CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF NEW ALBANY, MISSISSIPPI 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: July 3, 1979 
Effective: October 1, 1979 
____________ 
Published in 1979 by Order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF NEW ALBANY 
____________ 
Tim Kent 
Mayor 
____________ 
Scott Dunnam 
Alderman at Large 
Jeff Olson 
Ward 1 
Johnny Anderson 
Ward 2 
Tommie Beasley 
Ward 3 
Will Tucker 
Ward 4 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Mrs. Frankie Roberts 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Regan Russell 
City Attorney 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the ordinances of the City of New Albany of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    The source of each section is included in the history note which appears in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate all laws and ordinances included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which also refer to relevant state laws have been included. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fiftieth section of Chapter 2 is 2-50. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 5-4 and 5-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 5-4.1, 5-4.2, 5-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a decimal after the chapter number, e.g., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of each chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Herbert E. Dewees, of the staff, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the City Attorneys Joseph T. Wilkins, III, and Hugh N. Clayton, and all other city officers and employees for their cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. 
October, 1979 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of New Albany, Mississippi; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for Violating Said Code or Other Ordinance; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, as Follows: 
    Section 1. That this ordinance, consisting of Chapters 1 to 21, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of New Albany, Mississippi," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances duly enacted on or before August 1, 1978, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
    Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect on and after the 1st day of October, 1979, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of New Albany enacted on final passage on or before August 1, 1978, and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the City, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
    Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City. 
(c)  Any administrative ordinance of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
(d)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the City. 
(e)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(f)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person, firm or corporation. 
(g)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City. 
(h)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City. 
(i)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(j)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City or providing regulations for the same. 
(k)  Any ordinance annexing property in the City. 
(l)  Any ordinance regulating zoning or subdivisions in the City. 
(m)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, speed limits, or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code. 
(n)  An ordinance enacted on May 16, 1977, and entitled "An Ordinance Establishing Rules and Regulations for the Operation and Maintenance of Facilities of the Natural Gas System of the City of New Albany, Mississippi." 
(o)  Any ordinance enacted after August 1, 1978. 
    Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance which has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. That any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code, so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of New Albany, Mississippi," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 5. That a copy of such Code, certified to by the mayor and city clerk shall be on file at the time of the adoption of such Code and shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by him to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. This copy of such Code shall be available to all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of the City. 
    Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 8 of this ordinance and Section 1-8 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section of such Code, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7. That it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or alter by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of New Albany to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 8 of this ordinance and Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Albany. 
    Section 8. That whenever in this Code hereby adopted or in this ordinance or any ordinances of the City, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of said Code or ordinance of the City shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
    In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the City, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
    Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
    Section 10. That this ordinance shall be in force and take effect the 1st day of October, 1979. 
    Passed this 3rd day of July, 1979. 
    Approved this 3rd day of July, 1979. 
/s/ G. W. Henson 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Frances Dodds 
City Clerk 
    The foregoing Ordinance, having been previously reduced to writing, was offered and introduced by Alderman Dean Provence, who moved its adoption. The ordinance was read and considered by sections at a public meeting by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. And each section, after having been read and considered, was unanimously adopted. Then, on final passage, as a whole, on motion of Alderman Dean Provence and seconded by Alderman Mary R. Phyfer, with all five Aldermen present, all five Aldermen voted "Yea," to-wit: Mary R. Phyfer, Jerry B. Mauldin, Dean Provence, Herman R. Hendrix and Malcom Reeves. Thereupon, the Mayor declared the motion unanimously passed and the ordinance unanimously adopted and approved in open session at this meeting on July 3, 1979. 
Approved: /s/ G. W. Henson 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Frances Dodds 
City Clerk 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
UNION COUNTY 
CITY OF NEW ALBANY 
    The undersigned Mrs. Frances Dodds, Clerk of the City of New Albany, hereby certifies that the above and foregoing is a copy of an ordinance passed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of said City on July 3, 1979, as the same appears in the records of said City in my official custody. 
    Given under my hand and the official seal of the City of New Albany, Mississippi this July 10th, 1979. 
/s/ Frances Dodds 
City Clerk 
(SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Date Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Supp. No. 24 11- 4-08 Included 24 12- 1-09 Included 24  3- 2-10 Included 24  6-14-10 Included 24  8-16-10 Included 24  1- 4-11 Included 24  4- 5-11 Included 24  5- 3-11 Included 24  7- 5-11(1) Included 24  7- 5-11(2) Included 24 11- 1-11 Included 24 Supp. No. 25  8-25-09 Included 25 12-20-11 Included 25  8- 7-12 Included 25 10- 2-12 Included 25 12- 4-12 Included 25  1-13-13 Included 25  2- 5-13(1) Included 25  2- 5-13(2) Included 25  5- 1-13 Included 25 Supp. No. 26  5- 7-13 Included 26  6-25-13 Included 26 11- 5-13 Included 26 12- 2-14 Included 26  1- 6-15 Included 26 Supp. No. 27 10- 6-15 Included 27 11- 3-15 Included 27 12- 1-15 Included 27 Supp. No. 28 11- 1-16 Included 28  2- 7-17 Included 28 Supp. No. 29 11- 7-17(1) Included 29 11- 7-17(2) Included 29 11- 7-17(3) Included 29  1- 2-18(1) Included 29  6- 5-18(1) Included 29  6- 5-18(2) Included 29  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of New Albany, Mississippi," and may be so cited. Such chapters may also be cited as "New Albany Code." 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify ordinances and adopt such codification, Miss. Code Ann., 1972, § 21-13-15. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen: 
    Board, board of aldermen. The term "board" or "board of aldermen" shall mean the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of New Albany, Mississippi" followed them. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday that day shall be excluded. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the words "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" are used they shall mean the legal boundary of the City of New Albany, Mississippi. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Union. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or agency of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed as authorizing the head of the department or agency to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or make the inspection unless the terms of the provisions or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. Whenever the word "keeper" or "proprietor" is used, it shall mean persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as thought the words "of the City of New Albany" followed it. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, by technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. Words used in the singular number only, either as descriptive of persons or things, shall extend to and embrace the plural number ; and words used in the plural number shall extend to and embrace the singular number. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. Whenever the word "person" is used it shall include, mean and be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or to a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or in any other manner. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights of action, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation or any right, title or interest in any real or personal estate shall be created, acknowledged, transferred, incurred, defeated, discharged or diminished. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The term "property" includes personal property as defined herein and also every estate, interest or right in land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Real property shall include every estate, interest or right in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. Whenever the word "sidewalk" is used it shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Mississippi. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    Sworn. The term "sworn" shall include the word "affirmed" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Tenant, occupant. Whenever the word "tenant" or "occupant" is applied to a building or land, it shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. Whenever the word "week" is used it shall mean seven (7) days. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" may include printing, engraving, lithographing or any other representation of words, letters or figures; except that in all cases where the signature of a person is required, it shall always be the proper handwriting or mark of such person. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless a contrary intention is expressed. 
State Law reference- Definitions of terms used in statutes, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 1-3-3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Constitutionality. 
    If any part, section or subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of Code on existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of New Albany to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of the Code or ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both. Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any conditions caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15) 
State Law reference- Authority to impose penalties, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-13-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Working city prisoners; credit against fine. 
(a)  Persons imprisoned for the violation of city ordinances may be required to work upon the streets of the city under the direction of the street commissioner. 
(b)  Where such prisoner is engaged in working out a fine assessed against him, he shall receive a credit against the fine at the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per day worked. 
(c)  The street commissioner shall file a report with the chief of police of each prisoner working out a fine, and the latter shall credit the result of such labor to the fine assessed against such prisoner as the same appears upon his jail docket. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to work prisoners on streets, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 47-1-39; credit against fines, § 47-1-47. 
Sec. 1-10. - Imprisonment until fine and costs paid when not sentenced to imprisonment. 
    Any person convicted in the police court and sentenced to pay a fine and costs only shall be committed to the city jail, until the fine and costs imposed are paid in money, or by labor at the rate of pay as described by section 1-8. 
Sec. 1-11. - Place of imprisonment. 
    Any person convicted in the police court and sentenced to a term of imprisonment shall be committed to the city jail, or county jail. 
Sec. 1-12. - Boundaries. 
    Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 7, Township 7 South, Range 3 East and run thence west for one-eighth section mile to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 7 South, Range 3 East thence north for one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 7 south, Range 3 East; thence west for seven-eighth section mile to the Northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one section mile to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence west for one-eighth section mile to the Southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for three-eighths section mile to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence east for one-eighth section mile to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one-eighth section mile to the Northwest corner of Section 12, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one section mile to the northwest corner of Section 1, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence north along the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East, to the northwesterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 78; thence southeasterly along said northwesterly right-of-way line to the north line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east along said north line to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence north for three-fourths section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east for one-half section mile to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-fourth section mile to the Southeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-fourth section mile to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence south for three-fourths section mile to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the northeast corner of Section 6, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for 3,736 feet along the east line of Section 6, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence east for one section mile to the east line of Section 5, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence east for three-fourths section mile to the east line of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for 1,544 feet more or less, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one section mile to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-eight section mile to the southeast corner of the north half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 7 South, Range 3 east; thence west for three-eighths section mile to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for seven-eighths section mile to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for three-eighths section mile to the southwest corner of Section 16, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-half section mile to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one-half section mile to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-fourth section mile to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one-half section mile to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one-fourth section mile to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence north for three-fourths section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence north for one-half section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence east for one-eighth section mile to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence north for one-half section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 7 South, Range 3 East and the point of beginning. 
    That the corporate boundaries of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, as changed by the aforesaid extension and expansion shall be described and defined as follows, all of which land lies in Union County, Mississippi, as is described as: 
    Beginning at the Northwest corner of Section 1, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence run north one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East, thence north along the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East, to the northwesterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 78; thence southeasterly along said northwesterly right-of-way line to the north line of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east along said north line to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence north for three-fourths section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one-fourth section mile to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 6 South, Range 2 East; thence east to the west right-of-way of Glenfield Road; thence north along the west right-of-way of Glenfield Road to its intersection with a westerly extension of the north line of the L.H. Phillips property as recorded in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Union County, Mississippi, in Deed Book 180 at pages 159-160; thence run east along said westerly extension to the northwest corner of said L.H. Phillips property, thence run north 89 degrees 9 minutes 00 seconds east 149.97 feet to a point; thence run south 14 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds east along a line to its intersection with the north line of the south half of the south half of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence run east along said north line to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence east for one-fourth section mile to the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-fourth section mile to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence east for three-fourths section mile to the northeast corner of Section 32, Township 6 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one and three-fourths section miles to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence east for three-fourths section mile to the east line of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for 1,544 feet, more or less, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence east three-fourths section mile to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south one and three-fourths section miles to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west one-half section mile to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence South one-fourth section mile to the southwest corner of Section 15, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one section mile to the southwest corner of Section 16, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-half section mile to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one-half section mile to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence south for one-fourth section mile to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west for one and one-half section mile to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence north three-fourths section mile to the northwest corner of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 3 East; thence west one and one-half section mile to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one and one-half section miles to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north one-half section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence north for one section mile to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township 7 South, Range 2 East; thence east one-half section mile to the northwest corner of Section 1, Township 7 South, Range 2 East, said point also being the Point of Beginning. 
(Ord. of 12-23-68, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-6-89, § 2; Ord. of Jan. 2, 2001, § 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. of June 6, 1989, § 2, and Ord. of Jan. 2, 2001 did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as being amendatory of § 1-12 was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Corporate boundaries, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 2-1-27 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Election and term of office of municipal officers. 
    Elected officers of the city shall be elected in accordance with the provisions of state law and shall hold office for a term of four (4) years. 
(Ord. of 11-29-40, § 1) 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Method of electing aldermen. 
    All future aldermanic elections shall be conducted with one (1) alderman to be elected from each ward in which he is a resident and with the fifth alderman to be elected by the city at large, all in compliance with Section 3376-36 of the Mississippi Code of 1942, which is Section 36 of chapter 491 of the General Laws of Mississippi of 1950. 
(Ord. of 1-4-77, § 4) 
Editor's note- In connection with the above section and the state law cited therein, see the annotations following Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-3-7. 
Sec. 2-3. - Ward boundaries. 
WARD 1 LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of Rolling Hills Drive and the West line of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence run North to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 25 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence run East to the West right-of-way of Glenfield Road; thence run North along the West right-of-way of Glenfield Road to its intersection with a Westerly extension of the North line of the L.H. Phillips property as recorded in the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Union County, Mississippi in Deed Book 180 at Pages 159-160; thence run East along said Westerly extension to the Northwest corner of the said L.H. Phillips property; thence run North 89 degrees 9 minutes 00 seconds East 149.97 feet to a point; thence run South 14 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds East along a line to its intersection with the North line of the South half of the South half of Section 30 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run East to the Northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 29 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Southeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 29 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run East to the Southeast corner of the Southeast Quarter of Section 29 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 4 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run East to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 4 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 4 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run East to the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 East where said centerline intersects the North line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run in a Southwesterly direction with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 to a point where Mississippi State Highway #30 East intersects the East line of the West half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South along the East line of the West half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East to a point in the centerline of Arthur Street; thence run West along the centerline of Arthur Street to the intersection with the centerline of Tate Avenue; thence run Northwest along the centerline of Tate Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Tate Drive; thence run Northwest along the centerline of Tate Drive back to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 East; thence run Southwest along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 East to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 (which is now a four lane highway/right-of-way); thence run South along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Phyfer Street; thence run West along the centerline of Phyfer Street to the intersection with the centerline of Wheeler Avenue; thence run North along the centerline of Wheeler Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Highland Drive; thence West with the centerline of Highland Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Iowa Street; thence run North along the centerline of Iowa Street to the intersection with the centerline of Cleveland Street; thence run in a Southeast direction along the centerline of Cleveland Street to the intersection with the centerline of North Street; thence North with the centerline of North Street to the intersection with the centerline of First Street; thence East along the centerline of First Street to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 (which is now a four lane highway/right-of-way); thence run North along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Third Street; thence West along the centerline of Third Street to the intersection with the centerline of North Street; thence run North along the centerline of North Street to the intersection with the centerline of Tyler Street; thence run West and South along the centerline of Tyler Street to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi Avenue; thence run West along the centerline of Mississippi Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Monroe Street; thence run South along the centerline of Monroe Street to the intersection with the centerline of Broad Street; thence run West along the centerline of Broad Street to the intersection with the centerline of Madison Street; thence run South along the centerline of Madison Street to the intersection with the centerline of Highland Drive; thence run West and Southwest along the centerline of Highland Drive crossing the BNSF Railroad Track to the point where it appears Highland Street becomes North Central Avenue in an Easterly direction; thence run South and then Southwest along the centerline of North Central Avenue to the intersection with Old U.S. Highway 78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a East Bankhead Street); thence run Southeast along the centerline of Old U.S. Highway #78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a East Bankhead Street) to the intersection with the centerline of East Main Street; thence turn West and Northwest and run along the centerline of East Main Street to the intersection with the centerline of Wilbanks Street; thence run Southwest along the centerline of Wilbanks Street to the intersection with the centerline of Apple Street; thence run Northwest along the centerline of Apple Street to the intersection with the centerline of Glade Avenue; thence run South along the centerline of Glade Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Oak Street; thence run West along the centerline of Oak Street to the centerline of Camp Avenue; thence run Northeast along the centerline of Camp Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Railroad Avenue (also commonly known as King Street); thence run North along the centerline of Railroad Avenue/King Street to the intersection of the centerline of West Main Street; thence run West and North along the centerline of West Main Street crossing over Old U.S. Highway #78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a West Bankhead Street) to the intersection with the centerline of Snyder Street; thence run North and East along the centerline of Snyder Street to the intersection of the centerline of Summer Street; thence run South along the centerline of Summer Street to the intersection with the centerline of Winter Street; thence run East along the centerline of Winter Street to the intersection of the centerline of North Railroad Avenue; thence run North and East along the centerline of North Railroad Avenue to the end of North Railroad Avenue (which is a point on the North line of Section 8 Township 7 South Range 3 East); thence run East along the North line of Section 8 Township 7 South Range 3 East to the centerline of the former Mississippi/Tennessee Railnet Railroad (now operated as the GM&O Rails to Trails Recreational District a/k/a Tanglefoot Trail); thence run Northeast and North along the centerline of the Tanglefoot Trail to the point where it intersects the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River; thence run Southwest and then South along the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River to a point where it intersects the centerline of the BNSF Railroad; thence run West and Northwest along the centerline of the BNSF Railroad to the intersection of the centerline of a Southwesterly extension of a private entrance accessing apartments owned by Union Apartments II, L.P.; thence run Northeast along a line which runs down the centerline of said private entrance accessing the apartments owned by Union Apartments II, L.P. to the intersection of the centerline of Moss Hill Drive; thence run Northwest and North along the centerline of Moss Hill Drive to a point where the centerline of Moss Hill Drive intersects the Southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of Section 31 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run West along the South boundary line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31 Township 6 South Range 3 East to the centerline of Glenfield Road which is also the Southwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run North along the centerline of Glenfield Road to the intersection of the centerline of Rolling Hills Drive; thence run West, North, and West along the centerline of Rolling Hills Drive to a point on the West line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
WARD 2 LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    BEGINNING at the Northwest corner of Section 1 Township 7 South Range 2 East; thence run North to the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence run East to the Northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence North along the West line of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East to the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #178 (Bankhead Street); thence run Southeasterly along said centerline of Mississippi State Highway #178 (Bankhead Street) to the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence run East along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East; thence run North along the West side of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36 Township 6 South Range 2 East to the point where said line intersects with the centerline of Rolling Hills Drive; thence run in an Easterly, Southerly and then Easterly direction along the centerline of Rolling Hills Drive to the point where it intersects the centerline of Glenfield Road; thence run South along the centerline of Glenfield Road to a point where Glenfield Road intersects the centerline of Fairgrounds Spur Road at the Southwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31 Township 6 South Range 3 East; thence run East along the South boundary line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31 Township 6 South Range 3 East to the intersection of the centerline of Moss Hill Drive; thence run in a Southerly direction along the centerline of Moss Hill Drive to a point where it intersects the centerline of a private drive used to access the Union Apartments II, L.P. property; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said private drive and a Southwesterly extension thereof to a point where the extension would intersect the centerline of the BNSF Railroad; thence run in a Southeasterly and Easterly direction along the centerline of the BNSF Railroad to a point where said Railroad centerline intersects the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River; thence run along the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River in a Southerly direction to the point where said centerline intersects the centerline of Bratton Road; thence run West along the centerline of Bratton Road to the point where Bratton Road intersects the centerline of Martintown Road; thence run in a Southerly direction along the centerline of Martintown Road to a point where the centerline of Martintown Road intersects the South line of Section 14 Township 7 South Range 2 East; thence run along the South line of Section 14 Township 7 South Range 2 East to the Southwest corner of Southeast Quarter of Section 14 Township 7 South Range 2 East; thence run North along the Section lines to the Northwest corner of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2 Township 7 South Range 2 East; thence run East to the Northeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2 Township 7 South Range 2 East and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
WARD 3 LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    BEGINNING at a point where the South line of Section 14 Township 7 South Range 2 East intersects the centerline of Martintown Road; thence run in a Northerly direction along said centerline of Martintown Road to the point where the centerline of Martintown Road intersects the centerline of Bratton Road; thence run East with the centerline of Bratton Road to the point where it intersects the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River; thence run Northerly with the centerline of the Little Tallahatchie River to the point where it intersects the centerline of the former Mississippi-Tennessee Railnet (now operated as the GM&O Rails to Trails Recreational District a/k/a Tanglefoot Trail); thence run Southwest along the centerline of the said Tanglefoot Trail to a point on the North line of Section 8 Township 7 South Range 3 East that is East of the ending point of the centerline of North Railroad Avenue; thence run West to the centerline of the North Railroad Avenue; thence run South along the centerline of North Railroad Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Winter Street; thence run West along the centerline of Winter Street to the intersection with the centerline of Cleveland Street; thence run North along the centerline of Cleveland Street to the intersection with the centerline of Snyder Street; thence run Westerly and turn South along the Snyder Street centerline crossing Mississippi State Highway #178 (a/k/a West Bankhead Street) to a point in the centerline of West Main Street; thence run South and then East along the centerline of West Main Street to the intersection with the centerline of Railroad Avenue (a/k/a King Street); thence run South along the centerline of Railroad Avenue/King Street to the intersection with the centerline of Camp Avenue; thence run Southwest along the centerline of Camp Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Oak Street; thence run Southeast along the centerline of Oak Street to the intersection with the centerline of Glade Avenue; thence run Northeast along the centerline of Glade Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Apple Street; thence run Southeast along the centerline of Apple Street to the intersection with the centerline of Wilbanks Street; thence run Northeast with the centerline of Wilbanks Street to the intersection with the centerline of East Main Street; thence run Southeast along the centerline of East Main Street to the intersection with the centerline of Old U.S. Highway #78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a East Bankhead Street); thence run Northwest along the centerline of said highway to the intersection of the centerline of North Central Avenue; thence run North along the centerline of North Central Avenue to where said street ends and intersects with the centerline of Highland Street; thence run West and then Northeast along the centerline of Highland Street crossing the BNSF Railroad to the intersection with the centerline of Madison Street; thence run North along the centerline of Madison Street to the intersection with the centerline of Broad Street; thence run East along the centerline of Broad Street to the intersection with the centerline of Monroe Street; thence run North along the centerline of Monroe Street to where it intersects with the centerline of Mississippi Street; thence run East with the centerline of Mississippi Street to the intersection with the centerline of Tyler Street; thence run North and then East along the centerline of Tyler Street to the intersection with the centerline of North Street; thence run South along the centerline of North Street to the intersection with the centerline of Third Street; thence run East along the centerline of Third Street to the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way (which is now a four lane highway); thence run South along centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of First Street; thence run West along the centerline of First Street to the intersection with the centerline of North Street; thence run South and Southwest along the centerline of North Street to the intersection with the centerline of Cleveland Street; thence run Northwest along the centerline of Cleveland Street to the intersection with the centerline of Iowa Street; thence run Southwest along the centerline of Iowa Street to the intersection with the centerline of Highland Street; thence run in a Southeasterly direction along the centerline of Highland Street to the intersection with the centerline of Wheeler Avenue; thence run South along Wheeler Street as the centerline crosses through the New Albany High School campus to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way; thence run Southwest along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Old U.S. Highway #78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a Bankhead Street); thence run Southeast along the centerline of said highway to the intersection with the centerline of Hillcrest Drive; thence run West and Southwest along the centerline of Hillcrest Drive to the intersection with the centerline of South Central Avenue; thence run South along the centerline of South Central Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Owen Road; thence run West along the centerline of Owen Road to a point where Owen Road intersects the North line of Section 19 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West along the North line of Section 19 Township 7 South Range 3 East to the Southwest corner of Section 18 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West along the South line of Section 13 Township 7 South Range 3 East to the Southwest corner of Section 13 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West along the South line of Section 14 Township 7 South Range 3 East to the point where said line intersects with the centerline of Martintown Road and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
WARD FOUR 4 LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    BEGINNING at a point where Mississippi State Highway #30 East intersects the North line of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run Easterly along the Section line to the Northeast corner of the Northwest Quarter of Section 10 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the North line of the South half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 15 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West to the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 15 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Southwest corner of Section 15 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West to the Southwest corner of Section 16 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of Section 20 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West to the Southwest corner of Northeast Quarter of Section 20 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run South to the Southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 20 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run West to the Southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 19 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run North to the Northwest corner of Section 19 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run East along the South line of Section 18 Township 7 South Range 3 East to the point where said line intersects the centerline of Owen Road; thence run Northeasterly along the centerline of Owen Road to the point where it intersects the centerline of South Central Avenue; thence run North along the centerline of South Central Avenue to the point where it intersects the centerline of Hillcrest Drive; thence run Easterly along the centerline of Hillcrest Drive to the point where it intersects the centerline of Old U.S. Highway #78 (a/k/a Mississippi State Highway #178 a/k/a East Bankhead Street); thence run Northwest along the centerline of said highway to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way (which is now a four lane highway/right-of-way); thence run Northwest along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Wheeler Street; thence run North along the centerline of Wheeler Street to the intersection with the centerline of Phyfer Street; thence run East along the centerline of Phyfer Street back to the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #15 right-of-way; thence run Northeast along the center of said highway right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 East; thence run East and Northeast along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 to the intersection with the centerline of Tate Drive; thence run South and East along the centerline of Tate Drive to the intersection with centerline of Tate Avenue; thence run Southeast along the centerline of Tate Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Arthur Street; thence run East along the centerline of Arthur Street to the East line of the West half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East; thence run North along the East line of the West half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East to a point on the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30; thence run Northeast along the centerline of Mississippi State Highway #30 to the point where the centerline of said highway intersects the North line of Section 9 Township 7 South Range 3 East and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Ord. of 1-4-77, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-2-2001; Ord. of 8-24-2004; Ord. of 2-5-2013(1)) 
Sec. 2-4. - Regular meetings of mayor and board of aldermen. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen shall hold regular meetings in the board room of the city hall at 6:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month. 
(Ord. of 7-3-62, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-98) 
State Law reference- Regular meetings of board of aldermen, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-3-19. 
Secs. 2-5-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-31-2-42. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARK COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Park commission, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, §§ 21-37-33-21-37-43. 

Sec. 2-43. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Commission shall mean the park commission of the city. 
    Park commissioners shall mean the members of the city park commission. 
Sec. 2-44. - Created. 
    A park commission for the city is hereby created. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-45. - Composition; qualifications, appointment and terms of office of park commissioners. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five (5) park commissioners who shall be qualified electors of the city. 
(b)  Each commissioner shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen and shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the commissioners first appointed shall be appointed in such a manner as to provide staggered terms, with one commissioner's term expiring each year. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-46. - Park commissioners not to hold other municipal office. 
    While serving on the commission, a park commissioner shall not hold any other municipal office of honor or profit. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-47. - Compensation. 
    The park commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services on the commission. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-48. - Officers and employees. 
(a)  The commission shall elect one of its members as treasurer, who shall give bond in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  The commissioners may elect such other officers and appoint such employees as may be necessary in their discretion to properly maintain and operate the parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreational facilities of the city, and they shall have the right to fix the salaries or wages of all such employees and to discharge them for good cause, subject to the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 2) 
Sec. 2-49. - Powers, rights and duties generally. 
    The commission shall have all of the powers, rights and duties set forth in Mississippi Code Annotated, 1972, Sections 21-37-33-21-37-43, and shall have the power to manage and control all of the parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreational facilities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-50. - Reports to mayor and board of aldermen. 
(a)  Quarterly. The park commissioners shall report quarterly to the mayor and board of aldermen all their doings and transactions of any kind whatsoever and shall make a complete statement of the financial condition of the commission at the end of each quarter. 
(b)  Annually. Annually, the commissioners shall make a detailed statement covering the entire management and operation of the recreational facilities of the city and submit said statement to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 2) 
Sec. 2-51. - Fiscal regulations. 
(a)  The commission shall purchase all supplies for city parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and recreational facilities in the manner now provided by law for the purchase thereof and shall issue vouchers in payment thereof. 
(b)  The commission shall have full jurisdiction over all funds coming into its possession and shall have authority to make all contracts in relation to the same. 
(c)  All funds coming into the hands of the commission shall be used solely for recreational purposes for the city and its citizens. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 3) 
Sec. 2-52. - Treasurer required to post bond. 
    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in sections 2-44 through 2-47, 2-49, there shall be no requirement that any commissioner post any bond other than the treasurer, whose bond shall be determined under section 2-48 hereof. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88) 
Secs. 2-53-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Dec. 14, 1993, §§ 1-5, enacted provisions pertaining to a tree committee. Such provisions have been designated by the editor as Div. 3, §§ 2-61-2-65. 

Sec. 2-61. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all trees on publicly owned lands, to include all city owned property, parks, and that portion of the street right-of-way lying between the edge of the paved surface area and the legal boundary of said right-of-way. The city hereby establishes its sole right to maintain and care for all such trees in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-62. - Created; membership, terms. 
    To assist in such management there is hereby created a city tree committee, to be made up of seven (7) concerned and public-spirited citizens of the city (or citizens of Union County not residing within the municipal boundaries, but who are interested in the welfare of the city) willing to so serve without compensation as appointed by the mayor. Members will serve three-year staggered terms such that three (3) appointments will expire in one (1) year and two (2) appointments will expire in the ensuing two (2) years. The initial board will, after appointment, cast lots to determine which three (3) members will serve a one-year term, which two (2) members will serve a two-year term, and which two (2) members will serve a three-year term. Members shall be eligible to be reappointed for succeeding terms. 
(Ord. of 12-14-93, § 2) 
Sec. 2-63. - Responsibilities. 
    The tree committee shall be responsible for meeting periodically at such times and places as the committee shall determine necessary to investigate, study and plan for the planting, care and maintenance of all trees on publicly owned lands. The committee shall reduce its recommendations, plans, and suggestions to writing at least once each year, to be presented for consideration by the board of aldermen and to be implemented as presented or as modified by the board. The recommendations should include a program for the proper removal, replacement and maintenance of trees on public properties, specifically the preservation, pruning, planting and replanting of trees to insure a healthy and nonhazardous condition of our trees. The committee shall be authorized to consult with such experts in the field of forestry and landscaping as are necessary to ensure that the plans for the city are such that they will promote healthy growth of trees that will not, due to size, foliage, general condition, and other similar considerations, present a hazard to the public by creating traffic hazards, interfering with electrical lines, or otherwise endangering life or property. 
(Ord. of 12-14-93, § 3; Ord. of 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 2-64. - Policy. 
    With such professional assistance as may be appropriate, the tree committee shall establish a written policy, to be concurred upon by the board of aldermen, setting forth the species of trees that are suitable for planting in various situations and locations, and prescribing the care and precautions that should be complied with should such plantings be undertaken. Such plan shall specifically address the matters of distance from street corners, public utility lines of every nature, restricted plantings under power lines, and related subjects. Private citizens desiring to plant trees (to be deemed to include shrubs and bushes) in the public right-of-way abutting their property shall comply with the terms and conditions of the written policy, and such trees shall, once planted, be strictly subject to management by the city to include pruning and removal as necessary to protect the public health. 
(Ord. of 12-14-93, § 4) 
Sec. 2-65. - Interfering with member performing duties; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, harass, intimidate, threaten, or otherwise impede any member of the tree committee while in the course of carrying out his or her duties and responsibilities under this article, which unlawful act shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Anyone so convicted shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Secs. 2-66-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRESERVATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 16, 2007, §§ I-XVII, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 4, §§ 2-76-2-92, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; planning and development, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 2-76. - Purpose. 
    The City of New Albany hereby recognizes that the city is known for unique qualities that have proven increasingly attractive to residents, business, interests, and tourists. The city encompasses certain areas that are known for their historic, religious, government, educational, commercial, and residential buildings. 
    As a matter of public policy the city aims to preserve, enhance, and perpetuate those aspects of the city having historical, cultural, architectural, and archaeological merit. Such preservation activities will promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people living in and visiting the City of New Albany. 
    More specifically, this historic preservation commission is designed to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  Protect, enhance and perpetuate resources which represent distinctive and significant elements of the city's historical, cultural, social, economic, political, archaeological, and architectural identity; 
(2)  Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city; 
(3)  Strengthen civic pride and cultural stability through neighborhood conservation; 
(4)  Stabilize the economy of the city through the continued use, preservation, and revitalization of its resources; 
(5)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided; 
(6)  Promote the use of resources for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city; 
(7)  Provide a review process for the maintenance, preservation and appropriate development of the city's resources. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § I) 
Sec. 2-77. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically noted otherwise, the following definitions are standard throughout this division: 
    Alteration means any change in the exterior appearance or materials of a landmark or a structure within a historic district or on a landmark site. 
    Applicant means the owner of record of a resource; the lessee thereof with the approval of the owner of record in notarized form; or a person holding a "bona fide" contract to purchase a resource. 
    Appurtenance means an accessory to a building, structure, object, or site, including, but not limited to, landscaping features, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, shutters, awnings, solar panels, satellite dishes, and signs. 
    Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, garage, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means an official signed and dated governmental document issued by the board of aldermen to permit specific work in a historic district or at a landmark site or landmark which has been reviewed and approved. 
    Certified local government (CLG) means a federal program authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act, 16 U.S.C. Section 470, et seq., that provides for the participation of local governments in a federal/state/local government preservation partnership. The federal law directs the State Historic Preservation Officer and the Secretary of the Interior to certify local governments to participate in this partnership. Specific Mississippi requirements for the program are published in "State of Mississippi, Guidelines and Regulations for the Certified Local Government Program." 
    City means the City of New Albany, Mississippi, as represented by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
    Commission means the New Albany Preservation Commission, a local historic preservation commission created pursuant to Miss, Code Ann. Section 39-13-5, as amended. 
    Construction means work which is neither alteration nor demolition. Essentially, it is the erection of a new structure which did not previously exist, even if such a structure is partially joined to an existing structure. 
    Demolition means the intentional removal, either complete or partial, of a structure within a local historic district or on a landmark site or which has been designated as a landmark. 
    Demolition by neglect means the substantial deterioration of a historic structure that results from improper maintenance or lack of maintenance and threatens its continued preservation. 
    Design review guidelines means that if adopted by the historic preservation commission and approved by the board of aldermen, shall be in a written form designed to inform local property owners about historical architectural styles prevalent in the community and to recommend preferred treatments and discourage treatments that would compromise the architectural integrity of structures in a historic district or on a landmark site or individually designated as landmarks. 
    Exterior features means that exterior features shall include, but not be limited to, the color, kind, and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, and appurtenances. 
    Historic district means a group of two (2) or more tax parcels and their structures, and may be an entire neighborhood of structures linked by historical association or historical development. It is not necessary that all structures within a historic district share the same primary architectural style or be from the same primary historical period. A historic district may also include both commercial and residential structures, and may include structures covered by two (2) or more zoning classifications. A historic district may include both contributing and noncontributing structures. 
    Historic landmark means a structure of exceptional individual significance and typically is a structure and its historically associated land or other appropriate setting which could not be included within a local historic district, designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance, which possesses particular architectural, cultural, or historic significance by meeting at least one (1) of the following criteria source: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political economic, or social history of the nation, region, state, county, or city; 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state, or local history; or 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a landscape type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style of a period, style, method of construction, or use of indigenous material or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose individual ability has been recognized or who influenced his age. 
    Historic landmark site means an unimproved or improved parcel of ground designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance, which possesses particular archaeological, architectural, geological, or historic significance. A landmark site differs from a landmark in that the physical location, not the building, structure, or object, possesses primary significance. For the purposes of this division, a landmark site encompasses prehistoric or historic sites on improved or improved land. Landmark sites meet at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political economic, or social history of the nation, region, state, county, or city; or 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state, or local history; or 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction, or use of indigenous material or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. A "Historic Landmark Site" may be a culturally significant feature other than landscape. 
    Historic preservation commission means the body established to advise the mayor and board of aldermen on matters relating to historic preservation, including the designation of historic districts, landmarks and landmark sites. 
    Landscape means any improvement or vegetation including, but not limited to shrubbery, trees, plantings, outbuildings, walls, courtyards, fences, swimming pools, planters, gates, street furniture, exterior lighting, and site improvements, including but not limited to, subsurface alterations, site regrading, fill deposition, and paving. 
    National historic landmark means a district, site, building, structure, and/or object that has been formally designated as a National Historic Landmark by the Secretary of Interior and possesses exceptional value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture and that possesses a high degree of integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association. National Historic Landmarks are automatically listed in the National Register. 
    National Register of Historic Places means a federal list of cultural resources worthy of preservation, authorized under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as part of a national program to coordinate and support public and private efforts to identify, evaluate, and protect the nation's historic and archaeological resources. The National Register Program is administered by the commission, by the State Historic Preservation Office, and by the National Park Service under the Department of Interior. Significant federal benefits may accrue to owners of properties listed or determined eligible for listing in the National Register. 
    Object means a material thing of functional, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Ordinary repair or maintenance means work done to prevent deterioration of a resource or any part thereof by returning the resource as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay, or damage. 
    Owner of record means the owner of a parcel of land, improved or unimproved, reflected on the city tax roll and in county deed records. 
    Period of greatest historic significance for a landmark means the time period during which the landmark had been essentially completed but not yet altered. It is also the period during which the style of architecture of the landmark was commonplace or typical. If a landmark also achieved historical importance in part because of designed landscape features, the period of greatest historic significance includes the time period during which such landscape features were maintained. 
    Preservation district means a district designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance, which contains a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration of sites, buildings, structures, or objects associated by past events or by plan or physical development, and which meets at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the nation, state, county, or city; 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state, or local history; 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of architectural types or contains examples inherently valuable for the study of periods, styles, methods of construction, or uses of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Is representative of the notable work of master builders, designers, or architects whose individual abilities have been recognized or who influenced their eras. 
    Relocation means the moving of a structure to a new location on its tax parcel or the relocation of such a structure to a new tax parcel. 
    Resource means parcels located within preservation districts, individual landmarks, and landmark sites, regardless of whether such sites are presently improved or unimproved. Resources can be separate buildings, districts, structures, sites, and objects and related groups thereof. 
    Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings means a federal document stating standards and guidelines for the appropriate rehabilitation and preservation of historic buildings. 
    Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing buildings, or objects. 
    State historic preservation office means the Historic Preservation Division of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
    State historic preservation officer means the Director of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
    Structure means a manmade object and typically will be visible because of portions which exist above grade. Structures built during the historic period, 1700 forward, may in some instances not be visible above grade if they are cellars, cisterns, icehouses or similar objects which by their nature are intended to be built into the ground. A structure includes both interior components and visible exterior surfaces, as well as attached elements such as signs and related features such as walks, walls, fences and other nearby secondary structures or landmark features. The term includes, but is not limited to engineering projects, earthworks, boats, barges and bridges. 
    Subdistricts means discrete areas within a larger historic district within which separate design guidelines are appropriate and that may be created to recognize different zoning classifications or historic development patterns which have caused adjacent historic areas to develop at different times. 
    Subdivision includes any change in the boundaries of a single tax parcel, whether the change results in expansion or reduction or a boundary relocation. 
    Substantial deterioration means structural degradation of such a nature that water penetration into a historic structure can no longer be prevented, or structural degradation that causes stress or strain on structural members when supports collapse or warp, evidence of which includes defective roofing materials, broken window coverings and visible interior decay. 
    Survey of resources means the documentation, by historical research or a photographic record, of structures of historical interest within a specified area or jurisdiction or of existing structures within a proposed historic district. 
    Unauthorized demolition means the deliberate demolition of a historic structure without prior review and approval by a local historic preservation commission or a governing authority to which such a commission has made a recommendation. 
    Unreasonable economic hardship means the definition under constitutional standards used to determine whether a "taking" exists. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § II) 
Sec. 2-78. - Composition, and terms of commission. 
    By virtue of Miss. Code Ann. Section 39-13-5 (1972), as amended, the city is authorized to establish a preservation commission to preserve, promote, and develop the city's historical resources and to advise the city on the designation of preservation districts, landmarks, and landmark sites and perform such other functions as may be provided by law. 
    There is hereby created the New Albany Preservation Commission. 
    All members of the commission shall appointed by the city and shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city. The commission shall consist of five (5) members resident in the city. The members of the commission shall serve a term of three (3) years upon appointment by the city and shall be eligible for reappointment. The three-year terms of the members of the commission shall be staggered so as to maintain experience on the commission. Commission members shall be appointed by the board of aldermen with due regard to proper representation in such fields as history, architecture, urban planning, archeology and law. If a documented good faith effort has been made unsuccessfully by the board of aldermen may appoint individuals who own property within the municipality or are in the serve of an employer located within the boundary of the municipality, or both. The commission annually shall elect from its membership a chairman and a vice chairman. The commission shall keep a complete set of minutes and shall retain copies of all applications filed including supporting documentation. The commission shall advise the board of aldermen as to the designation of historic districts and the designation of historic landmarks and landmark sites. 
(1)  The city shall publish at least one (1) notice in a newspaper in its jurisdiction to solicit responses from citizens who are professionals in the related fields of historic preservation and who are interested in serving on the commission. The city may contact known professionals and interested lay persons and invite submission of their qualifications in written resume form. 
(2)  The city shall provide three (3) weeks (fifteen (15) working days) for responses. Respondents shall submit, in written resume form, information concerning their demonstrated interest, competence, knowledge, or expertise. Such information should include, but is not limited to, educational and professional background, membership in appropriate preservation organizations, subscriptions to suitable professionals publications, volunteer work, attendance at workshops and seminars, and other relevant experience. 
(3)  When the city has collected adequate information concerning the potential appointees to the commission, the board of aldermen shall decide, with the assistance of the State Historic Preservation Office, if desired, which candidates can be considered professionals and thereby qualified for appointment to the commission. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § III) 
Sec. 2-79. - Powers of the commission. 
    In order to preserve, promote, and develop the distinctive appearance and the historic resources of the city and to accomplish the purposes set forth in Miss. Code Ann. Section 39-13-5 (1972), as amended, and in this division: 
(1)  The commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing study and survey of resources within the city, and review such potential local historic districts or potential landmarks or landmark sites within the city. 
(2)  The commission shall recommend to the city the adoption of ordinances designating historic districts, historic landmarks and landmark sites within the jurisdiction of the city. The board of aldermen, upon the recommendation of the commission, shall have the final authority to designate historic districts, historic landmarks and landmark sites within its jurisdictional area as the governing authority so chooses to designate. 
(3)  The commission may recommend that the city recognize subdistricts within any historic district in order that the commission may adopt specific guidelines for the regulation of properties within such a subdistrict. 
(4)  The commission shall review applications proposing construction, alteration, demolition or relocation of any resource or subdivision of tax parcels designated as landmarks or landmark sites contained within a historic district and make such recommendations to the city as the commission feels appropriate under the circumstances. The commission may recommend to the city that such an application should be either granted or denied. The document granting such an application shall be known as a certificate of appropriateness and the city may not deny a certificate of appropriateness for demolition if denial of such a certificate would cause unreasonable economic hardship to an owner. 
(5)  The commission shall use as a basis for its decisions on applications for certificates of appropriateness the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as well as any more specific design review guidelines adopted by the commission or the city, or combination thereof. 
(6)  The commission, at the discretion the city, shall may grant or deny certificates of appropriateness in whole or in part and may grant certificates of appropriateness contingent upon the acceptance by the applicant of specified conditions. 
(7)  The commission shall not consider interior arrangements of buildings and structures except that it may when requested by the Department of Archives and History to advise the department on questions relating to the interiors of publicly owned historic buildings. Interior arrangements which shall not considered by the commission shall include floor plans, architectural details and finishes, but the commission may consider interior structural elements visible through doors or windows if they become deteriorated because of demolition by neglect. Such interior structural elements may include walls, floors and ceilings, as well as other supporting elements of a composite structure. 
(8)  The commission may, by city ordinance, review proposed governmental actions affecting governmentally owned structures included within local historic districts, located on landmark sites or designated as landmarks. 
(9)  The commission, subject to the consent and requirements of the city, may apply for, receive, hold and spend funds from private and public sources in addition to appropriations made by the city for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the commission. 
(10)  The commission, subject to the consent and requirements of the city, may employ such staff or contract with technical experts or other persons as may be required for the performance of its duties and may obtain the equipment, supplies and other materials necessary for its effective operation. 
(11)  The commission, solely in the performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, and with the approval of the property owner, may enter upon private land for the examination or survey thereof. No member, employee or agent of the commission shall enter any private dwelling or structure without the express consent of the owner of record or occupant thereof. 
(12)  The city, by this division, specifies that color changes are outside the jurisdiction of the commission. 
(13)  The city may apply to participate in the Certified Local Government Program of the National Park Service, which is administered in Mississippi by the Department of Archives and History and may on behalf of the commission apply for funding from the Department of Archives and History to supplement funds available from the governing authority itself. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § IV) 
Sec. 2-80. - Rules of procedure. 
    To fulfill the purposes of this division and carry out the provisions contained therein: 
(1)  Annually the commission shall elect from its membership a chairman and vice-chairman. It shall select a secretary from its membership or its staff. If neither the chairman nor the vice-chairman attends a particular meeting, the remaining members shall select an acting chairman from the members in attendance at such meeting. 
(2)  The commission shall develop and adopt rules of procedure, which shall govern the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the city. Such rules of procedure shall be a matter of public record. 
(3)  The commission shall develop design review guidelines for determining appropriateness as generally set forth in section 2-82 of this division. Such criteria shall insofar as possible be consistent with local, state, and federal guidelines and regulations, including, but not limited to, building safety and fire codes and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. 
(4)  The commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and decisions. The commission may additionally create tape recordings or transcripts of its meetings. In addition, the commission shall retain copies of all applications filed with it including supporting documentation that may be added during open public meeting to supplement an original application or comment thereon. All such material shall be a matter of public record to be kept in the planning and zoning department. 
(5)  The commission shall establish its own regular meeting time; however, the first meeting shall be held within thirty (30) days of the initial appointment of the commission by the city and regular meetings shall be scheduled monthly unless no applications are brought before the commission; in which case, a regular monthly meeting may be canceled by the chairman or any two (2) members; however, the commission must conduct a regular meeting at least once every three (3) months. The chairman or any two (2) members may call a special meeting to consider an urgent matter. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § V) 
Sec. 2-81. - Designation of historic landmarks, historic landmark sites, and historic districts. 
    By ordinance, the city may establish historic landmarks, landmark sites, and preservation districts within the area of its jurisdiction. Such historic landmarks, landmark sites, and preservation districts shall be designated following the criteria as specified in section 2-77: 
(1)  The commission shall initiate a continuing and thorough investigation of the archaeological, architectural, cultural, and historic significance of the city's resources. The findings shall be collected in a cohesive format, made a matter of public record, and made available for public inspection. The commission shall work toward providing complete documentation for previously designated preservation districts, which would include: 
a.  An inventory of all property within the boundary of the district, with photographs of each building and an evaluation are to be used only as a reference or guide and shall not be used as the determining factor for issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  An inventory which would be in format consistent with the statewide inventory format of the Historic Preservation Division of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. The commission shall advise the city on the designation of preservation districts, historic landmarks and landmark sites, and submit or cause to be prepared ordinances to make such designation. 
(2)  A resource or resources may be nominated for designation upon motion of three (3) members of the commission or by an organization interested in historic preservation or by an owner of the property being nominated. A nomination shall contain information as specified by the commission. The commission must reach a decision on whether to recommend a proposed nomination to the city within six (6) months in the case of a preservation district and two (2) months in the case of either a historic landmark or landmark site. 
(3)  If in private ownership, a landmark site must include significant surviving landscape features to qualify for designation, unless its primary significance is archeological; new construction, after review and approval, shall be built to fit into such landscape features rather than replace them or shall be designed to avoid insofar as possible an archeological resource rather than replace it. 
(4)  If in public ownership, the commission shall discourage new construction can be located on a portion of the site which will permit a continuing understanding of its historical character and will avoid damage to surviving landscape features or an archeological resource. 
(5)  If the commission votes to recommend to the city the designation of a proposed resource, it shall promptly forward to the city its recommendation, in writing, together with an accompanying file. 
(6)  The commission's recommendations to the city for designation of preservation district shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A map of the preservation district that clearly delineates the boundaries. The boundary of a historic district or historic landmark or landmark site may follow the formal legal description of a tax parcel or parcels or, because of historical justification or topographical conditions, may deviate from such formal legal descriptions. When a boundary deviates from formal legal descriptions, there must be written justification for such a deviation in any local designating ordinance. 
b.  A verbal boundary description and justification. Unless justification is contained in a designating ordinance, the boundary for any historic landmark shall include an entire tax parcel and may include adjoining tax parcels that were historically linked to the primary parcel during the period of greatest historic significance for the landmark structure. 
c.  A written statement of significance for the proposed preservation district. 
(7)  No preservation district or districts shall be designated until the Mississippi Department of Archives and History has been notified by certified letter by the city and invited to make recommendations concerning the proposed district boundaries. The Mississippi Department of Archives and History, acting through such agent or employee as may be designated by its director, may comment by letter, telephone, e-mail or in person, and shall have made an analysis of, and department to submit its analysis and recommendations to the city within sixty (60) days after a written request for such analysis has been mailed, it shall relieve the city of any reasonability for awaiting such analysis; and the city may at any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its ordinance. 
(8)  If a proposed ordinance is to designate a landmark or landmark site, it may be presented to the city with a recommendation that it be adopted without submission to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
(9)  The city must conduct at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed designation and notice of the public hearing must be published weekly for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of local publication authorized to publish legal notices. The city must take action on the purposed designation within sixty (60) days of the public hearing, either to adopt a designating ordinance or to reject the proposed designation. 
(10)  The commission shall notify, as soon as is reasonably possible, the appropriate state, county, and municipal agencies of the official designation of all historic landmarks, landmark sites, and historic preservation districts. An updated list and map shall be maintained by such agencies and made available to the public. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § VI) 
Sec. 2-82. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
    No exterior feature of any resource shall be altered, relocated, or demolished until an application for a certificate of appropriateness of such work has been received and reviewed by the commission, who shall then make known its recommendation to the city for final decision. Likewise, no construction, which affects a resource, shall be undertaken without a certificate of appropriateness. In making its recommendation, the commission shall seek to accomplish the purposes of this division. The certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the city if it finds that a proposed construction, alteration, demolition, subdivision or relocation is consistent with the design review guidelines established by the commission, would be compatible with the character of a historic district or historic landmark or landmark site, and does not compromise the historic and architectural integrity or the historic district, historic landmark or landmark site. The city may, at its discretion, require that a property owner post a bond to guarantee satisfactory completion of a relocation project. 
    Any qualified and interested person aggrieved by the recommendation of the commission may make his or her position known to the city when it considers whether or not the recommendation of the commission should be accepted. Thereafter, any qualified and interested person aggrieved by the action of the city in either denying or granting a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such decision directly to the Circuit Court of Union County, Mississippi. 
    Whenever the commission shall make a recommendation to the city regarding a certificate of appropriateness, whether such recommendation is for the granting or denial of such certificate, the commission must state the reasons for its decision in writing. If the certificate of appropriateness is denied, the applicant may resubmit a new application at any time, except that an applicant must wait six (6) months whenever an application for a certificate of appropriateness is denied for a landmark property of statewide or national significance and notice of any second or subsequent application must be sent to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History as well as to the commission. 
    The city's denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the building inspector, and shall prevent the issuance of other building permits for the same parcel until a certificate of appropriateness is approved. A certificate of appropriateness may be required for work which does not require a building permit. A certificate of appropriateness may be evidenced by either a written and dated letter to an owner or applicant or such a letter accompanied by a signed and dated stamp on the face of any and all architectural or project drawings prepared for a project. The city may, at its discretion, provide by ordinance that a certificate of appropriateness shall expire at the end of a specified time period if work has not begun. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for work that is ordinary repair or maintenance of any resource. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § VII) 
Sec. 2-83. - Criteria for issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
    The commission and the city shall use the following criteria in evaluating and granting or denying certificates of appropriateness: 
(1)  General factors: 
a.  Architectural design of existing building, structure, or appurtenance and proposed alteration; 
b.  Historical significance of the resource; 
c.  General appearance of the resource; 
d.  Condition of the resource; 
e.  Materials composing the resource; 
f.  Size of the resource; 
g.  The relationship of the above factors to, and their effect upon the immediate surroundings and, if within a preservation district, upon the district as a whole and its architectural, historical character and integrity. 
(2)  New construction: 
a.  In advance of new construction, steps shall be taken to ensure evaluation of possible archaeological resources, as set forth in the Mississippi Antiquities Act. 
b.  The following aspects of new construction shall be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which the new construction is visually related, including but not limited to; the height, the gross volume, the proportion between width and height of the facade(s), the proportions and relationship between doors and windows, the rhythm of solids to voids created by openings in the facade, the materials, the textures, the patterns, the trims, and the design of the roof. 
c.  Existing rhythm created by existing building masses and spaces between them shall be preserved. 
d.  The landscape plan shall be compatible with the resources, and its shall be visually compatible with the environment with which it is visually related. Landscaping shall also not prove detrimental to the fabric of a resource, or adjacent public or private improvements like sidewalks and walls. 
e.  No specific architectural style shall be required. 
(3)  Exterior alteration: 
a.  All exterior alterations to a building, structure, object, site, or landscape feature shall be compatible with the resource itself and other resources with which it is related, as is provided in subsections (1) and (2); and the original design of a building, structure, object, or landscape feature shall be considered in applying these standards. 
b.  Exterior alterations shall not effect the architectural character or historic quality of a landmark and shall not destroy the significance of landmark sites. 
(4)  [ Demolition. ] In considering an application for the demolition of landmark or a resource within a preservation district, the following shall be considered: 
a.  The commission shall consider the individual architectural, cultural, and/or historical significance of the resource. 
b.  The commission shall consider the importance or contribution of the resource to the architectural character of the district. 
c.  The commission shall consider the importance of contribution of the resource to neighboring property values. 
d.  The commission shall consider the difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a resource because of its texture, design, material, or detail. 
e.  Applicants that have received a certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall be permitted to receive such demolition permit without additional commission action on demolition. Permits for demolition and construction shall be issued simultaneously, if requirements of subsection (2) are met and the applicant provides financial proof of his ability to complete the project. 
f.  When the commission recommends approval of demolition of a resource, a permit shall not be issued until all plans for the site have received approval from all appropriate city boards, commissions, departments and agencies. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § VIII) 
Sec. 2-84. - Procedures for issuance of certificate of appropriateness. 
    Anyone desiring to take action requiring a certificate of appropriateness concerning a resource for which a permit, variance, or other authorization from either the building inspector, planning and zoning department, or city is also required, shall therefore make application in the form and manner required by the applicable code section or ordinance. Any such application shall also be considered an application for a certificate of appropriateness and shall include such additional information as may be required by the commission. After receipt of any such application, the city building inspector shall be assured that the application is proper and complete. No building permit shall be issued by the city building inspector which affects a resource without a certificate of appropriateness. In the event that a building permit need not be obtained for a building, structure, or object to be erected within a preservation district or on a historic landmark or landmark site, a certificate of appropriateness is still required before such building, structure, or object may be erected. Thereafter, such application shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of sections 2-82 and 2-83 and the following procedure: 
(1)  When any such application is filed, the building inspector shall immediately notify the commission chairman, or vice-chairman if the chairman is unavailable, of the application having been filed. 
(2)  The applicant shall, upon request, have the right to a preliminary conference with a member of the commission or of the commission staff for the purpose of making any changes or adjustments to the application, which might be more consistent with the commission's standards. 
(3)  Not later than fifteen (15) days before the date set for the said hearing, the building inspector shall mail notice thereof to the applicant at the address in the application and to all members of the commission. 
(4)  Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days before such hearing and by posting such notice on the bulletin board in the front of city hall. 
(5)  At such hearing, the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to present any relevant evidence in support of the application. Likewise, the city shall have the right to present any additional relevant evidence in support of the application. 
(6)  The commission shall have the right to recommend changes and modifications to enable the applicant to meet the requirements of the commission. 
(7)  Within not more than twenty-one (21) days after the hearing on an application, the commission shall make its recommendations, or defer action until the next meeting of the commission, giving consideration to the factors set forth in section 2-83 hereof. Notice of the commission's decision shall be in writing to the applicant and building inspector, who shall forward the commission's recommendation and his to the city for its consideration. 
(8)  In all cases of applications affecting National Historical Landmarks, at least three (3) members of the commission must agree on recommending approval before its recommendation is forwarded to the building inspector, if necessary, and to the city. 
(9)  The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve an applicant for a building permit, special use permit, variance, or other authorization from compliance with any other requirement or provision of the laws of the city concerning zoning, construction, repair, or demolition. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § IX) 
Sec. 2-85. - Appeals. 
    The applicant or other qualified interested individual who desires to protest a recommendation by the commission that the a certificate of appropriateness be denied or granted shall file with the building inspector a brief statement supporting his or her position and the same shall be transmitted to the city by the building inspector. The issue shall be presented at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen as provided by law. Once a decision is made by the city to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness, the aggrieved applicant or other qualified interested individual may appeal in the same manner as other appeals from municipal boards or courts are taken. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § X) 
Sec. 2-86. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
    In order to insure the protective maintenance of resources, the exterior features of such properties shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the city's minimum housing code and the city's building code. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XI) 
Sec. 2-87. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any resource which is a landmark and all resourced within a historic preservation district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay, substantial deterioration, and free from unreasonable structural defects that threaten the continued stability and preservation of a historic landmark, landmark site, or resource found within a historic preservation district. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one (1) or more of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe conditions as determined by the city building inspector. 
(2)  Deterioration, as determined by the city building inspector, or a building characterized by one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings, which have parts thereof, which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property; 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports inefficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
d.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members, which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; 
g.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
h.  Fireplaces of chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; or 
i.  Any faults, defect, or condition in the building, which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, it shall notify the mayor and board of aldermen who will direct the city building inspector to notify the owner or owners of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give the owner of record thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notices shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address of the record owner or owners as listed on the city and/or county tax rolls; or 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource. If the owner or owners fail to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a building permit, the board of aldermen shall notify the owner or owners in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission at a date, time, and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least thirty (30) days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner or owners may present evidence in rebuttal thereto by neglect. 
(3)  Should the owner or owners be aggrieved by the commission's decision, appeal may be taken directly to the mayor and board of aldermen at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, at which time the mayor and board of aldermen shall take and hear evidence from the owner or owners and the commission and/or building inspector. The board of aldermen, with the concurrence from the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Archives and History, may make repairs necessary to correct demolition by neglect, and the cost of such repairs shall become a lien against the property in accordance with Miss. Code Ann. Section 21-91-11(3) (1972), as amended. 
(c)  If property in a historic district or a historic landmark or landmark site is demolished without review and approval by the commission, the owner or owners may be required by the city to rebuild on the site using as much of the original building material as possible, but in general following the same form. Unauthorized demolition of a portion of a structure shall not serve as justification for a demolition permit whenever it can be shown that restoration or rehabilitation would still be feasible. Whenever a structure or structure is demolished without review and approval by the commission, the city may require that no permit be issued for any structure or structures proposed for the same parcel which would require a footprint larger than the footprint of the demolished structure or structures, and may require that no permit for any constitution on the parcel from which the landmark or landmark site has been removed may be issued for a period of up to twenty-four (24) months. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XII) 
Sec. 2-88. - Public safety exclusion. 
    None of the provisions of this division shall be construed to prevent any action of construction, alteration, or demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any resource, or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous condition of any resource, or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the city building inspector and where the proposed actions have been declare necessary by such authorities to correct the said condition; provided, however, that only such work as is necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any resource designated as a landmark or located within a preservation district, shall be damaged by fire or other calamity to such and extent that it cannot be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws, provided that: 
(1)  The city building inspector concurs with the property owner that the resource cannot be repaired and restored and so notifies the commission in writing. 
(2)  The commission, if in doubt after receiving such notification from the city building inspector, shall be allowed time to seek outside professional expertise from the State Historic Preservation Office before issuing a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition. The commission may indicate in writing appropriateness for the demolition. The commission may indicate in writing by letter to the city building inspector that it will require a time period of up to thirty (30) days for this purpose, and, upon such notification to the city building inspector, this section shall be suspended until the expiration of such a delay period. If the commission fails to act within the prescribed period, the city building inspector shall make his recommendation directly to the city, which may, at its discretion, issue or deny the certification of appropriateness. 
(3)  If the commission does not recommend granting a certificate of appropriateness, the owner or owners may follow the procedures for appeal provided for in this division. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XIII) 
Sec. 2-89. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    The following civil and criminal penalties may be imposed upon those persons, firms, or corporation found to have violated requirements or prohibitions contained within this division: 
(1)  Civil penalty. Any person who constructs, alters, relocates, or demolishes any resource in violation of this division shall be required to restore the resource to its appearance or setting prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this provision shall be brought by the city upon the recommendation of the commission. This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution and penalty. 
(2)  Criminal penalty. Any persons, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each day during which any violation hereof is committed. Upon conviction; each violation shall be punishable by a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XIV) 
Sec. 2-90. - Title to property acquired. 
    All property acquired by finds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the City of New Albany unless otherwise provided by the city. So long as owned by the city, properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city. All property acquired by the commission from funds other than those appropriated by the city may be acquired and held in the name of the city with prior approval of the city. Whenever the city shall hold title to properties in its own name, such properties shall be administered in accordance with this division and other city ordinances. The city is authorized to make appropriations to the commission necessary for the expenses of the operation of the commission. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XV) 
Sec. 2-91. - Non-restrictive clause. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the regulation or acquisition or property, improved or unimproved, by the State of Mississippi or any of its political subdivisions, agencies, or instrumentalities or by the United States of America or any of its political subdivisions, agencies, or instrumentalities. Furthermore, the city hereby acknowledges that the Mississippi State Antiquities Act (Miss. Code Ann. Section 39-7-1, et seq. (1972), as amended), provides for the sensitive treatment of publicly owned property, improved or unimproved, shown to possess certain architectural, historical, or archaeological significance, which are designated by the Board of Trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History as Mississippi Landmarks. Whenever the city proposes to rehabilitate, alter, or enlarge a Mississippi landmark (or proposes similar actions, which would effect a Mississippi landmark), the city shall submit its plans to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History for review and compliance. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XVI) 
Sec. 2-92. - Disqualification of members by conflicts of interest. 
    Because the city may possess few residents with experience in the individual fields urban planning, American history, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, architecture, interior design, landscape design, construction, law, real estate appraisal and related fields, and in order not to impair such residents from practicing their trade for hire, members of the commission are allowed to contrast their services to an applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, and, when doing so, must expressly disqualify themselves from the commission during all discussions for that application. In such cases, the city may, upon the request of the chairman of the commission or the vice-chairman in his stead, appoint a substitute member who is qualified in the same field as the disqualified member, and who will serve for that particular case only. If no qualified resident of the city is able to substitute for the disqualified member, the city may appoint, in this case only, a qualified substitute who must be resident of Mississippi but who is not required to be a resident of New Albany. If any member of the commission must be disqualified due to a conflict of interest on a regular and continuing basis, the chairman or vice-chairman of the commission shall encourage the city to replace the member. Likewise, any member of the commission who has an interest in the property in question or in property within three hundred (300) feet of such property, or who is employed with a firm that has been hired to aid the applicant in any matter whatsoever, or who has any proprietary, tenancy, or personal interest in a matter to be considered by the commission shall be disqualified from participating in the consideration of any request for a certificate of appropriateness involving such a property. In such cases, a qualified substitute may be appointed as provided above. 
(Ord. of 7-16-2007, § XVII) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Misrepresentations by peddlers, § 15-5. 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 49-23-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Erecting, maintaining advertisements, etc., on public property. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, put up, place or maintain any billboard, post, signboard, posting board, placard or advertisement or notice of any kind consisting of words, figures, pictures or illustrations on public property, to include telephone poles, but not to exclude other public property. 
Sec. 3-2. - Tearing down, defacing, covering up advertisements or bills. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person, when the same is lawfully posted and put up during the time such sign or advertisement shall be of value. 
Sec. 3-3. - Public address systems. 
    No person shall use or operate within the corporate limits of the city any type of public address system for commercial purposes; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to public address systems used within buildings for business purposes when the volume of such address system is such as not to create loud noises outside the building in which such system is being used. 
(Ord. of 6-3-58, § 1) 
Secs. 3-4-3-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 3-24. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    Newspaper shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States in accordance with federal statutes or regulations, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public, and any other copyrighted material. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Sec. 3-25. - Applicability of article to mail and newspapers. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property. 
Sec. 3-26. - Disposition in public places restricted. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city any handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
Sec. 3-27. - Disposition in or upon vehicles or to drivers of vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, in any public place, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
Sec. 3-28. - Private premises generally. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises ; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the same from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. 
Sec. 3-29. - Posted private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words : "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises. 
Sec. 3-30. - Depositing on uninhabited, vacant premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - NEW ALBANY BEER ORDINANCE 

Sec. 4-1. - Sale regulated. 
    It will promote the public health, morals and safety to provide reasonable rules and regulations governing the sale of beer and light wine as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beer and light wines are defined by MCA 1972, § 67-3-5 and by this article as beverages having an alcoholic content of not more than five (5) percent by weight. 
    Permittee is a person or entity who has obtained a beer permit from the ABC Division of the Mississippi Tax Commission under MCA 1972, § 67-3-7-17, as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-3. - Privilege license required. 
    No beer or light wine shall be sold within the municipal boundaries of the city unless the seller has first obtained a retail ABC permit from the State Tax Commission under MCA § 67-3-72, as amended, and has also obtained a business privilege license and a sale of beer and light wine privilege license, the fee for which shall be fifty (50) percent of the amount charged by the state, from the city and paid the privilege license fees to be renewed annually. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-4. - Restrictions on sale of beer and light wine. 
(a)  Cold beer sales allowed. It shall be lawful for refrigerated beer or light wine to be sold within the municipal boundaries of the city for off-premises and on-premises consumption except as restricted below. 
(b)  On-premises kitchen facilities required. No beer or light wine shall be sold for on-premises consumption unless the seller has suitable kitchen facilities on the licensed premises to provide for the preparation, cooking and serving of food so that food sales generate fifty (50) percent of gross revenue. The service of foods not prepared on the premises shall not be deemed in compliance with the requirements of this section. Restaurants must contain seating for a minimum of forty (40) with suitable facilities for the consumption of food for its patrons and the kitchen facilities must remain open for business so long as beer or light wine is being sold. 
(c)  [ Sunday sales. ] It shall be lawful to sell beer and light wine on Sunday. Beer and light wine may be sold on Sunday only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(d)  Hours of sale for all days except Sunday. Beer or light wine may be sold for on-premises or off-premises consumption between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(e)  Drive-in sales prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell beer or light wine through a drive-in window sales facility or a drive-thru "beer barn" within the municipal boundaries of the city. 
(f)  Advertising. There shall be no advertising for beer and light wine outside of the interior of the building where it is sold or consumed. There shall be no advertising or storage of beer or light wine within the interior of the store which allows it to be visible from the street or highway side of the store. 
(g)  Territory where sale is prohibited. No beer or light wine shall be sold for either on-premises or off-premises consumption within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the nearest point of the primary building of any church or school. This distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the building housing the church or school to the nearest point of the premises which consists of the floor planned area to be licensed by the commission. This distance shall be measured in a straight line, such as airline distance, rather than the usual route of pedestrian travel. 
(h)  [ Sales for off-premises consumption. ] It is unlawful for any beer or light wine beverages to be sold for off-premises consumption in quantities less than said products are prepackaged for sale by the manufacturer. 
(i)  Open containers prohibited on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of beer or light wine on public property, including buildings, parking lots, sidewalks, streets and parks within the municipal boundaries of the city. Open containers do not include empty containers. 
(j)  Zones where beer and light wine may lawfully be sold. The sale of beer and light wine shall be lawful only in C-1 (downtown commercial district) and C-2 (general commercial district) within the municipal limits of the city. 
(k)  Open container-Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of beer or light wine either as an operator or passenger of a motor vehicle. Open containers shall include containers which have been opened and reclosed. Open containers do not include empty containers. 
(l)  Open container-Private property. It shall be lawful for any person of legal age to possess a container of beer or light wine on private property. 
(m)  Consumption of package beer. There shall be no on-premises consumption of package beer on the premises where the same is sold. 
(n)  On-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any premises licensed for on-premises consumption to allow a patron to leave such premises with either a full or partial container of beer or light wine. 
(o)  Bagging of beer and light wine sold for off-premises consumption. The sales clerk of each premises selling package beer or light wine for off-premises consumption must first place the same in an opaque bag or sack before delivering same to the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-5. - Discontinuing operations during emergency. 
    In the event of any disturbance, uprising or riot or any other emergency of life, property or public safety, the mayor may require the chief of police to promptly order any and all places in the city where beer or light wine is consumed, sold or otherwise dispensed, to discontinue such for the period of such emergency. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-6. - Minors giving false identification. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age twenty-one (21) years to make a false statement as to his or her age for the purpose of obtaining beer or light wine. The penalty for violating this provision shall be a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a sentence of not more than thirty (30) days community service. 
(b)  The judge may, in his or her discretion, accept, in lieu of community service, a certificate indicating the individual has successfully completed an alcohol and/or drug education program or treatment program at the expense of the individual. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-7. - Compliance with state law requirements. 
    No permit or license required by this article shall issue to any person unless satisfactory evidence is furnished to the tax collector that such person has complied with the requirements of state law, and if the permit required by state law is at any time revoked, said revocation shall operate as a cancellation and forfeiture of the rights of the person holding a permit or license from the municipality. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-8. - Penalty for violation of article; misdemeanor. 
    Any violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both, unless otherwise specified herein. 
(Ord. of 3-2-10) 
Sec. 4-9. - Title. 
    The sections of this article may be referred to collectively as the "New Albany Beer Ordinance." 
Secs. 4-10-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NEW ALBANY LIQUOR ORDINANCE 

Sec. 4-25. - Definitions. 
    Any term, word or phrase which is specifically defined by Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 65-1-5, shall be so defined in this article: 
    Permittee shall refer to any holder of a state permit to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    Commercial establishment shall include any business or organization, public or private, which charges or accepts revenue for goods, membership or admittance, whether for profit or not for profit. 
    Consumption shall include the ingestion of any alcoholic beverage as well as possession of any alcoholic beverages in an open or opened container. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-26. - Purpose. 
    The city finds and determines that it is in the public interest and will promote public health, morals and safety to provide reasonable rules and regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Cross reference- New Albany Beer Ordinance, § 4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-27. - Incorporation of state laws, including sale to minors and possession by minors. 
    All state statutes, rules and regulations, including the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in their present form or as hereinafter amended, modified, repealed or created are incorporated herein by reference as the governing law of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
State Law reference- Miss. Code Ann. 1972, Title 67, generally, § 97-31-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-28. - Sale, possession of alcoholic beverages. 
    It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages or to possess alcoholic beverages in the city in violation of any state law or any rule or regulation of the state department of revenue, including the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, possession of alcoholic beverages by minors and sale of alcoholic beverages within prohibited distances from churches, schools, kindergartens and funeral homes. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
State Law reference- Sale to minors prohibited, penalties, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 67-1-81; permits, distance regulations, § 67-1-51; permitted premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, Mississippi Administrative Code, § 35.II.2.03. 
Sec. 4-29. - False statements by minors. 
    It is unlawful in the city for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to make a false statement to the effect that he or she is twenty-one (21) years of age or older for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise acquiring any alcoholic beverage or for the purpose of gaining admittance to any business, resort, entertainment venue or club in which alcoholic beverages are being sold or furnished and in which persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age are not allowed by the owner, host or manager or pursuant to any state or local law or regulation. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Cross reference- New Albany Beer Ordinance, minors giving false identification, § 4-6. 
Sec. 4-30. - Locations where possession prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage on or in any of the following locations, except as specifically allowed by order of the city board of aldermen: 
(1)  The interior of any business, including a restaurant, in which the owner or manager shall display in several conspicuous location inside the business and at the entrances signs containing the following language: "NO ALCOHOL BEVERAGES ALLOWED"; 
(2)  Any public playground; 
(3)  Any public park, including the New Albany Sportsplex; 
(4)  Any fire station or police station; 
(5)  Any school buildings or grounds or any sports facilities owned or in use by any school; 
(6)  Any public library or museum; 
(7)  Any properties in use by the Union County Fair; or 
(8)  Any property owned, leased or operated by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-31. - Transportation for compensation prohibited. 
    It is unlawful in the city for any person to transport or deliver any alcoholic beverage to another person for compensation of any kind except for transportation as permitted by state law, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
State Law reference- Miss. Code Ann. 1972, §§ 67-1-1 et seq., 27-71-15 et seq. 
Sec. 4-32. - Possession of alcoholic beverages by operators of public conveyance prohibited. 
    It is unlawful in the city for any person operating any public conveyance to have any alcoholic beverage in their possession in such conveyance. "Public conveyance" shall be defined as a taxi service, a limousine service, a bus service, or any other motorized means of conveyance operating as a means of transporting people for hire. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-33. - Liquor store advertisements. 
    Advertising. There shall be no advertisements for alcoholic beverages on the exterior of any building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold pursuant to a package retailer's permit except as specifically authorized by state law. There shall be no advertising or storage of alcoholic beverages within the interior of any building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold pursuant to a package retailer's permit which allows it to be visible from the street or highway side of the store. 
(Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Editor's note- An Ordinance of 11-1-2016 deleted the former § 4-33, and enacted a new § 4-33 as set out herein. The former section pertained to employment of persons under the age of twenty-one, and derived from Ord. of 7-7-2013. 
Sec. 4-34. - Requirement for insurance. 
    Permittees selling alcoholic beverages within the municipal boundaries of the city shall procure and maintain at all times general liability insurance and other necessary insurance which shall specifically insure against alcohol related events with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-35. - Hours and days during which alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
    As set by state laws, rules and/or regulations, alcoholic beverages may be sold as follows: 
(1)  For holders of a state package retailer's permit, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that no sales may be made on Sundays or on Christmas Day; and 
(2)  For on-premises permittees, including hotels, restaurants, clubs or caterers with a state permit, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, and between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Sundays. It is further provided that on New Year's Eve night on-premises permittees, including clubs with a state permit, may remain open until 1:00 a.m., January 1. In the event that New Year's Eve falls on a Sunday, on-premises permittees, including clubs with a state permit, may remain open from 1:00 p.m. until 1:00 a.m. 
(3)  These prohibited hours and days, all of which conform with present state law, shall be subject to any amendment of state law, rules or regulations, and shall conform with any amendments thereto without amendment to this article. They are further subject to specific amendment by order of the department of revenue in response to a petition by the city requested approval of alternate hours and/or Sunday sales, which order shall survive any subsequent amendment to state law, rules or regulations not specifically intended to supersede prior orders by the department of revenue approving hours and days during which alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
(4)  While resorts are exempt from state hours and days of sale regulations, the city may, by petition to the department of revenue, request designate hours and/or days for resort sales without further amendment to this article. Any subsequent order of the department of revenue on this subject is hereby adopted by reference. 
(5)  Any other limits, prohibitions or exceptions granted by state laws, rules and/or regulations, in their present form and as hereinafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-5-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
State Law reference- Hours and days during which alcoholic beverages may be sold by hotels, restaurants, clubs, package stores and caterers, Mississippi Administrative Code, § 35.II.2.04. 
Sec. 4-36. - Brown-bag ordinance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity, nor any agent nor employee thereof, operating a commercial establishment to allow consumption of alcoholic beverages by customers or business invitees on the premises of such establishment without a state on-premises retailer's permit. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-37. - Open container. 
    It is unlawful in the city for any person to have in his or her possession an open container, which shall not be construed to include an empty container or an open but reclosed container, in the following locations within the municipal boundaries of the city: 
(1)  On public property, including buildings, parking lots, sidewalks, streets and parks; and 
(2)  Within a motor vehicle, regardless of whether the person is possession is an operator or a passenger of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Cross reference- Restrictions on sale of beer or light wine, § 4-4(i), (k). 
Sec. 4-38. - Lewd entertainment. 
    It shall be unlawful in the city for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to allow or permit within or on the business premises any conduct or activities prohibited by Title 35, Part II, Subpart 2, Chapter 7 of the Mississippi Alcohol Beverage Control Regulations, including conduct which is lewd, immoral or offensive to public decency, as defined therein. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
State Law reference- Prohibited conduct and activities, Mississippi Administrative Code, § 35.II.2.08. 
Sec. 4-39. - Disturbance of the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful in the city for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to allow or permit loud and disorderly conduct on the business premises, including loud music, so as to disturb the community. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-40. - Enforcement. 
    The city police department is hereby authorized, ordered and directed to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-41. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. In addition, in lieu of imprisonment the judge may, at his or her discretion, impose not more than thirty (30) days community service. The judge may further, at his or her discretion, accept in lieu of community service a certificate indicating successful completion of an alcohol and/or drug education program or treatment program at the expense of the individual. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 4-42. - Limitation. 
    It is the intent of the city that its ordinances conform to all state statutes, rules and regulations now in force or as hereafter amended, repealed, modified or later created. Nothing in this article shall be construed as overruling or limiting the applicability of state laws, rules and regulations. Any provision of any ordinance herein which shall be interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction as being in conflict with any applicable state law, rule or regulation governing alcoholic beverages is superseded by the conflicting state law, rule or regulation, and the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Secs. 4-43-4-49. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for municipalities to regulate circuses, shows, etc., Miss. Code Ann, 1972, § 21-19-33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement rides. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the negligent operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. 
(b)  This section shall apply to all persons whether or not a license or permit is required by any other provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
Cross reference- Local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Amusement park tax, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-21; tax on merry-go-round operation, § 27-17-267. 
Secs. 5-2-5-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SHOWS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, FAIRS AND MINSTRELS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate circuses, shows, etc., Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-33. 

Sec. 5-22. - When operation allowed; reservation of right to refuse issuance of permit. 
    Upon payment of a minimum permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city clerk, and upon receipt of a permit from the city clerk, it shall be lawful for the owner or operator of a show, circus, carnival, fair or minstrel, without animals, to conduct such entertainment for one night only in the city; provided, however, the city reserves the right to refuse to issue such permit with or without visible cause. 
Cross reference- Adoption of state local privilege tax code, § 11-21. 
Sec. 5-23. - Authority to increase permit fee. 
    The amount of the permit fee specified in section 5-22 may be increased in the discretion of the city on the basis of the size of the show, circus, carnival, fair or minstrel. 
Sec. 5-24. - Disposition of permit fees. 
    The fee collected for a permit required by this article shall be used to clean up the area occupied by the show, circus, carnival, fair or minstrel and to defray the expense of providing policemen at such event. 
Sec. 5-25. - Liability of city. 
    The city shall assume no obligation or responsibility to anyone for any claim of damage arising out of, or from granting a permit for, any show, circus, carnival, fair or minstrel, such permit being merely permission to show within the city. 
Secs. 5-26-5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Applicability of slot amusement machine ordinance to poolrooms and billiard halls, § 5-94; local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, prohibit or suppress billiard tables, pool rooms, etc., Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-33; general licensing regulations, §§ 27-17-59-27-17-67. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-46. - Frequenting by minors. 
    No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to enter and remain in any poolroom or billiard hall. No owner or manager of any poolroom or billiard hall, and no agent or employee of any such owner or manager, shall permit or allow such person to enter and remain in any such establishment. Any manager or owner of any poolroom or billiard hall, and any agent or employee of such owner or manager, shall, for each offense, upon conviction, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 97-5-11. 
Sec. 5-47. - Drinking, betting on premises prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or any employee of any poolroom or billiard hall holding a license for the use of pool or billiard tables to knowingly permit in or about such room or place, or on the premises adjacent thereto, the drinking of any alcoholic beverages or alcoholic mixture, or to knowingly permit any betting on any game on the tables therein. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A conviction under this section of the owner, manager or any employee of such poolroom or billiard hall shall ipso facto operate as a forfeiture of the license obtained under the provisions of this article for the use of the tables in such establishment, or any other like room, and no license shall be issued to any person for the use of the tables in such poolroom or billiard hall for ten (10) years after the date of such conviction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, 17-65. 
Secs. 5-48-5-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 

Sec. 5-68. - Application. 
    Before any license shall be issued to any person to operate a poolroom or billiard hall, such person shall make an application to the city tax collector which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in the following form: 
To the Tax Collector of the City of New Albany, Mississippi: 
    I (or we) hereby make application for a privilege license to operate _________ pool or billiard tables in a room at _______, New Albany, Mississippi. 
    I state on oath that I (or we) will not knowingly permit any betting on any game played therein, or drinking of any alcoholic beverages or alcoholic mixture therein or on the premises adjacent thereto. 
Signed:__________ 
    Sworn to before me this ______ day of ______________, 19___. 
_______________________ 
Notary Public 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-61. 
Sec. 5-69. - Affidavit required. 
    Before any poolroom or billiard hall license may be issued, the applicant shall be required to make and file in the office of the city clerk, in addition to the application therefor, the following affidavit: 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
COUNTY OF UNION 
CITY OF NEW ALBANY 
TO THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF NEW ALBANY, COUNTY OF UNION, MISSISSIPPI: 
    I, having made application for privilege tax license to operate a poolroom or billiard hall or tables in or at the following place, to wit: 
    In the City of New Albany, Mississippi, I hereby state, under oath, that I have never been convicted of violating the prohibition laws of the State of Mississippi ; further that I will operate said business in compliance with all ordinances of the City of New Albany, Mississippi; further in the event I should knowingly violate any section or sections of any ordinance of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, pertaining to the operation of poolrooms or billiard halls, the said city shall have the right to immediately close the doors of and terminate my said business and declare forfeited the bond herewith deposited for the faithful performance and observance of the ordinances of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, and the statutes of the State of Mississippi, with reference to the operation of a poolroom; I will not permit any alcoholic drinks to be sold on said premises, nor will I permit any drinking of alcoholic beverages on said premises. I will not permit any gambling on said premises ; nor will I permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to frequent or patronize the same. 
Signed: ___________________ 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
COUNTY OF UNION 
    Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, __________, Notary Public, in and for the County and State, who acknowledged that he signed the above and foregoing application and that he will abide by and comply with all obligations imposed on him therein. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office this the ________ day of _______________, 19____. 
______________________________ 
Notary Public 
Union County, 
Mississippi. 
Sec. 5-70. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-71. - Conditions of issuance, denial. 
    The city shall not issue any poolroom or billiard hall license to any person who has been convicted of violating any of the prohibition laws of the state. Before the city shall issue the license, the applicant shall file with the city clerk the application and affidavit, which shall remain on file ten (10) days for consideration by the board of aldermen. If the board, in its discretion, decides that it would not be for the best interest of, promote the general welfare of, the city or its citizens, or shall not be expedient for the license to be issued to such person making application therefor, it shall so notify the city clerk and the license shall not be issued. The board may refuse, in its discretion, any such application. 
Sec. 5-72. - Revocation; closure of business. 
    If at any time the board of aldermen shall ascertain and adjudge that any business subject to the provisions of this article is not being operated in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code, city ordinances or state laws, or that it will not be expedient or for the best interest of, and will not promote good morals or general welfare of the city for the operation of such poolroom or billiard hall to continue, or for any reason satisfactory to the board, it shall have the right to immediately order the business closed, and the license therefor canceled, revoked and surrendered. On failure or refusal of the licensee to close his business when ordered to do so, the bond that he has given therefor shall be immediately forfeited; and if such person fails to close such poolroom or billiard hall promptly, the mayor is hereby authorized to close the same immediately. 
Secs. 5-73-5-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SLOT AMUSEMENT MACHINES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Slot amusement machine tax, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-27-1 et seq. 

Sec. 5-93. - "Slot amusement machine," "machine" defined. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "slot amusement machine" or "machine" shall mean any mechanical device or contrivance which is operated, played, worked, manipulated or used by inserting or depositing any coin, slug, token or thing of value, in which may be seen any picture or heard any music, or wherein any game may be played or any form of diversion had. 
Sec. 5-94. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall not apply to any machine operated for gambling purposes, to any machine kept at a regular place of business of distributors or manufacturers for sale or lease without being operated, or to any pool table operated in a place of business commonly known as a poolroom or billiard hall when the gross income from the operation of such pool table is taxable under the state sales tax law. 
Sec. 5-95. - Application for license; issuance. 
    Every person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation any slot amusement machine shall file an application for a license with the city clerk on forms furnished by him for that purpose. The application shall contain such information as may be required by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by remittance for the amount of tax and any penalty required. Persons owning or placing on location more than one machine may apply for a license authorizing the operation of the machines at the various locations in the state, and such license when issued shall show the total number of each type machine for which the license was issued and the amount of tax paid by the applicant. The city clerk shall then issue to the licensee an individual receipt for the number of machines applied for which shall be the evidence of payment of the tax. 
Sec. 5-96. - Effect of issuance of license; transfer; change in classification of machine. 
    The license issued under this article shall entitle the owner or the person placing the machine on location for the purpose of operation to operate a machine of the type specified until December next. If a machine for which a license has been issued should be destroyed or traded, the privilege of operation for the remaining time covered by the license may be transferred to another machine of the same type by procedure to be specified by the city clerk. When ownership of a licensed machine is transferred to another person, no additional tax shall be required. Where a slot is changed to require additional coins or money to operate a machine, an additional license shall be obtained and a tax paid at the rate prescribed by this article to be prorated for the months remaining on the original license, and the licensee shall be allowed credit for the tax paid for the months remaining on the original license. 
Sec. 5-97. - Form of license; display. 
    The city clerk shall issue a license on a form to be prescribed by him. Such license shall be securely affixed or attached to the machine to which it applies in such a manner as to be readily visible and shall be affixed before the machine is operated or played. The absence of a proper license affixed to a machine shall be prima facie evidence of failure to pay the tax levied for the operation of the machine. 
Sec. 5-98. - Annual license tax imposed. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each person engaging in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation any slot amusement machine annual license taxes as follows: 
(1)  Each machine wherein may be seen any picture or heard any music ..... $27.00 
(2)  Each machine, not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section, wherein or whereby any game may be played or any form of diversion had ..... 45.00 
(3)  Each machine, not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section, wherein or by means of which children may obtain a ride upon a "hobby horse" or the figure of any animal, or upon the figure of a boat, airplane, rocket or other such machine ..... 18.00 
(b)  The measure of the tax shall be the amount of money required to operate or play any machine one time. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95) 
Sec. 5-99. - Payment of tax required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on location any machine without paying the tax levied by the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-100. - When license tax due; renewal. 
    The tax levied under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable annually on January first, and all licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire annually on December thirty-first. A license may be renewed on the machine without penalty during the month of January. The amount of the license tax to be paid for a period of less than twelve (12) months shall be that proportionate amount of the annual license tax that the number of months, or fractional part thereof, remaining until January first, next, bears to twelve (12) months. 
Sec. 5-101. - License tax in addition to other taxes. 
    The license tax levied by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes levied by law. 
Sec. 5-102. - Penalty for failure to pay tax. 
    Any person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation any slot amusement machine without the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be liable for the amount of the required tax plus fifty (50) per cent of the amount of the tax as penalty. 
Sec. 5-103. - Disposition of taxes and penalties. 
    The taxes and penalties collected under this article shall be paid into the city general fund in the same manner as other taxes collected by the city clerk. 
Sec. 5-104. - Refund of license tax. 
    No refund of any tax paid under the provisions of this article shall be allowed for failure or inability to exercise the privilege granted after the license has been issued. 
Sec. 5-105. - Records to be kept. 
    It shall be the duty of every person taxable under this article to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years adequate records showing the location on which each machine is placed for the purpose of operation, type of machine and the size of the coin required to operate the machine one time. 
Sec. 5-106. - Seizure of machine. 
(a)  Any police officer of the city shall have full and complete authority, without an order from any court, to take possession of any slot amusement machine and keep, seal or otherwise prevent the operation of such machine for failure to pay the license tax and any penalty required by this article, or for the operation of such machine without a proper license affixed thereto. 
(b)  When such machine shall have been seized or possession taken to prevent further unlawful use thereof, the same shall remain under the exclusive jurisdiction of the city until released by the city upon payment of the proper tax, penalty and costs, or until the same is disposed of under a writ of venditioni exponas issued by the proper court for the collection of the taxes due, together with the penalties and costs. 
(c)  Any operation of any machine after seizure of the same by an officer, or any disturbance of possession or notice of seizure posted by such officer, shall be unlawful, and any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Chapter 6 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted August 25, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-16, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to animals and fowl. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Abused animals means any animal which is any of the following whether such abuse is attributable to intentional cruelty or neglect: 
(1)  Mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased whether resulting in death or not. 
(2)  Deprived of water, food or shelter. 
(3)  Kept under unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  Abandoned. 
(5)  Trained, bred, or sold for fighting other animals. 
(6)  Transported unrestrained in open air vehicle. 
(7)  Transported in the trunk of any vehicle. 
(8)  Left unattended in a vehicle in extreme heat without proper ventilation. 
(9)  Is overcrowded in its habitat such as, but not limited to, too many dogs in one (1) yard. 
(10)  Is held outside in extreme weather conditions. 
    Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild except homosapiens. 
    Animal control officer means the person or persons designated by the mayor and board of alderman to perform duties involving animals and enforce this article. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city, its authorized agents or an independent contractor, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law. 
    At large shall mean off the enclosed premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or other person by leash, cord, chain, or other physical means of restraint sufficient to control such dog, cat, or other animal. 
    Cat shall include both male and female sex domesticated carnivore. 
    City shall mean the City of New Albany, Mississippi, and any and every place within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany. 
    Dog shall include both male and female sex in the canine species. 
    Domestic animal means any animal other than a feral dog or cat (as defined above) or wild animal (as defined below). 
    Feral cat means a cat that has escaped from domestication and become wild, dangerous or untamed. 
    Feral dog means a dog that has escaped from domestication and become wild, dangerous or untamed. 
    Owner means any person, firm, or other entity owning, possessing, harboring or keeping one (1) or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered. 
    Pet means any animals kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds, city parks or private property; 
(4)  Repeatedly runs at large; 
(5)  Damages private or public property; 
(6)  Barks, whines, screams, crows or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion; 
(7)  Defecates or frequently urinates on public property or private property of one other than its owner; 
(8)  Creates foul, offensive or noxious odors beyond the boundaries of the property of the owner. 
(9)  Is allowed by its owner to become a nuisance to people or other animals. 
    Restraint mean the condition of securing any animal, by leash or lead within the real property limits of its owner, or by tethering in such manner that the animal remains within the immediate possession and control of its owner. 
    Running at large shall mean off the enclosed premises of the owner, not behind fence or other enclosure and not under the control of the owner or other competent person by lease, cord, chain or other physical means of restraint sufficient to control such dog, cat or other animal. 
    Vicious animal means: See section 6-12. 
    Vicious dog means: See section 6-12. 
    Wild animal includes all animals referred to in MCA 1973 §§ 49-8-1 et seq. and any supplements and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009; Ord. of 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-2. - Keeping of livestock and fowl generally. 
(a)  Livestock. 
(1)  No person shall raise, have or keep any livestock or other animals excepting dogs, cats, birds and other household pets, within the city and within three hundred (300) feet of the residence of any other person who shall complain, in writing, to the mayor or board of alderman regarding the same. 
(2)  The premises on which any livestock or other animals, excepting dogs, cats, birds, and other household pets, are raised, had or kept within the corporate limits of the city shall be kept in accord with section 6-11, herein. 
(3)  This section shall be enforced only upon a written complaint, filed with the mayor or board of alderman, by some resident citizen residing on premises within three hundred (300) feet from where any such acts occur, setting out in detail the name of the person, location of the premises and type of violation, including what livestock or animals are being raised, kept or maintained. 
(4)  Upon the filing of a written complaint regarding any act set out in the section, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to give written notice to the person against whom the complaint is filed, to cause such act to cease, within five (5) days, to continue such act, such official shall make proper charges regarding such violations. 
(b)  Fowl. 
(1)  No person shall raise, have or keep any fowl within the city and within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the residence of any other person, except in areas in which the property is zoned agricultural. The exception for fowl kept in areas zoned agricultural shall not apply if a residence of another person on property not zoned agricultural is within two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(2)  The premises on which any fowl are raised, had or kept within the corporate limits of the city shall be kept in accord with section 6-11. 
(3)  Violation of this section of the ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be enforced by the animal control officer or by the New Albany Police Department. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009; Ord. of 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-3. - Keeping of swine prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine of any kind within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-4. - Dead animals within corporate limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or deposit the carcass of any dead animal within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person owning or responsible for any animal which dies within the corporate limits of the city shall immediately remove such animal from the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-5. - Songbird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a songbird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any songbird or to rob any songbird nest. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-6. - Cruelty, abuse, fighting. 
    No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, promote or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans unless otherwise permitted by law. The animal control officer or his lawful designee, shall have the authority to take the abused or neglected animal into protective custody pending disposition of charges of cruelty or abuse or neglect against owner. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-7. - Exposing to poisons. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same may be eaten by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common pest-control poison for the elimination of animals commonly regarded as pests. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-8. - Cropping dog's ears or performing other surgical procedure. 
    No person except a licensed veterinarian shall crop the ears of any dog or perform any surgical procedures on animals. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-9. - Leaving unattended animals inside motor vehicle; authority to remove from vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended inside a motor vehicle when such action is reasonably believed to be potentially harmful to said animal. The animal control officer and his lawful designee, shall have the authority to remove an animal from such a vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-10. - Operator of vehicle striking animal to report accident. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall at once report the accident to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-11. - Responsibility of owner generally. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to: 
(1)  Exercise proper care and control of his animals including, but not limited to, dogs or cats; 
(2)  Prevent them from becoming a public nuisance, as defined in section 6-1, or a private nuisance; or 
(3)  Comply with the standards set out next below and all other provisions of this title. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any lot or stall or stable or other place where animals are kept to be in an unclean, filthy or unsanitary condition. All lots, stalls, stables, pens, yards and other places where cattle, horses, mules, dogs, cats or other animals are kept for any purpose whatsoever, anywhere in the city, shall be kept clean and wholesome by removal of all offensive matter and by suitable cleansing and disinfecting as often as may be necessary, which care is hereby required and made the duty of every person having, owning or controlling such places. 
(c)  The owner of every animal, including but not limited to cats and dogs, shall remove any fecal matter deposited by such animals on public walks, streets, recreation areas or private property of another. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow unsanitary or malodorous conditions to develop on his property due to the keeping, maintaining, owning or harboring of animals. Yards, pens, premises and animals shall be kept free of insect infestations. 
(d)  Animal pens or enclosures shall be large enough to provide reasonable freedom of movement for the animals contained therein. 
(e)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal or fail to maintain such animal in a healthy condition or to provide appropriate veterinary treatment immediately, if ill. 
(f)  No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather and to generally provide humane care and treatment. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-12. - Vicious, ferocious, or dangerous animals regulated. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
State Law reference- Importation, sale and possession of inherently vicious, ferocious or dangerous wild animals, MCA 1972, § 49-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-13. - Definition. 
(a)  The following animals are hereby found and determined to be vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals and as such are subject to all requirements and provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any animals, other than domestic dogs and cats, which in a wild state are carnivorous or poisonous or which, due to their physical makeup or capabilities, are capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings. This includes, but is not limited to, animals belonging to the cat or snake family, including all constrictors, bears, wolverines, badgers, lions, tigers and such other animals as the board of aldermen may from time to time determine by order or resolution to be vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals. The city clerk is authorized to compile and maintain a list of such animals as may be determined to be regulated by this article. 
(2)  Any pit bull terrier, which shall be herein defined as any Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its breeding the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire bull terrier so as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire bull terrier by any qualified veterinarian duly licensed as such by the state. 
(3)  Any domestic dog or cat or any other animal that exhibits any of the following characteristics: 
a.  Without provocation approaches, in a threatening or terrorizing manner, any person in an apparent attitude of attack or exhibits any behavior that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person upon the streets, sidewalks, any public or common grounds or places, or in any place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully; 
b.  Without provocation bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a person, in any place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully, or animal when such animal is not on the property of the owner of the attacking animal; 
c.  A known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals; 
d.  Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or any animal trained for fighting. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, a person shall be considered to be peaceably and lawfully upon the private property of an owner of an animal when he is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by any laws or postal regulations of the United States or any political subdivision thereof or when he is on such property upon invitation, expressed or implied. 
(c)  The provisions of this section notwithstanding, no animal may be determined to be dangerous due to the fact that it: 
(1)  Inflicts injury or damage on a person who is committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the person owning or in possession of the animal or who is teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or who is committing or attempting to commit a crime; 
(2)  Inflicts injury or damage on another domestic animal that is or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; 
(3)  Takes any action to defend or protect a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(d)  Unless specifically stated to the contrary, the following are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Any duly authorized and lawfully operating dealers in animals within the city; 
(2)  Any lawfully operated circus, carnival, performing act or similar functions and events of a temporary nature as may be authorized by the city; 
(3)  Dogs or other animals lawfully used to guard private property; 
(4)  Dogs or other animals assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties; 
(5)  Animals in a licensed veterinary, animal or small animal hospital for treatment or kept in a bona fide educational, medical or other research institution or in zoos, museums or similar places where such animals are kept as live exhibits or for study. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-14. - Licensing, registration and permits. 
(a)  No dangerous animal may be owned, kept, possessed or harbored within the city without the owner or person in possession or control of such animal first obtaining a license or permit from the city. An application for such license or permit shall include the name and address of the owner, the address at which the animal will be located or confined, a description of measures to be taken to secure the animal, a complete description of the animal, including type of animal, sex, color and other distinguishing marks, and, at the city's discretion, a photograph of the animal. 
(b)  Persons owning or in possession or control of vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals shall, upon the birth, death or transfer of such animals, report such fact to the city. A separate license or permit shall be issued for each dangerous animal. Upon the transfer of any dangerous animal, a statement shall be filed with the city stating the name and address of the person to whom the animal is sold or transferred and the address at which the animal is to be located, if known. 
(c)  The application for such license or permit must be signed and dated by the owner or the person in possession or control of the dangerous animal. The owner or person in possession or control must sign a statement attesting to the fact that all provisions of this chapter have been and will be complied with in their entirety, and that the city shall be notified immediately of any attack or other violation of this chapter by such animal in his possession or control. 
(d)  A one-time fifty dollar ($50.00) fee per dangerous animal shall be required for the issuance of a license or permit. The fee amount may be adjusted from time to time by the City of New Albany Board of Aldermen. 
(e)  Any owner or person in possession or control of a dangerous animal who fails to obtain a license or permit from the city shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per dangerous animal. The owner or person in possession or control shall have ten (10) days from the date the city provides written notice of such failure to obtain a license or permit. Failure to obtain a license or permit within the ten-day time period shall subject the owner to an additional fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for each dangerous animal until such permit or license is obtained. 
(f)  Any license or permit issued pursuant to this section shall be revocable upon any non-compliance with any of the terms of this chapter by any person owning or in possession or control of any dangerous animal. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-15. - Posting of premises. 
(a)  All premises upon which a dangerous animal is kept, possessed or harbored shall be posted with signs that are conspicuously visible to the public and legible from property, public or private, adjacent to such premises. Such signs or notices shall contain letters of not less than two (2) inches in height and a message sufficient to warn the general public of the presence of the dangerous animal. Such signs shall be placed at all locations where entry to the owner's property is common and expected and upon all enclosures within which vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals are confined, including residences and other structures. 
(b)  The absence of any required signs shall be considered prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. Signs shall be constructed and maintained in a manner to withstand the elements. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the exemptions granted in section 6-13(d) of this article, the requirements of this section shall apply to all duly authorized and lawfully operated dealers in animals within the city any lawfully operated circus, carnival, performing acts or similar functions and events of a temporary nature as may be authorized by the city and to any premises utilizing dogs or other animals lawfully for guard purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-16. - Confinement required. 
(a)  All vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals shall be kept confined within the residence or other permanent structure on the premises of the owner or other person in possession or control of such animals or within an enclosure as defined in this section. 
(b)  All vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals to be kept on the premises of the owner or person having possession or control of such animals and not within the residence or other permanent structure shall be confined within a fence or structure area of at least four (4) feet in height, forming a confined area sufficient to prevent the entry of young children and, in conjunction with tethering or other measures, effective in containing a dangerous animal. Such enclosure shall be securely closed and locked and equipped with secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping the enclosure. The bottom of such enclosure shall be concrete, and the sides and top shall be constructed of steel wire or other materials sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping the enclosure. The city reserves the right to issue more specific confinement requirements in instances where enclosures prove to be insufficient to prevent escape of such animals or to prevent such animals from coming into contact with people adjacent to such enclosures. 
(c)  Such enclosure, fence or structure must be at least five (5) feet from any fenced property line of the owner or person in control or possession of such animals, provided that such enclosure, fence or structure is within a separately and totally enclosed fenced area. In the event that the area of the property of the owner or person in control or possession of such animals devoted to the confinement or enclosure of such animals is not within a separately and totally enclosed fenced area, any animals confined in such enclosure must be securely tethered or otherwise restrained so that they cannot come within five (5) feet of the walls of the enclosure or area within which they are confined. 
(d)  No dangerous animal shall be allowed outside of the residence or required enclosure unless it is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain, having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three (3) feet in length, and under the direct control and supervision of the owner. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-17. - Determination of status, impoundment, redemption or disposition of vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals. 
(a)  The animal control officer or his lawful designee shall have the right to enter any private property for the purpose of inspecting the property for the presence of vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals or for the performance of other duties in the enforcement of this article. The animal control officer or his lawful designee having probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, ferocious or dangerous shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation into the facts of each such case. The owner of the animal shall be notified of the investigation and shall have the opportunity to present evidence as to why the animal should not be determined to be dangerous. The results of this investigation and any such determination shall be made in writing and shall constitute an administrative action of the city, appealable according to law. The results of any investigation with respect to a particular animal shall not bar the city from investigating any subsequent actions of the animal. 
(b)  Should the animal control officer or his lawful designee have reason to believe that an animal is vicious, ferocious or dangers and may pose a threat of serious harm to persons or other domestic animals, the officer or official may immediately seize and impound the animal, pending an investigation as described in this section. 
(c)  Should the animal control officer or his lawful designee, upon complaint by any citizen or on his own initiative, may make inquiries to determine compliance with this article and may seize and impound any animal found in violation of any of its provisions. 
(d)  If any animal is caused or permitted or is found to be within the corporate limits of the city and in violation of the provisions of this article, such animal may be apprehended and impounded by the animal control officer or his lawful designee, to be held or disposed of as provided in this section. 
(e)  If any such animal is so impounded, the animal shall be released to the owner thereof only if payment is made within seven (7) days to the city or its designee of such sums as may be designated from time to time by the mayor and board of aldermen for compensation for catching or otherwise apprehending such animal and for harboring and caring for such animal on a daily basis during the time of impoundment. 
(f)  In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal found in violation of this article, the animal control officer or his lawful designee may issue to the person known to own or be in possession or control of such animal a citation for any violations of this article. Any fines imposed, as set from time to time by the mayor and board of aldermen, shall be paid within three (3) working days of such citation. If such fine is not paid within the time prescribed, a criminal warrant shall be issued for such person who may, upon conviction of such offense before the city court, be punished as provided in sections 1-8 of this Code. 
(g)  All fees and fines imposed pursuant to this section shall be paid by any violator, and all other requirements of this chapter with respect to a dangerous animal shall be met before an animal impounded pursuant to this article shall be released. If such fees and fines are not paid within five (5) working days, then any such animal so impounded may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-18. - Killing of vicious, ferocious or dangerous animals. 
    When any dangerous animal, in the judgment of the animal control officer or his lawful designee, poses a serious and immediate threat of serious harm or injury to human life, it shall be the lawful duty of such officer to kill such animal, without requiring such officer to catch, restrain or impound such animal. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-19. - Additional remedies for violations. 
(a)  Should any vicious, ferocious or dangerous animal, when unprovoked, kill or wound or assist in killing or wounding any livestock, fowl or other domestic animal belonging to or in possession of any person or attack, bite or otherwise assault or injure any human being or assist in doing so, whether out of or within any required enclosure of the owner or person in possession or control or whether on or off the property of the owner, whether or not such animal is leashed or muzzled, and whether or not such animal escaped without the fault of the owner, the owner of the animal shall be liable to the person aggrieved for all damages sustained, to be recovered in a civil action, with costs of suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a dangerous animal in violation of this article is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain such action, to prove that the owner of such vicious, ferocious or dangerous animal knew that the animal possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the animal had a dangerous nature. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to restrict any other remedies at law available to persons aggrieved by any attack of a vicious, ferocious or dangerous animal, nor so as to prohibit criminal prosecution of persons owning or in possession of such animals as may be allowed by law. 
(c)  Should any employee of or person carrying out contractual responsibilities for the city be attacked by any vicious, ferocious or dangerous animal or other animal while such employee or person is engaged in the lawful performance of his official duties, any rights, privileges or services enjoyed by the residents of property on which the attack occurs or by the owner of such animal, at the discretion of the city, may be immediately terminated without further notice. This includes, but is not limited to, termination of water, sewer and electrical service, termination of garbage pickup service, and revocation of building permits or privilege licenses. 
(d)  The owner or harborer of any animal, which according to the records of the animal control officer, seriously injuries a person without provocation or which has aggressively killed a domestic animal may be required to provide and maintain public liability insurance in a single instant amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property resulting from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance shall contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled until ten (10) days written notice of cancellation has been given to the animal control officer. A copy of such policy must be furnished to the animal control officer. 
(e)  The persons having the enforcement duty under the article may enter the premises where an alleged vicious, ferocious or dangerous animal is kept for an onsite inspection of the premises, and said inspection shall be made upon a reasonable attempt to provide advance notice to the occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-20. - Vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies. 
(a)  Required. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or cat six (6) months of age or older within the city shall have that animal vaccinated against rabies with the approved dosage of an approved anti-rabic virus (vaccine) properly administered by one legally authorized to do so; it shall be unlawful for any person to own or have in his possession any dog or cat not so vaccinated. 
(b)  Tag bearing vaccination serial numbers to be worn. The owner of any dog or cat shall make certain that the animal wears at all times a securely branded metal tag with the serial number of the vaccination and the year in which the animal was inoculated stamped thereon. 
(c)  Identification of owner. In addition, each owner must have affixed to the collar of each dog kept or maintained by him some means of identifying the owner including the owner's name, a telephone number and/or a city street address. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
State Law reference- State law reference-Authority to prevent or regulate the running at large of animals, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-9. 
Secs. 6-21-6-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATING CONTROL OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-27. - Operation of a city shelter. 
    The city shall have the authority to enter into a contract with an independent contractor for the purpose of managing an animal shelter to be owned and operated by the independent contractor who shall act as animal control officer for the city. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-28. - Running at large. 
    Prohibited. It should be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit it to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. The animal control officer or his lawful designee, may pick up any animal running at large within the city and impound same at the animal control shelter operated by the animal control officer. For all dogs having vaccination tags and/or other identifying tags, reasonable effort shall be made to contact the owners. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-29. - Feral or stray dogs constituting a menace. 
    Dogs found running at large within the corporate limits without visible evidence of a collar, vaccination tag or other indication of ownership shall be deemed to be feral or stray dogs. Reasonable efforts shall be made to capture and impound of such dogs. However, when, in the opinion of the animal control officer or his lawful designee, such animals constitute a clear threat to the physical safety of the citizens of the city and reasonable efforts to capture the dogs have failed, then such dogs are subject to being destroyed immediately, as permitted by state law. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-30. - Dogs constituting a nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful to maintain one (1) or more dogs on private property under such circumstances that the dog or dogs create a nuisance to the surrounding property owners, either through excessive noise by constant or uncontrolled barking or through the generation of noxious and offensive odors. Upon receipt of a written complaint filed with the city clerk, any such owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the alleged nuisance and given five (5) days to respond or to correct the situation. Failure to take corrective action within five (5) days shall constitute a misdemeanor, which may be prosecuted in city court upon a proper affidavit by any proper complaining party. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Secs. 6-31-6-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 6-37. - Independent contractor. 
    The city shall contract with an independent contractor to operate as the animal control officer and this person shall have authority to enforce the provisions of articles I, II and III. The requirements for the animal control officer, an independent contractor with the city, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Must submit to criminal background investigation. 
(2)  Must submit to financial background investigation. 
(3)  Carry a minimum of general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. 
(4)  Carry a minimum of automobile liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate as well as five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) uninsured motorist coverage. 
(5)  City will provide cell phone for independent contractor or pay for same. 
(6)  Be available by cell phone twenty-four (24) hours a day/seven (7) days a week. 
(7)  Furnish suitable tranquilizer gun. 
(8)  Furnish both large and small humane box wire traps. 
(9)  Furnish suitable and dependable vehicle to be used in animal control. 
(10)  Furnish a kennel consisting of the following, at a minimum, to wit: a secure building containing ten (10) 4' × 10' runs, well ventilated and with a well-drained concrete floor. This building may not be placed in a heavily populated area. All animal feces is to be disposed of properly and not allowed to go into a water source. Building to be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length with no more than six (6) feet of the ten-foot length of each kennel run exposed to the elements. Sufficient clean water shall be available for hosing down the kennels and keeping water available for animals kept. 
(11)  Furnish all veterinary supplies (as allowed by law) and medicines necessary for the humane treatment of the animals within his care as well as chemical euthanasia supplies or allow a licensed veterinarian to perform euthanasia where applicable. 
(12)  Furnish appropriate amounts of wholesome food for all animals taken into custody. 
(13)  Keep complete and accurate records of all animals taken into custody, boarded, released to owners, adopted or euthanized. Keep complete and accurate records of all fees charged (to be set by the city) and remit same to city clerk to be deposited into city general fund. 
(14)  Suitable animal taser device (at discretion of animal control officer). 
(15)  A firearm suitable for dealing with vicious, seriously diseased or seriously injured animals. However, same is not be to worn or carried on routine calls, but is to be available in vehicle when needed. 
(16)  Abide by all regulations of the City of New Albany Code regarding animals (chapter 6). 
(17)  Submit to firearms training by the City of New Albany Police Department to be used for vicious, seriously diseased or seriously injured animals or those which cannot be caught by other means. 
(18)  Enter into a contract with the city for these services. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-38. - Notification and fees. 
(a)  Animals found loose or trespassing. The animal control officer or his lawful designee shall take up any animal found loose or trespassing and shall impound such animal and make all reasonable attempts to notify the owner that the animal control officer has such animal in charge, and the owner may redeem same within the above period of time and by paying the fees as below set forth. Any animal that is impounded may be kept by the animal control officer for a period of at least seven (7) consecutive days unless claimed sooner by the owner. 
(b)  Notification. In the event the owner cannot be found within seven (7) days or the animal is not picked up within seven (7) days from its impoundment, the animal control officer may consider the same to have been abandoned. 
(c)  Records. The animal control officer shall keep a complete and accurate record or all animals taken up, giving names of owners, if known, kind of animal, whether vaccinated, date of taking up and disposition of the matter, and periodically render a report to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(d)  Impounding fee, etc. The impounding fee, medical and feed charges shall be paid to the city by the owner of the animal or by anyone adopting said animal. The rightful owner of any animal held by the animal control officer may obtain said animal upon payment to the city by paying the city clerk or the animal control officer an impounding fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), a maintenance fee of seven dollars ($7.00) per day, payment for all medical services provided to such animal, provided proof of a current vaccination certificate as set forth herein is presented at the time such animal is claimed by its owner and, if a dog, the same has an identification tag on its collar identifying the owner of the dog. The seven-day waiting period is waived for a vicious or feral dog or cat, or for any animal suffering from an infectious disease or so terribly injured that it is unlikely to live. Pursuant to MCA 1972 § 97-41-3, an injured or neglected animal may be euthanized without any waiting period. The goal is to mercifully end the life of such animal. 
(e)  If an unvaccinated dog or cat is claimed during the seven-day period, such dog or cat shall not be released until vaccinated and tagged as herein provided. 
(f)  Should any impounded animal not be claimed within the seven-day period, any and all such animals shall be disposed of by adoption or destroyed. 
(g)  For all dogs and cats having vaccination tags and/or identifying tags, reasonable efforts shall be made to contact the owners. 
(h)  Funds obtained from fees generated under subsection (d), above, shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-39. - Animal control officer enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  The civil and criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by the board of aldermen including the animal control officer or his lawful designee. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with an animal control officer or his lawful designee in the performance of their duties herein. Any designated animal control officer may utilize any equipment reasonable and necessary to enforce the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, humane wire box traps, chemical capture weapons, and other animal control equipment. 
(b)  As authorized by the city, any law enforcement officer and/or animal control officer, may enter private premises to enforce local animal control chapters or state animal control statutes. 
(c)  Any official or representative of the city, lawfully designated to enforce the provisions of this article, shall have the power and authority to issue summons and citations returnable to the municipal court or to any other proper authority for violations of this article. Such summons and citations shall have the same full force and effect as if issued by the police department of the city for other law enforcement purposes. The section on penalties also applies for purposes of enforcement responsibility. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-40. - Enforcement. 
    Animal control officer or, in extraordinary circumstances, police officer to enforce article; interfering with prohibited. 
(a)  The civil and criminal provisions of this title shall be enforced by the animal control officer and, in extraordinary circumstances, the city police department. 
(b)  The animal control officer having probable cause that a person has violated a section of this title may, in lieu of obtaining a misdemeanor warrant for arrest of such suspect, issue to the person a written citation requiring the person to appear at a date and time in the municipal court to answer the charge or charges specified in the citation. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this title to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-41. - Elimination of animals, when authorized. 
(a)  Vicious animals or feral or vicious dogs and cats. When an animal is determined by the animal control officer to be a vicious animal or a feral or vicious dog or cat, that animal may be destroyed by the animal control officer or his lawful designee, provided two (2) of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The animal is running at large or not properly confined as described herein. 
(2)  There is no ownership identification tag on the animals collar (dogs only). 
(3)  There is no vaccination tag around the animal's neck. 
(4)  Attempts to peacefully capture the animal have been made and proven unsuccessful. 
(b)  Any dog that aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of any humans shall be immediately confiscated by animal control and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. "Severe injury" means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
(c)  Seriously injured or diseased animals, etc. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his lawful designee either to humanely euthanize with an injection or to discharge a firearm in order to mercifully end the life of an animal suffering from a serious injury or disease or as the sole effective means of controlling a public nuisance or health hazard, including, but not limited to, rabbits, squirrels, snakes, feral or vicious dogs or cats and vicious animals. Reasonable efforts shall be made to first locate the owner of any such injured or diseased animal if the animal carriers proper identification. 
(d)  When any dangerous animal, in the judgment of the animal control officer, or his lawful designee, poses a serious and immediate threat of serious harm or injury to human life, then it shall be the lawful duty of such officer to eliminate such animal without requiring such officer or official to catch, restrain or impound such animal or give any notice whatsoever in the sole and exclusive judgment of said officer. 
(e)  Neither the city, the animal control officer, his lawful designee or the police department shall be held liable for any acts in this regard or any phase of the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-42. - Authority. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his lawful designee to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this article, all animals, whether domesticated or undomesticated, found in violation of the provisions of this chapter within this city, whether such animal shall be in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-43. - Right of entry. 
    The animal control officer or his lawful designee is hereby authorized to enter upon any lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found thereon in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-44. - Right and costs to redeem, fines additional. 
    The owner of any animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this article shall have the right to redeem such animal upon the payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animal; provided, however, that the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine which may be imposed for the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-45. - Time for redemption/adoption. 
    All impounded animals shall be redeemed within seven (7) days after the animal was impounded. Any such animal not redeemed within such time may be adopted or destroyed. Reasonable efforts will be made to secure adoption of impounded animals. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Sec. 6-46. - Penalties, disposition of fines charged under this chapter. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating a provision of this chapter that does not include a specific penalty under state law shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, and all lawful costs, except that any person so convicted shall be fined a sum of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second offense, and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third offense and all subsequent offenses. In addition, the court may require up to one hundred (100) hours of community service. However, if state law provides penalties for a particular offense that exceeds the penalties listed herein, the court may choose to apply the penalty allowed by state law. Also, see penalties for vicious, ferocious and dangerous animals in section 6-14. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; open burning for construction purposes prohibited, § 8-26; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; planning and development, Ch. 16; construction in potential flood-prone areas, § 16-24; street numbers for buildings, § 18-47 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 21; design/construction regulations, App. B; zoning, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Building lines; yard and off-street parking requirements, etc. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the phrase, "building line" shall mean a line beyond the street or road right-of-way line on which the property fronts. Corner lots shall have the same depth from each street. 
(b)  All future structures, houses and buildings shall be built in strict compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Residences. 
a.  Minimum depth of front yard. As per the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Minimum depth of rear yard. As per the zoning ordinance. 
c.  Minimum width of each side or property line. As per the zoning ordinance. 
d.  Off-street parking requirements. Two (2) car spaces for each dwelling. 
e.  Utility buildings. Five (5) feet from property line. 
(2)  Business buildings. 
a.  Minimum yard size. Front yard, forty (40) feet, except where existing establishments (other than residential) are set back. Any new structures shall be set back not less than the average of the setbacks of existing establishments within one hundred (100) feet on each side thereof. Rear yards, twenty (20) feet. Side yards, not specified except on a lot adjoining along its side lot line which is in a residential district, there shall be a side yard not less than ten (10) feet wide. 
b.  Off-street parking. Two hundred (200) square feet off-street parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of building space. 
c.  Off-street loading and unloading. Shall use required rear or side yard for loading and unloading where possible. 
(3)  Corner visibility in residence and local business district. In a residence or local business district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three and one-half (31/2) feet and fifteen (15) feet above street level shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or railroads or of a street and a railroad right-of-way line. 
(c)  The mayor and board of aldermen reserve the authority and discretion to permit a builder or landowner to vary from the above minimum requirements for just cause established by proof before the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 12-1-09; Ord. of 7-5-11(1)) 
Sec. 7-2. - Trailers and portable buildings in commercial districts. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "permanent" shall mean any period of time in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "trailer" shall mean a vehicle other than a motor vehicle, designed or intended to be towed behind a motor vehicle, including all types of mobile homes, whether or not such vehicle is attached to or resting on the ground. 
(c)  No trailers, including mobile homes, are to be used for permanent businesses in any commercial district. 
(d)  No portable buildings are to be used for permanent business in the C-1 commercial district. 
(e)  All portable buildings used in commercial districts other than C-1 must meet all applicable codes in the commercial district in which they are placed and will be subject to tiedown requirements at the discretion of the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 10-12-98) 
Sec. 7-3. - Exterior surfaces, parking and loading areas, pedestrian circulation and landscaping. 
    All future structures and buildings in commercial and light industrial zones shall be built in strict compliance with the following regulations. These regulations also apply to any existing structure or building that is remodeled at a cost of fifty (50) percent of the value of the building or structure. 
(1)  Exterior surfaces. 
a.  "Stage-set" facades are prohibited. The continuity of design goes beyond the primary elevations of the building. The material and color of the street face shall continue on the sides and rear of the building. 
b.  No flat-faced cement block, vinyl siding or metal surfaces shall be visible upon the exterior of any building. 
c.  Parapet facades may be used when of unified construction of the primary surface of the wall and of the same material and color. The parapet shall be designed such that the reverse side of all elements shall not be visible to public view. 
d.  Required exterior surface material; brick, cement stucco, "split-faced" concrete block, integrally colored unit masonry (ICUM), vertical board and batten, wood siding, wood simulated materials. 
(2)  Parking and loading. 
a.  All areas used for access, parking, maneuvering, standing or display of motorized vehicles, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, or manufactured or mobile homes, whether for customer or business purposes, shall be concrete or asphalt, maintained for all-weather use, and so drained as to avoid the flow of water across sidewalks. 
b.  All vehicular parking shall be delineated by white, reflectorized pavement striping. 
(3)  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  Where the property does not already provide public sidewalks, a five-foot sidewalk shall be constructed along the entire street frontage of the property. 
b.  The sidewalk shall be constructed to align with existing sidewalks on adjacent properties. 
c.  Where sidewalks are not yet present on adjacent properties, the sidewalk shall be constructed at least five (5) feet back from the curb to allow for green space. 
d.  In the instance of a corner lot, the sidewalk will be constructed along both street frontages, and handicapped access ramps will be constructed at the street corner. 
e.  Sidewalks are not required to cross driveways, provided that appropriate handicapped access ramps are provided on either side of the driveway access. 
f.  Asphalt sidewalks are prohibited. 
(4)  Perimeter landscaping. 
a.  A minimum of one (1) large deciduous shade tree for every thirty-five (35) lineal feet of street frontage or portion thereof shall be planted upon the subject property within the area five (5) feet behind the street right-of-way line. 
b.  Said trees may be clustered or arranged within the setback, and need not be placed in a uniform thirty-five-foot interval. 
c.  Parking areas shall be organized as a series of small parking bays with landscape islands separating them. 
d.  A landscape island shall be placed for each one hundred (100) lineal feet of parking. 
e.  The island shall contain a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree. 
(Ord. of 7-5-11(2)) 
Secs. 7-4, 7-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-6. - Licenses and bonds required for builders and contractors. 
(a)  Residential contractors and remodelers: 
(1)  It shall be the duty and requirement of every residential building contractor or remodeler within the corporate limits of the city to secure a privilege license from the city tax collector. The privilege license charge shall be as per the schedule required by law, a copy of which is available from the city tax collector, and shall be good for a period of twelve (12) months from the time the license is secured. 
(2)  No privilege license nor building permit shall be issued by the city until the residential contractor or remodeler furnishes the city with a copy of or provides to the city verification of the issuance of a contractor's certificate of licensure issued by the state board of contractors as specified in Mississippi Code Annotated Section 73.59-1 et seq. In addition, no building permit shall be issued by the city until the contractor secures the required privilege license from the city. However, a residential contractor or remodeler who has obtained a privilege license from another municipality and who furnishes the city with a copy of said license shall not be required to obtain a privilege license from the city. However, all applicant contractors shall be required to pay to the city a license fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(3)  No privilege license not building permit shall be issued for the construction or remodeling of a residential building until a license bond is submitted to the city in the name of the contractor and/or privilege license holder. Said bond shall be payable to the city in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10.000.00) and shall be written to expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Further, said bond must be issued by a surety company acceptable to the city building inspector. 
(4)  When a residential contractor or remodeler, hereinafter referred to as contractor, in the construction or remodeling of a residential building violates any provision of the construction codes adopted by the city and fails to correct the violation after having received notification and given adequate time to correct the violation, the city may withhold issuing of additional permits to the contractor and/or may call upon the license bond of the contractor with the proceeds from the same to be used by the city to correct the violation. For purposes of this section, adequate notice shall be considered delivery of a letter through the United States Postal Service to the address of contractor listed on the privilege license or license bond. Adequate time shall be considered a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the aforementioned notice. 
(b)  Electrical and mechanical contractors; plumbers and plumbing contractors; heating and air conditioning contractors; water and sewer contractors; gas fitters and gas contractors; roofing contractors: 
(1)  The licensing of electrical and mechanical contractors, plumbers and plumbing contractors, heating and air conditioning contractors, water and sewer contractors, gas fitters and gas contractors and roofing contractors by the city shall be pursuant to the requirements of Mississippi Code Annotated Section 27-17-457. Accordingly, any applicant contractor who is licensed by any one (1) municipality or county of the state, which municipality or county has an examining board where there is a regularly given written examination and who does not hold a current certificate of responsibility issued by the state board of public contractors shall be allowed to conduct business in the city without further examination and without the requirement of obtaining a privilege license from the city. However, the contractor must furnish: 
a.  Evidence that said contractor has such a license; 
b.  Evidence that said contractor took and passed the written examination which qualified him/her for such license; however, in lieu thereof, evidence that said contractor was issued a license prior to May 1, 1972 and prior to the existence of such written examination by a county or municipality which has an examining board that does presently require written examination to qualify for a license; 
c.  Evidence that said contractor is not operating a separate place of business located in New Albany, Mississippi. 
(2)  Any applicant contractor who is licensed by any one (1) municipality or county of the state, which municipality or county has an examining board where there is a regularly given written examination and who does hold a current certificate of responsibility issued by the state board of public contractors shall be allowed to conduct business in the city without further examination and without the requirement of obtaining a privilege license from the city. However, the contractor must furnish: 
a.  Evidence that said contractor has such a license; 
b.  Evidence that said contractor took and passed the written examination which qualified him/her for such license; however, in lieu thereof, evidence that said contractor was issued a license prior to May 1, 1972 and prior to the existence of such written examination by a county or municipality which has an examining board that does presently require written examination to qualify for a license; 
(3)  No building permit shall be issued by the city until said applicant contractor furnishes the city with evidence that said applicant has a privilege license from another municipality or county in Mississippi, which municipality or county has an examining board where there is a regularly given written examination, and that said applicant has passed a written examination which qualified him/her for such license as contemplated in subsection (1) above and as mandated in Mississippi Code Annotated Section 27-17-457 et seq. 
(4)  Any applicant contractor who does not hold a privilege license from another municipality of county in Mississippi, which municipality or county has an examining board where there is a regularly given written examination, and who has not passed a written examination to qualify for said license as specified in subsection (1) and (2) above shall be required to pass a written examination as per the requirements of the city building inspector. All costs and fees associated with the examination shall be the responsibility of the applicant and said written examination shall not be given until the examination fee has been paid in full. In addition, once said applicant contractor has taken and passed the required examination, it shall be the duty and requirement of the applicant contractor to secure a privilege license from the city tax collector. The privilege license charge shall be as per the schedule required by law, a copy of which is available from the city tax collector, and shall be good for a period of twelve (12) months from the time the license is secured. No building permit shall be issued by the city until said applicant contractor secures the required privilege license from the city. 
(5)  All applicant contractors shall be required to pay a license fee to the city in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Further, no building permit shall be issued to any applicant contractors until a license bond is submitted to the city in the name of the contractor and/or privilege license holder. Said bond shall be payable to the city in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and shall be written to expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Further, said bond must be issued by a surety company acceptable to the city building inspector. 
(6)  When said applicant contractor, in the performance of the work for which he or she is licensed, violates any provision of the construction codes adopted by the city and fails to correct the violation after having received notification and given adequate time to correct the violation, the city may withhold issuing of additional permits to the contractor and/or may call upon the license bond of the contractor with the proceeds from the same to be used by the city to correct the violation. For purposes of this section, adequate notice shall be considered delivery of a letter through the United States Postal Service to the address of contractor listed on the privilege license or license bond. Adequate time shall be considered a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the aforementioned notice. 
(c)  Commercial contractors: 
(1)  It shall be the duty and requirement of every commercial contractor within the corporate limits of the city to secure a privilege license from the city tax collector. The privilege license charge shall be as per the schedule required by law, a copy of which is available from the city tax collector, and shall be good for a period of twelve (12) months from the time the license is secured. 
(2)  No privilege license nor building permit shall be issued by the city until the commercial contractor furnishes the city with a copy of or provides to the city verification of the issuance of a contractor's certificate of responsibility issued by the state board of contractors as specified in Mississippi Code Annotated Section 31-3-1 et seq. In addition, no building permit shall be issued by the city until the contractor secures the required privilege license from the city. However, a commercial contractor who has obtained a privilege license from another municipality and who furnishes the city with a copy of said license shall not be required to obtain a privilege license from the city. However, all applicant contractors shall be required to pay to the city a license fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(3)  No privilege license nor building permit shall be issued for the construction or remodeling of a commercial structure until a license bond is submitted to the city in the name of the contractor and/or privilege license holder. Said bond shall be payable to the city in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and shall be written to expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Further, said bond must be issued by a surety company acceptable to the city building inspector. 
(4)  When a commercial contractor, hereinafter referred to as contractor, in the construction or remodeling of a commercial structure violates any provision of the construction codes adopted by the city and fails to correct the violation after having received notification and given adequate time to correct the violation, the city may withhold issuing of additional permits to the contractor and/or may call upon the license [bond] of the contractor with the proceeds from the same to be used by the city to correct the violation. For purposes of this section, adequate notice shall be considered delivery of a letter through the United States Postal Service to the address of contractor listed on the privilege license or license bond. Adequate time shall be considered a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the aforementioned notice. 
(Ord. of 9-5-78, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-25-2002) 
Editor's note- An Ordinance adopted Sept. 5, 1978, §§ 1, 2, did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 7-6 was at the editor's discretion. Interim sections were reserved to facilitate future inclusion of additional material. 
Cross reference- Local privilege taxes, § 11-21 et seq. 
Sec. 7-7. - Permits and inspections-Presence of license holder or representative. 
(a)  Contractors licensed in the city or their representative duly authorized pursuant to section 7-8 are required to apply in person for permits to be issued by the city building inspector pursuant to such license(s). 
(b)  Contractors licensed in the city or their representative duly authorized pursuant to section 7-8 are required to attend all inspections by the city building inspector required by state statute and/or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15) 
Sec. 7-8. - Authorized representative of contractors. 
(a)  The city building inspector shall have the authority to approve in writing authorized representatives of contractors licensed in the city. 
(b)  For all contractor licenses issued in the name of a business rather than an individual, the business shall designate, and the city building inspector shall authorize in writing, at least one (1) owner, officer or employee of such business as the authorized representative for such licensed business. 
(c)  The city building inspector may authorize additional representatives designated by contractors licensed in the city, whether such licenses are held by individuals or by businesses, at the building inspector's discretion, as he deems reasonably necessary to promote efficiency and reliability of services. 
(d)  The city building inspector shall maintain a record of all authorized representatives of contractors licensed in the city and shall rescind, and remove from such records, names of previously authorized representatives replaced by newly designated persons or otherwise no longer employed or affiliated with the licensee or no longer acting in such representative capacity. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15) 
Sec. 7-9. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person or business who shall violate any provision of article I of this chapter of the Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  For any person or business who is convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the city building inspector may immediately revoke any city licenses issued to such person or business as a building contractor or remodeler, electrical contractor, mechanical contractor, plumbing contractor, heating and air contractor, water and sewer contractor, gas fitter or gas contractor, roofing contractor or commercial contractor, or may seek such revocation of license by the board of aldermen, subject to the following limitations. 
(1)  For all such city licenses which are revoked by the building inspector without a prior hearing by the board of aldermen, the person or business whose license is revoked shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such revocation and shall be allowed ten (10) days from receipt of such notification to appeal this action to the board of aldermen by written notice of appeal filed with the municipal clerk. 
(2)  If the licensee cannot be otherwise notified of such immediate revocation, it shall be presumed that notification mailed to the licensee's address of record with the city was received five (5) days after mailing. 
(Ord. of 12-1-15) 
Secs. 7-10-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 7-21. - Adopted; exceptions. 
    The International Building Code (IBC), 2006 Edition, with appendices C, E, F, G, H, I , J, and K, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen, is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding construction, conversion, renovation, demolition, occupancy and related requirements of buildings and related structures within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. The following exceptions from the provisions of the International Building Code are made, which shall control over any requirements to the contrary in the printed code and any revisions thereto: 
(1)  All buildings and structures and additions thereto shall have a minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from all electrical distribution lines and gas lines for the working area. All affected utility departments must be notified of intent to build prior to beginning construction to ensure the required clearance of utilities from the working area. 
(2)  All applications for building permits, including new construction and additions to existing structures, shall be accompanied by a scale drawing, in duplicate, showing the shale and dimensions of the lot; the location, size and height of the structure, and, if residential property, the number of family units the building is designed to accommodate. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-4-77, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-7-89, § 1; Ord. of 12-12-91, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-96; Ord. of 11-4-97, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-09; Ord. of 7-5-11(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt building code, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-25. 
Sec. 7-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of New Albany, Mississippi. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of the city. 
Sec. 7-23. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
Sec. 7-24. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 7-25. - Building Code amendments; when effective; review by building inspector; publication, etc. 
    No amendments or additions to the Standard Building Code shall take effect within the City of New Albany until such time as the said amendment or addition has been reviewed by the city building inspector and his recommendation received by the mayor and board of aldermen and appropriate action implementing such change has been taken by order of the board of aldermen. However, publication of the adoption of such amendments shall not be required pursuant to authority of Section 21-19-25 of the Mississippi Code of 1972. 
(Ord. of 3-7-89, § 2) 
Secs. 7-26-7-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 7-45. - Adopted; exceptions. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, compiled by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding electrical wiring requirements within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. The following exceptions from the provisions of the National Electrical Code are made, which shall control over any requirements to the contrary in the printed code and any revisions thereto: 
(1)  Subject to the two (2) exceptions hereinafter set forth all industrial classifications, etc. will be equipped with one (1) main disconnect switch of sufficient size and capacity to protect and/or disconnect the entire electrical load of such building or structure. In cases where the same building or structure is served by two (2) or more service entrances, each entrance will be equipped with one (1) main disconnect switch of sufficient size and capacity to protect and/or disconnect the entire electrical load received through each individual service entrance. In such cases, the specific load served by each service entrance must be clearly identified at the individual main disconnect switches. In all cases the electric department will determine the number of service entrances. The aforementioned two (2) exceptions to these requirements shall be: 
a.  Customer may purchase and own the transformer bank and other facilities on the load side of a primary metering point. The electric department will charge material cost and labor for all installation and/or maintenance work performed on the load side of metering point. Customer may then eliminate the use of a main disconnect switch and install service entrance equipment according to the minimum standards listed in the National Electrical Code. 
b.  On a residential or commercial building requiring over 225A., the customer may divide the load between two (2) main disconnect switches served by the same service entrance. In such cases, the specific load served by each disconnect switch must be clearly identified on each switch. These must be side by side. The electric department or building inspector reserves the right to require disconnect under certain circumstances. 
(2)  All service entrances shall be constructed so that the meter base is securely attached to the building and rigid conduit shall extend upward from the meter base through the eave to a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the roof, and the overall height of the weatherhead shall be not less than twelve (12) feet six (6) inches from ground level. The exact location of the meter base shall be determined by the New Albany Electric Department. Further minimum construction requirements for service entrances for mobile homes and for one-hundred-ampere, two-hundred-ampere and four-hundred-ampere electrical systems shall be as set forth in the attached Exhibits A and B. (NOTE: Exhibits A and B are not set out in full in the Code of Ordinances, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.) 
(Ord. of 1-4-72, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-4-77, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-7-89, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-96; Ord. of 10-7-04; Ord. of 12-1-09; Ord. of 7-5-11(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt electrical code, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-25. 
Sec. 7-46. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of New Albany, Mississippi. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of the city. 
Sec. 7-47. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and the applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
Sec. 7-48. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 7-49. - Electrical Code amendments; when effective; review by building inspector; publication; etc. 
    No amendments or additions to the National Electrical Code shall take effect within the City of New Albany until such time as the said amendment or addition has been reviewed by the city building inspector and his recommendation received by the mayor and board of aldermen and appropriate action implementing such change has been taken by order of the board of aldermen. However, publication of the adoption of such amendments shall not be required pursuant to authority of Section 21-19-25 of the Mississippi Code of 1972. 
(Ord. of 3-7-89, § 2) 
Secs. 7-50-7-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FUEL GAS CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, amended article IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 7-69-7-73, pertained to the gas code. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 7-69. - Code adopted; prior ordinance amended and exceptions. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2006 Edition with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding construction, conversion, renovation, demolition, occupancy and related requirements of buildings and related structures within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. The following exceptions from the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code are made, which shall control over any requirements to the contrary in the printed code and any revisions thereto: 
(1)  The installation of gas lines shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  No joints or connections shall be made in walls or other confined and unvented locations. 
(b)  Copper tubing may be used only for connecting appliances from a floor cut-off valve to an appliance cut-off valve or for gas grills and lights located outside of buildings. 
(c)  No polyvinyl chloride pipe or tubing, whether called PVC or CPVC or some other form thereof, shall be used to transmit gas in any location. 
(d)  Single-wall unit pipe shall not be used to vent appliances in any location. 
(e)  The testing requirements for tightness of newly installed or repaired gas-line systems shall be in accordance with the reasonable requirements prescribed by the building inspector and such system shall not be put in service until the line test has been inspected and approved by either the building inspector or an authorized employee of the New Albany Gas System. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 7-70-7-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article V, §§ 7-93-7-97, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 7-93. - Code adopted; prior ordinance amended. 
    The International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2006 Edition, with appendices A and B, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements to maintain all residential buildings within the corporate limits in a safe and sanitary condition. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 7-94-7-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, amended article VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VI, §§ 7-118-7-122, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 7-118. - Code adopted and amended prior ordinance. 
    The International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2006 Edition, with appendices B, C, D, E, F, and G, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding construction, conversion, renovation, demolition, occupancy and related requirements of buildings and related structures within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 7-119-7-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI.1 - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, amended article VI.1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VI.1, §§ 7-126, 7-127 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 7-126. - Code adopted and amended prior ordinance. 
    The International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2006 Edition, with appendix A, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding construction, installation, maintenance and repair of heating systems, air conditioning systems, venting systems and other related forced-air mechanical systems installed in buildings within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 7-127-7-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROTECTION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES FROM EXCAVATION AND DEMOLITION OPERATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Filling and excavation, § 16-21; street excavations, Ch. 18, art. II; water and sewers, Ch. 21. 

Sec. 7-131. - Short title. 
    This article may be cited as the "Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 1) 
Sec. 7-132. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Damage includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
    Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
    Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, including angering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
    Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power, including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
    Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
    Person means any individual, any corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of any state; and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof. 
    Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
    Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 2) 
Sec. 7-133. - Excavation or demolition permit does not relieve person from duty to comply with article. 
    A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 3) 
Sec. 7-134. - Information to be filed by operators with city clerk. 
(a)  No later than thirty (30) days before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived*, each operator having underground utilities in the counties of Union, Benton and Marshall in the State of Mississippi and within the franchised area of this city, as certificated by the Mississippi Public Service Commission on August 2nd, 1977, cause "U-3316, City of New Albany," which is made a part hereof by reference, shall file with the city clerk a list containing the name of every city, village, township and section within the certificated area in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephonic notice of intent required by section 7-136. 
(b)  Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under this section shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk within five (5) working days of the change. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 5) 
Editor's note- *The ordinance was adopted on October 4, 1977, to become effective one month thereafter. 
Sec. 7-135. - Excavators and demolishers to ascertain location of underground utilities. 
    Except as provided in section 7-139, no person shall excavate in a street, highway, public space a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility or demolish a building, without having first ascertained the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 4) 
Sec. 7-136. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish-Generally. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 7-139, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 7-135, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish, at least three (3), but not more than ten (10), full working days before the excavation or demolition operation begins, on each operator which has filed a list required by section 7-134 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition. If the proposed area of excavation or demolition is served by an association provided for in section 7-137, such notice shall be served on such association and on each operator which has filed a list required by section 7-134 indicating that it has underground utilities in the proposed areas of excavation or demolition that is not receiving the services of the association. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by section (a) above must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators and associations notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 6) 
Sec. 7-137. - Same-Operator associations to receive. 
    Operators may form and operate an association providing for mutual receipt of notifications under section 7-16 of excavation or demolition operations in a defined geographical area. An association that provides such service on behalf of operators having underground utilities within the counties of Union, Benton and Marshall in the State of Mississippi and within the franchised area of this city, as certificated by the Mississippi Public Service Commission on August 2nd, 1977, called "U-3316, City of New Albany," which is made a part hereof by reference, shall file with the city clerk the telephone number and address of the association, a description of the geographical area served by the association and a list of the names and addresses of each operator receiving such service from the association. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 7) 
Sec. 7-138. - information to he furnished by operators to person responsible for excavation or demolition. 
    Each operator or designated representative, including an association established in accordance with section 7-137, notified in accordance with section 7-136 shall, not less than two (2) working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do no exist. 
    For purposes of this section, the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three (3) feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility, plus one and one-half (11/2) feet on either side of the utility. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 8) 
Sec. 7-139. - Emergency excavations or demolitions. 
(a)  Compliance with the notice requirements of section 7-136 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavations or demolitions to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that such persons shall give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area (or to an association provided for in section 7-137, that serves an operator) where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and shall request emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedure under sections 7-136 and 7-138 can be fully complied with. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 9) 
Sec. 7-140. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
    In addition to the notification requirements of this article, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 7-135 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 10) 
Sec. 7-141. - Procedure when damage occurs. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 7-135 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 7-135 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator and police and fire departments and shall take such other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 11) 
Sec. 7-142. - Civil penalty for violation of article; article does not affect civil remedies. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city attorney, at the request of any person, in the court having jurisdiction and venue of such an action in Mississippi. All penalties recovered in any such action shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property (including underground utilities) damage, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-4-77, § 12) 
Secs. 7-143-7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SATELLITE RECEIVER DISH ANTENNA[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of June 5, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as a new Art. VIII, §§ 7-151, 7-152, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 7-151. - Permit fee. 
    Satellite receiver dish antennas shall not be installed upon any lot in the city without first having obtained a permit for installation from the city building inspector. Such permit shall require payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. of 6-5-90, § 1) 
Sec. 7-152. - Installation and setback requirements. 
(a)  Satellite receiver dish antennas shall not be installed in the front yard of any residential lot in the city and, if installed in the side yard, shall be set back at least as far as the front edge of the house located on the lot. 
(b)  Such antennas shall have a minimum side and rear setback of five (5) feet, to include any part of the apparatus. 
(Ord. of 6-5-90, §§ 2, 3) 
Secs. 7-153-7-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013 amended article IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IX, § 7-161 pertained to swimming pools. See Comparative Code Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 7-161. - Code adopted and amended prior ordinance. 
    The International Residential Code (IRC), 2006 Edition, with appendices E, G, H, I, J, M, O and Q, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding construction, conversion, renovation, demolition, occupancy and related requirements of buildings and related structures within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 7-162-7-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013 repealed article X, which pertained to housing code. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 7-171-7-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, repealed article XI, which pertained to unsafe building abatement code. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 7-181-7-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS CODE 

Sec. 7-191. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to facilitate the rapid expansion of the wireless telecommunications industry through the use of reasonable and nondiscriminatory policies designed to encourage growth and competition for the benefit of the citizens of the city, but at the same time to protect the public against any adverse impact upon the city's aesthetic resources, avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements, and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-192. - Definitions. 
(a)  Antenna. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or radiating electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
(b)  Commercial wireless telecommunication services. Licenses commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
(c)  Tower. Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, mast, structure, or combination thereof taller than fifteen (15) feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-193. - Application and fees. 
(a)  Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct in place, place or erect, replace, or repair any tower without first making application to the building inspector and securing a permit therefor as provided herein. The applicant shall provide at the time of application sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of other persons. 
(b)  Permits are not required for: 
(1)  Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the safety factor. 
(2)  Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pick-up operations, provided that all requirements of subsection (d) are met. Temporary antennas shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours following installation. 
(c)  Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. Such fee shall be established by the board of aldermen. 
(d)  Application. Each application shall contain the following information as well as additional information that the board of aldermen and the office of the building inspector may from time to time require. 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. The person named shall be a primary contact who has authority to act on behalf of the person or entity requesting the permit. 
(2)  Site plan: The site plan shall contain a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings and design data showing the proposed location of the tower, antenna or both, as well as the location of all other towers used to provide services within the city. 
(3)  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which describes: 
a.  The tower height and design, including a cross section and elevation; 
b.  The height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distance between antennas; 
c.  Describes the towers' capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; 
d.  Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications; 
e.  Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and 
f.  Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request, 
(4)  Owners of all commercial wireless telecommunications service towers shall file a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for share use, 
(5)  Written authorization from the site owner for the application. 
(6)  Before the issuance of a permit for the construction of a tower the following supplemental information shall be submitted. 
a.  Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by the FAA; and 
b.  A report from the qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the tower's compliance with structural and electrical needs required by this article. 
(e)  Processing. 
(1)  Each application shall be processed within a reasonable period of time after the application has been filed. A permit or denial of permit shall issue not later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the application was made. The governing authority may extend the time period for granting or denial of a permit beyond the allowed time in increments not to exceed thirty (30) days if the governing authority finds that due to the nature and scope of the application additional time is required. The reasons for the additional time shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
(2)  If the request for a permit is denied then the denial shall be in writing setting forth each specific reason for the denial. The reasons for the denial shall be entered in the written records of the city. 
(3)  A denial shall be supported by substantial evidence. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-194. - District (zoning) regulations. 
    Cellular or PCS towers shall be permitted only areas zoned A-1 (agricultural) or I-1 (industrial). 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-195. - Indemnity; claim resolution. 
    The owner of the tower and all communications service providers must show by certificate from a registered engineer that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with the building inspector a written indemnification of the city and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the city, in form approved by the city's attorney. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-196. - Construction and maintenance of antennae and supporting towers. 
(a)  Construction requirements. All antennas and towers erected, constructed, or within the city, and all wiring therefor, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of this Code and all applicable provisions of the building and electrical codes. 
(2)  Towers shall be certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Southern Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association. 
(3)  With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by the governing authority, no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line. No tower shall be in excess of a height equal to the distance from the base of the antenna and tower to the nearest overhead electrical power line which serves more than one (1) dwelling or place of business. 
(4)  Towers and associated antennas shall be designed to conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code. 
(5)  All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground at all points, unless buried underground. 
(6)  Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. 
(7)  All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(8)  Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances. 
(b)  Existing antennas and towers. Antennas and towers in existence as of February 6, 2001, which do not conform to or comply with this section are subject to the following provisions. 
(1)  Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this section. 
(2)  If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this section. 
(c)  Lights and other attachments. No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way except during time [of] repair or installation any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the Federal Communications Commission, nor shall any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any platform catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair. 
(d)  Inspections. All towers may be inspected at least once each year by the building inspector to determine compliance with original construction standards. Deviation from original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of this section. 
    Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and he will have thirty (30) days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs. The owner will notify the building inspector that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
(e)  Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Interpretation. It is not the intention of this section to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or other agreement between parties, provided, however, where this section imposes or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants or agreements, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2001, § 1) 
Secs. 7-197-7-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BULK STORAGE OF PROPANE GAS 

Sec. 7-201. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the citizens of the city from a catastrophic explosion of propane gas tanks capable of holding five hundred and one (501) gallons or more. Its purpose is to further avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from such catastrophic explosion and protect the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 7-202. - Definitions. 
    Bulk storage of propane gas- This shall apply to any tank or tanks at one (1) location used for the storage of propane gas having a total capacity of five hundred and one (501) gallons or more. (Two (2) two hundred and fifty (250) gallon tanks shall be classified the same as one (1) five hundred (500) gallon tank). 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 7-203. - District (zoning) regulations. 
    The bulk storage of propane gas shall be permitted only in areas zoned I-1 (industrial) and further such bulk storage of propane gas shall be located only in areas having a minimum setback of five hundred (500) feet from all public streets, adjoining land owners and structures not owned by the owner of the tank or tanks. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 7-204. - Construction and maintenance of facilities for the bulk storage of propane gas. 
    All facilities, including tanks, used for the bulk storage of propane gas shall comply with all federal, state and local regulations regarding the bulk storage of propane gas. Any facility found to be in violation of any federal, state or local laws or regulations shall be subject to closure by the city building inspector. Upon closure, the city building inspector is authorized to contract all appropriate governmental authorities regarding the closure and to take all such further steps as may be appropriate and lawful to protect the citizens of the city from the threat of catastrophic explosion. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 7-205. - Enforcement. 
    Anyone found to be in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 7-206. - Existing tanks. 
    All tanks presently in existence which violate the provisions of this article shall be "grandfathered in", but may not be replaced except in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2001) 
Secs. 7-207-7-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 7-220. - Adopted. 
    The International Standard Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, with any revisions thereto, compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen, is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum requirements regarding standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties, all within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs 7-221-7-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - NEW ALBANY MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR RENTAL HOUSING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 1, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as 7-210-7-232. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 7-231-7-252. 

Sec. 7-231. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the citizens of the city from sub-standard rental housing (houses, duplexes, apartments, mobile homes, modular homes, etc.). An additional purpose of this ordinance is to have the Code Enforcement Officer for the City of New Albany periodically, under set terms and conditions, inspect all residential rental property within the City of New Albany. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-232. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof within the jurisdiction of the city, which are rented or are intended to be rented for human occupancy as a residence. The provisions of this article also apply to any and all other housing standard ordinances, which may be ordained by the governing authorities of the City of New Albany. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec 7-233. - Authority of code enforcement officer. 
    The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. The code enforcement officer shall have the authority of a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-234. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection or enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building or premises covered by this ordinance as defined by section 7-232 any condition or violation of this article which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous for human occupation, the code enforcement officer may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or perform any duty imposed upon the code enforcement officer by this article: provided however that if such building or premises is occupied the code enforcement officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such building or premises is unoccupied he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the code enforcement officer shall have recourse to obtain an inspection warrant or to utilize any other remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-235. - Frequency of inspections. 
    All residential rental property shall be inspected by the code enforcement officer or his designees each time a building or premises becomes vacant, either before it is rented or leased or upon proper notice by landlord of present or prospective occupancy as set-forth in section 7-246. The code enforcement officer or his designees may also inspect any residential housing unit at the request of the landlord or tenant or if a visual observation by the code enforcement officer or his designees of reasonable cause for an additional inspection. (See sections 7-234 and 7-245) 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-236. - Report of violations. 
    Should, upon completion of an inspection, the code enforcement officer or his designees find one (1) or more conditions which are in violation of this article, he shall make a written report on the same to the city and shall provide the owner and occupant (if applicable) with a copy of said findings. The owner must then bring the rental housing unit into compliance with this article before a certificate of occupancy will be issued by the code enforcement officer. It shall be unlawful for anyone to rent or occupy a rental housing unit without the granting of a certificate of occupancy. Rental housing units that are already occupied at the time this article goes into effect shall be exempt from initial inspection and may remain occupied without a certificate of occupancy until there is a change in tenants, however, the residential rental housing unit may be inspected at the request of the landlord or tenant or if a visual observation by the code enforcement officer or his designees justifies an additional inspection or pursuant to section 7-245. 
Sec. 7-237. - Occupancy permit. 
(a)  Application for occupancy permit. Before allowing a dwelling unit to be occupied or pursuant to valid notice of present or prospective occupancy pursuant to section 7-246, the owner shall apply for and obtain a rental housing occupancy permit from the city for such unit. Each owner shall take all steps required by this chapter to keep the occupancy permit valid and in effect at all times. 
(b)  Issuance of occupancy permit. When the owner has complied with all the requirements of this chapter relating to the dwelling unit, and has paid all the fees required by this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall issue a rental housing occupancy permit to the owner for such unit. 
(c)  Expiration of occupancy permit. An occupancy permit for a dwelling unit issued under subsection (b) of this section shall be valid until termination of the first occupancy to occur after such permit is issued, at which time such occupancy permit shall expire. No new occupancy permit shall be issued with respect to such dwelling until the owner has complied with all the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Posting of the occupancy permit. The owner shall cause the occupancy permit to be placed in each unit where it is readily available for examination by prospective tenants, present tenants and the code enforcement officer at all times. 
(e)  Contents of the occupancy permit. The occupancy permit shall contain the following information: the property address of the dwelling unit; the unit number of the dwelling unit; the owner's name, address and telephone; the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit; the date of issuance of the occupancy permit. 
(f)  Inspection prior to issuance of occupancy permit. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any dwelling unit, the code enforcement officer shall inspect the dwelling unit to insure that it complies in all respects with all codes made applicable to dwelling units by the provisions of this chapter. Upon vacancy of a dwelling unit and re-application for an occupancy permit, the code enforcement officer may, at his discretion, issue a permit without additional inspection if a previous inspection of such dwelling unit has been performed within one (1) year of the application. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-238. - Biennial registration of dwelling units. 
    Every owner shall apply for and pay an biennial registration fee for each rental dwelling unit. The registration fee shall be determined as provided herein. The initial notification of the requirements of this article to all landlords owning residential rental property within the City of New Albany, Mississippi shall be by publication of a summary of this article in the New Albany Gazette, a newspaper of general circulation within New Albany and Union County, Mississippi. Publication shall be made for three (3) consecutive weeks and each landlord shall be given sixty (60) days from the initial publication of this article in which to properly register his or her residential properties with the city. Residential properties made available for rental subsequent to the sixty-day period must be registered prior to occupancy. Failure to register a residential rental property may be punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) at the discretion of the code enforcement officer taking into account all relevant factors. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-239. - Substandard rental units-generally. 
    Any rental unit or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the unit is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in this division, to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a sub-standard building. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-240. - Substandard conditions. 
    Substandard conditions shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower. 
(2)  Lack of or improper kitchen sink. 
(3)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures. 
(4)  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
(5)  Lack of or minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this article. 
(6)  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
(7)  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
(8)  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the code enforcement officer. 
(9)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
(10)  Lack of connection to the required sewage disposal system. 
(11)  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the code enforcement officer. 
(12)  Lack of a valid minimum rental housing occupancy permit for the dwelling unit. 
(13)  Lack of a current registration receipt for the dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-241. - Structural hazards. 
    Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed leads with safety. 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed leads with safety. 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys with list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-242. - Faulty weather protection. 
    Faulty weather protection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
(3)  Defective weather protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-243. - Improper occupancy. 
    Improper occupancy shall include any occupancy of a building or portion thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which was not designed or intended to be used for such occupancy. Improper occupancy shall also include the occupancy of, or allowing the occupancy of, any dwelling unit for which there is not in effect a valid and current minimum rental housing occupancy permit or a valid and current registration receipt with respect to said dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-244. - Various sub-standard problems. 
    These may consist of, but not limited to, hazardous plumbing, hazardous mechanical equipment, fire hazards, and faulty materials of construction, hazardous or unsanitary premises, inadequate maintenance or inadequate exits. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-245. - Additional inspections. 
    As stated, there will be inspections upon vacancy of all residential rental property in the city. However, additional inspections may be made when the code enforcement officer, mayor and board of aldermen, planning and zoning commissions have reasonable cause to suspect that a particular rental property is out of compliance. If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property is out of compliance, he may inspect the same for code violations and proceed accordingly. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-246. - Notice by landlord of present or prospective occupancy. 
    In the event that a residential rental property which does not have a valid certificate of occupancy (one that has not expired as setforth in section 7-237(c)) either (1) becomes occupied by a tenant, or (2) is contracted, in writing or orally, to be occupied within one (1) month or less, whichever occurs first, the owner or landlord shall notify the code enforcement officer of such occupancy or prospective lease within three (3) business days. Upon such notification, the code enforcement officer or his designees shall inspect such property within three (3) days or as soon as is reasonably possible, with written notice to be provided to the landlord of the reason for any delay beyond the three (3) day period, as well as an estimate of the length of delay. A failure by the code enforcement officer to inspect the property within this time period shall not relieve the landowner of any duties pursuant to this Act nor relieve the requirement for an inspection prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A failure by the landlord to properly notify the code enforcement officer or his designees shall constitute a criminal offense pursuant to section 7-248, which charge may be brought at the sole discretion of the code enforcement officer or his designees, taking into account all relevant factors. Courts hearing such charges are further directed to consider any convictions for prior offenses pursuant to this act within three (3) years in its determination of the appropriate fine for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-247. - Fees. 
    The fee for biennial registration of rental units shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per unit up to a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a multi-unit apartment complex or a maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for separate homes. The fee for the inspection for an occupancy permit for a unit found to be substandard is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and this fee shall be due for each inspection when the unit is found to be substandard. There shall be no fee for an inspection for an occupancy permit for a unit inspected and found to be in compliance. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-248. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-249. - Appeals. 
    Upon notice of appeal filed within thirty (30) days of notification of the findings of the code enforcement officer, anyone dissatisfied with such findings may appeal to the planning and zoning commission, which shall have the power to either uphold or overturn such decision. All matters concerning appeal from the decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be first to the mayor and board of aldermen, and if a party is still aggrieved, appeal can be to the courts, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-250. - Conflict. 
    In any case where a provision of this Code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code of the city existing on the effective date of this Code, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of health and safety of the community shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-251. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect thirty (30) days after passage as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Sec. 7-252. - Severability. 
    That should any sentence, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or section of this article be adjudged or held to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole, or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, and shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2013) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; sale of fireworks prohibited, § 14-3.1; street naming and property numbering plan, § 18-47 et seq.; design/construction regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority to enact fire regulations, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted January 13, 2013, amended article II, §§ 8-21-8-25, to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 8-21-8-25, pertained to fire prevention code adopted, definition, conflicts, penalty for violation, fire prevention code amendments. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 8-21. - Code adopted; prior ordinance amended. 
    The International Fire Code (IFC), 2006 Edition, with appendix D, together with any revisions thereto, as compiled by the International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206, a copy of which has been printed and presented in pamphlet form and examined and approved by the board of aldermen is hereby adopted and approved as providing the minimum regulations for the reasonable protection of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion due to storage, use or handling of hazardous materials, substances and devices, and to minimize hazards to life and property due to fire and panic (exclusive of those hazards considered in other building code regulations) within the corporate limits. Three (3) copies of this code shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk and shall be maintained at all times available for inspection by interested members of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2013) 
Secs. 8-22-8-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-26. - Open burning prohibited except by written permit issued by the Fire Chief of the City of New Albany. 
(a)  Agricultural burning. 
(1)  Permit required. No open burning of waste materials such as vegetation produced as a result of agricultural activities on lands lying within the municipal limits shall be undertaken without having first obtained a permit for such activity for the New Albany Fire Department. 
(2)  Permit issuance. Upon application for a permit to burn and payment of the required permit fee, the fire chief shall undertake an appropriate investigation to determine that the proposed burn can be accomplished in a manner that does not pose a threat to the health and welfare of others or to the property of others in the area of the proposed burn. In making a determination as to the advisability of issuing a permit, the fire chief shall act in accord with a certain document entitled "Guidelines for Issuance of an Agricultural Burning Permit of the City of New Albany" previously submitted to and approved by the board and in the form attached to this section as addendum A and incorporated herein by reference. 
(3)  Application form and permit fee . The form for application will be in accord with the example form that is a part of addendum A. The required fee for issuance of an agricultural burn permit is twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and no permit may be issued by the New Albany Fire Department without having first received a duly executed application and the required filing fee. 
(4)  Additional conditions and terms . The fire chief is granted discretion in determining the advisability of issuing a burn permit under this section to add reasonable additional terms and conditions to the permit that may appear advisable to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community taking into account that unique circumstances regarding the proposed burn that may come to the fire chief's attention. 
(5)  Penalties for violation . The violation of this section by conducting an unauthorized and unpermitted burn or exceeding the terms and conditions attached to a permit shall constitute a misdemeanor and subject the violator to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offence. For any second offence occurring within one (1) year of the first offense, the fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For all subsequent offenses occurring within one (1) year of the last preceding offense, the fine shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(6)  The fire department is authorized to investigate any complaints regarding violations of this ordinance or at their own discretion. The New Albany Police Department and Code Enforcement Officer are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(b)  Open burning other than agricultural. 
(1)  Permit required. No open burning of waste materials in conjunction with land clearing or development or routine property maintenance not related to agricultural purposes on property lying within the municipal limits shall be undertaken without having first obtained a permit for such activity from the New Albany Fire Department. 
a.  Exception-Recreational fires. No permit is required for recreational fires when meeting the following guidelines: 
1.  Dimensions and construction. Recreational fires shall be contained in an outdoor fireplace, fire/barbecue pit, campfire ring or other container approved by the fire chief or other city official or employee designated by him, and shall be limited in size to a total fuel area of three (3) feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height. The use of devices made of earth, stone, or metal designed for the purpose of containing a fire shall also be permitted provided the area containing the fire is no more than three (3) feet wide by three (3) feet long. The pieces of wood contained in permissible fires shall be no more than three (3) feet in length. 
2.  Fuel for recreational fires. The fuel for recreational fires shall consist of seasoned dry firewood, fire logs or charcoal briquettes. Construction materials, garbage, rubbish or yard waste are strictly prohibited. Small amounts of paper and kindling may be used to kindle the fire. The use of flammable or combustible liquids, other than commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited. 
3.  Excessive smoke, odor emissions or other recreational fires otherwise deemed a hazard are prohibited. Recreational fires identified as hazardous due to excessive smoke or odor emissions are prohibited. The city may order the extinguishment of any recreational fire that creates or adds to a hazardous situation. 
4.  Burn barrels prohibited, except upon explicit approval. The use of burn barrels is generally prohibited. However, burn barrels may be allowed at the discretion of the fire chief or other city official or employee designated by him as a warming station for outdoor workers or other specifically pre-approved purposes. 
(2)  Permit issuance. Upon application for a permit to burn and payment of the required permit fee, the fire chief shall undertake an appropriate investigation to determine that the proposed burn can be accomplished in a manner that does not pose a threat to the health and welfare of others or to the property of others in the area of the proposed burn. In making a determination as to the advisability of issuing a permit, the fire chief shall act in accord with a certain document entitled "Standard Operating Procedures for Issuance of an Open Burning Permit in the City of New Albany" previously submitted to and approved by the board and in the form attached to the section as addendum B and incorporated herein by reference. 
(3)  Application form and permit fee. The form application will be in accord with the example form that is a part of addendum B. The required fee for issuance of an open burn permit is twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and no permit shall issued by the New Albany Fire Department without having first received a duly executed application and the required filing fee. 
(4)  Additional conditions and terms. The fire chief is granted discretion in determining the advisability of issuing a burn permit under this section to add reasonable additional terms and conditions to the permit that may appear advisable to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community taking into account any unique circumstances regarding the proposed burn that may come to the fire chief's attention. 
(5)  Penalties for violation. The violation of this section, by conducting an unauthorized and unpermitted burn or by exceeding the terms and conditions attached to a permit shall constitute a misdemeanor and subject the violator to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. For any second offence occurring within one (1) year of the first offence, the fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For all subsequent offenses occurring within one (1) year of the last preceding offense, the fine shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(6)  The fire department is authorized to investigate any complaints regarding violations of this section or at their own discretion. The New Albany Police Department and Code Enforcement Officer are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-19-06; Ord. of 6-4-10, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-2-2014) 
Chapter 9 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of November 6, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as a new Ch. 9, Art. I, § A-E was at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; planning and development, Ch. 16; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 21; design/construction regulations, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 9-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Mississippi has in Title 17, Chapter 1, Miss. Code Ann. 1972 delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Aldermen of New Albany, Mississippi does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 9-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard of the city are subject to periodic innudation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 9-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions is specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water and erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 9-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art; 1, § D) 
Sec. 9-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 1, § E) 
Secs. 9-6-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-26. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    A zone means portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to buildings. Areas of one hundred-year flood, base flood elevations and flood hazard factors not determined. 
    A1-A30 and AE zone means the Special Flood Hazard area inundated by the one hundred-year flood, base flood elevations are determined. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure, which is located on the same parcel of property as the principle structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AND AR/A zones means they are SFHAs that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a one hundred-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources. 
    A99 zone means that part of the SFHA inundated by the one hundred-year flood to be protected from the one hundred-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction, no base food elevations are determined. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    B and X zones (shaded) means these are areas of five hundred-year flood, areas subject to the one hundred-year flood with average depths of less than one (1) foot or with contributing drainage area less than one (1) square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood. 
    Base flood means the flooding having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred-year flood"). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, VI-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See "structure." 
    C and X (unshaded) zones means these are areas determined to be outside the five hundred-year floodplain. 
    Community means a political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction. 
    Community floodplain management map means any map produced by the community utilizing any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source. 
    Community rating system (CRS) means a program developed by the federal insurance administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
    Community flood hazard area (CFHA) means this is an area that has been determined by the floodplain administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams. 
    Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to designated public shelters, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
    D zone means an area in which the flood hazard is undetermined. 
    Dam means any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, constructed to impound or divert water, waste-water, liquid borne materials, or solids that may flow if saturated. All structures necessary to maintain the water level in an impoundment or to divert a stream from its course will be considered one (1) dam. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, ruining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Elevation certificate means a certified statement that verifies a building's elevation information. 
    Emergency program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable buildings in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Enclosure below the lowest floor. See "lowest floor." 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Executive order 11988 (floodplain management) means an order issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 4, 1985 the date of the initial flood insurance rate map, which can be found on the map index panel). 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community before September 4, 1985. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
    Five hundred-year flood means the flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the five hundred-year flood have a moderate to low risk of flooding. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FHBM (where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood water from any source. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain administrator means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodproofing certificate means the form used to certify compliance for non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating buildings to or above the BFE. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas the must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floodway fringe means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis. 
    Flood protection elevation means the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the floodplain administrator. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Hardship (as related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The board of aldermen requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    Hazard potential means the possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or mis-operation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way on the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood routing capacity). 
    High hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure may cause loss of life, serious damage to residential, industrial, or commercial buildings; or damage to, or disruption of, important public utilities or transportation facilities such as major highways or railroads. Dams which meet the statutory thresholds for regulation that are proposed for construction in established or proposed residential, commercial, or industrial areas will be assigned this classification, unless the applicant provides convincing evidence to the contrary. A development permit is required for a building and associated fill downstream from a dam at any location where flooding can be reasonably anticipated from principal or emergency spillway discharges, or from overtopping and failure of the dam. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis means an analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Mississippi, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or flood way boundaries. 
    Increased cost of compliance (ICC) means the cost to repair a substantially flood damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damage building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC) means an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMC's are broken down into the following categories: 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means a formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies. 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means a revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA. 
Letter to map revisions (LOMR) means a revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One (1) common type of LORM, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerting whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is, thereafter, exclude from the SFHA. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually as earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. For a levee system to be recognized, the following criteria must be met. All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage, whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised). All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a Federal Or State agency an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a community participating in the NFIP. 
    Low hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure would at the most result in damage to agricultural land, farm buildings (excluding residences), or minor roads. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a building's foundation system. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is no considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map panel number means the four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four (4) digits represent the map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. 
    Map amendment means a change to an effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the SFHA or an individual structure or a legally described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA. 
    Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed between willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of building (Actual Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    National flood insurance program (NFIP) means the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance industry. 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure and any construction beginning on a new foundation system or construction beginning with existing foundation system and the raising of new walls. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by a community. 
    Non-residential means, but is not limited to; small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six (6) months duration. 
    North American Vertical Datum of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Obstruction means, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One hundred-year flood means the flood that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A or V is subject to the one hundred-year flood. Over the life of a thirty-year loan, there is a twenty-six (26) percent chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA. 
    Participating community means any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP. 
    Post-FIRM construction means construction or substantial improvement that started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later. 
    Pre-FIRM construction means construction or substantial improvement, which started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later. 
    Probation means a way of formally notifying participating communities of violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. 
    Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Recreation vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and, 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regular program means the phase of the community's participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevation determined in a FIS. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Section 1316 means that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas. 
    Significant hazard dam means a dam assigned the significant hazard potential classification where failure may cause damage to main roads, minor railroads, or cause interruption of use, or service of relatively important public utilities. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means that portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO, AR, V, VE, or V1-V30. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act. P. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means all walled and roofed buildings, including gas or liquid storage tanks and manufactured homes that are principally above ground. 
    Subrogation means an action brought by FEMA when flood damages have occurred, flood insurance has been paid, and all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss-buildings (see definition). 
    For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other part of the building commences. 
    The term does not apply to: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; or 
(3)  Any improvement to a building. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place over a ten-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work done. 
    The term does not apply to: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; or 
(3)  Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Suspension means the removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulation required for participation in the NFIP. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or reverie areas. 
    X zone means the area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded (the five hundred-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2 percent. 
    Zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 2) 
Sec. 9-27. - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard (SFHA) (and, as determined by the floodplain administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, areas) within the jurisdiction of the board of aldermen (which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of New Albany. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 9-28. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood insurance rate map (multiple panels) numbers 04, 16, 9, and 15 dated September 4, 1985 and respectively Union County and other supporting data are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and/or maps are on file at: New Albany Building Department at 101 West Bankhead Street. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 9-29. - Use of preliminary flood hazard data. 
    When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance studies have been provided by FEMA: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD) by FEMA, the use of the preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(2)  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD) by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously existing flood hazards data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administrating these regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 9-30. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in the areas of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § D) 
Sec. 9-31. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § E) 
Sec. 9-32. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 9-33. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other power granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § G) 
Sec. 9-34. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the board of aldermen or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § H) 
Sec. 9-35. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the floodplain administrator from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 3, § I) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 9-36. - Designation of flood damage prevention ordinance administrator. 
    The board of aldermen hereby appoints the building inspector to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the floodplain administrator and/or the administrator. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 9-37. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing, Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 9-52(2) and subsection 9-54(b); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of proposed development; and; 
(2)  Construction stage. Upon a placement of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 9-38. - Powers, duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  The floodplain administrator and/or staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
(1)  Right of entry: 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the administrator by this chapter. 
b.  If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry. 
c.  If entry is refused, the administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
d.  When the administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Stop work orders: 
a.  Upon notice from the administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(3)  Revocation of permits: 
a.  The administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.  The administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities, the State NFIP Coordinator, and other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
(4)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with subsection 9-37(2). 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 9-37(2). 
(7)  Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(9)  When base flood elevation date or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-37, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article IV. 
(10)  Provide information, testimony, or other evidence, as needed during variance request hearings. 
(11)  When damage occurs to a building or buildings, the following actions shall be conducted: 
a.  Determine whether damaged structures are located within the special flood hazard area; 
b.  Conduct damage assessments for those damaged structures located in the SFHA, and; 
c.  Make a reasonable attempt to notify owner(s) of damaged structure(s) of the requirement to obtain a building permit/floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 4, § C) 
Secs. 9-39-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-51. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top of frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, such facilities shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions in this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-comformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(11)  New construction and substantial improvement of any building shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at least one (1) foot above the centerline of the designated street, unless the topography of the property does not allow for strict adherence as determined by the building inspector; 
(12)  New construction and substantial improvements built on fill shall be constructed on the properly designed and compacted fill that extends beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation, and shall have appropriate protection from erosion and scour. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 9-52. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 9-37, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lowest than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 9-52(3). 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the BFE (plus any community free board) elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsections 9-37(1) and 9-38(a)(2). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevations shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwater to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
4.  Limited in use to parking, storage, and building access; and 
5.  Limited to less than three hundred (300) square feet. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
d.  Property owners shall be required to execute a floodplain venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will not violate the requirements of subsection (c). 
(4)  Detached storage buildings, shed, or other like accessory improvements, excluding detached garages, carports, and boat houses are used primarily for parking and storage of vehicles. Such storage space shall not be used for human habitation and shall be limited to storage of items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. The storage space shall be constructed of flood resistant or breakaway materials, and equipment and service utilities, such as electrical outlets, shall be limited to essential lighting and other incidental uses, and must be elevated or floodproofed. Openings to preclude hydrostatic loading and allow ventilation as provided in subsection 9-52(3) shall also be required. These accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
(5)  Accessory improvements and other apparent structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures. 
(6)  Property owners shall be required to execute and record with the structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the lowest floor, or the detached accessory building shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area at any time. 
(7)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
Manufactured homes must be: 
1.  Elevated on a permanent foundation; 
2.  Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than twenty-one (21) feet above the level of the base flood elevation; 
3.  Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
b.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
3.  Must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of this subsection (7)a. or b.1. and 3., above. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of Mississippi Motor Vehicle Regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. All recreational vehicles, which are not self-propelled, must comply with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Guidelines for the Placement of Temporary Structures in Special Flood Hazard Areas." 
c.  All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 9-53. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard and community flood hazard areas established to section 9-28, where flood sources exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-28, then the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize and base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article III. If data is not available from outside sources, then the following provisions [(2), (3) and (4)] shall apply. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas with base flood elevations (Zones AE and A1-30) but without floodways, no encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be permitted unless certification by a registered professional engineer in provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data of floodway data are not available in accordance with subsection 9-28, in special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations adopted/established by the community. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal; state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article III of this chapter. The reference for this action is to be FEMA 265 "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base Flood Elevation," dated July 1995. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 9-54. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than five (5) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(e)  Where only a small portion of the subdivision lot or lots is in a designated zone A special flood hazard area inundated by one hundred-year flood with no base flood elevations determined and there is sufficient ground slope on the site to avoid possible flooding of structures in Zone X areas determined to be outside five hundred (500) years floodplain. The floodplain administrator may waive the requirement for a study to determine the base flood elevations. 
(f)  In order for the floodplain administrator to consider waiving the requirement of section 9-54(d) the applicant must provide an accurate topographic data and map for the lot or lots in question certified by a licensed land surveyor and/or professional civil engineer indicating sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
(g)  Each proposed parcel must have a designated buildable pad or site above the one hundred-year floodplain. The distance of the buildable pad or site above the one hundred-year floodplain shall depend on the slope of the ground and in accordance with the following table: 
Distance in feet from Zone A

100-year FloodplainMinimum Slope from Zone A

100-year Floodplain 

to Ground Level at Pad 

(%)20 5 30 3.33 40 2.50 50 2.0 60 1.67 70 1.43 80 1.25 90 1.11 100 1.0  
    Residential or non-residential structures lowest floor elevation also must be elevated one and one-half (1.5) feet above the ground level on the buildable pad or site. 
(h)  If a waiver is granted for subsection 9-54(d) the subdivider/applicant must comply with the following: 
(1)  File restrictive covenants on the lot or lots prohibiting construction within the designated special flood hazard area inundated by the one hundred-year flood and requirement for elevated lowest floor elevation. 
(2)  Place a statement on the face of the plat prohibiting construction in the designated area of special flood hazard inundated by the one hundred-year flood. 
(i)  Notice must be sent to the STATE NFIP COORDINATOR indicating that a waiver has been granted for subsection 9-54(d) providing written details of the waiver for any waiver granted by the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; 
(3)  Meet the requirements of section 9-37 and section 9-52 and this section. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 5, § D) 
Sec. 9-55. - Critical facilities. 
    Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (one hundred-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three (3) feet (approximate five hundred-year floodplain) or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 5, § E) 
Secs. 9-56-9-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 9-66. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
    The zoning board as established by the board of aldermen shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § A) 
Sec. 9-67. - Duties of variance and appeals board. 
    The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided in Miss. Code Ann., 1972. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § B) 
Sec. 9-68. - Variance procedures. 
    In passing upon such applications, the zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials is may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges; 
(12)  Upon consideration of factors listed above, and the purpose of this chapter, the zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter; 
(13)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § C) 
Sec. 9-69. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances shall not only be issued when there is: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinance. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of an "historic structure," a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See section 9-70). 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Mississippi Management Agency upon request. (See section 9-70.) 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § D) 
Sec. 9-70. - Variance notification. 
    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and; 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
    The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § E) 
Sec. 9-71. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § F) 
Sec. 9-72. - Special conditions. 
    Upon consideration of the factors listed in Article IV, and the purposes of this chapter, the zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2007, Art. 6, § G) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to compel and regulate removal of garbage, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Depositing uncovered items or piles of garbage, etc., in city. 
    No person shall deposit anywhere in the city uncovered items or piles of garbage, as defined by section 10-57, junk, tin cans, bottles, carcasses of dead fowl or animals, filth, sawdust, shavings, litter, old lumber, roofing, or other refuse of like or similar nature. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 15) 
Sec. 10-2. - Depositing refuse, trash, debris in streets. 
    No person shall place, dump or deposit refuse, debris and other trash in the streets, gutters and open ditches of the streets of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-5-38, § 1) 
Cross reference- Obstructing sidewalks, streets, gutters, ditches, § 14-4; obstructing streets and sidewalks, § 18-2 et seq. 
Sec. 10-3. - Materials placed for disposal presumed abandoned. 
    It is conclusively presumed that all materials placed for disposal in accordance with this chapter have been abandoned and all interest of the owner therein surrendered and transferred to the city. However, the city will assume no responsibility for the safekeeping or redelivering of any such materials. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 9) 
Sec. 10-4. - Potentially harmful substances to be placed in special containers. 
    It shall be the duty of every person having garbage, as defined by section 10-57, to be handled by the street commissioner and the men of his department to place all broken glass, razor blades and any other material which may injure a workman in the handling of the same in special containers in order to prevent injuries in the disposal thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 8) 
Sec. 10-5. - Marking, defacing dumpster refuse containers. 
    No person shall mark or deface any dumpster refuse container required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 4) 
Secs. 10-6-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL GARBAGE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to compel and regulate the removal of garbage and filth beyond corporate limits, § 21-19-1. 

Sec. 10-26. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Business, Commercial and Industrial Garbage Removal and Disposal Ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 1) 
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Business, commercial and industrial establishments. The term "industrial establishment" shall mean any and all establishments wherein a manufacturing process is carried on inside of said premises; the term "business and commercial establishment" shall mean all other buildings or premises other than residential buildings or structures. For the purposes of this article, the term "apartment complex" shall be determined by the commissioner of the street department. 
    Commissioner. The term "commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the street department. 
    Dumpster refuse containers. "Dumpster refuse containers" shall mean garbage containers which can be lifted by appropriate mechanical lifting equipment, which are approved by the commissioner of the street department for use in the city. 
    Garbage. "Garbage" shall mean rubbish, trash, waste, paper, cardboard, cans, metals and the like which usually and customarily originate within a place of business or industry. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 2) 
Sec. 10-28. - Responsibility for pickup and disposal of garbage. 
    All garbage shall be picked up, removed and disposed of by the street department under the direction and supervision of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 3) 
Sec. 10-29. - General duties of business, commercial and industrial establishments. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner and operator of each business, commercial or industrial establishment to: 
(1)  Remove all garbage and place the same in a dumpster refuse container; 
(2)  Locate or place the dumpster refuse container in such a location that the same can be lifted by appropriate mechanical lifting equipment and without the necessity of loading by hand; 
(3)  Maintain each such dumpster refuse container in a clean and sanitary condition, including the breaking down and flattening of all cardboard material; 
(4)  Place any and all animal, game, fowl, fish, human or other waste or discarded portions thereof in a separate plastic container, which plastic container shall be sealed and in an airtight condition, and thereafter place the same within the dumpster refuse container; 
(5)  Keep the area around the dumpster refuse container clear and free of all litter and debris; 
(6)  See that there is no blocking of access to the dumpster refuse container in order that the mechanical lifting equipment of the street department may move in and out of the area freely at all times. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 10-30. - Use of dumpster refuse container required. 
    It shall be unlawful for business, commercial and industrial establishments to place garbage in any type of container other than a dumpster refuse container. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 8) 
Sec. 10-31. - Fees. 
(a)  There is hereby fixed and levied against each business, commercial or industrial establishment of the city a monthly garbage fee ranging from a minimum of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) to a maximum of thirty dollars ($30.00) with the assessment based upon the volume and frequency of the pickup. The assessment shall be determined by the commissioner and approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  The fees established by this section may be reviewed at any time by the mayor and board of aldermen and may be altered, changed or modified by an order to that effect entered by the mayor and board upon its minutes without further amendment of this article. 
(c)  All fees to be collected under this article shall be collected and handled in the same manner as set forth in Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 5-7) 
Editor's note- Changes in fees, as authorized herein, are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-32. - Construction contractors, tree trimmers to remove rubbish, etc. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of all construction contractors, builders and remodelers, tree trimming contractors, tree surgeons, landscapers and the like to remove all of the rubbish, trimmings and trash resulting from the premises during the course of their operation and immediately following the same so as to leave the premises free and clear of such rubbish, trimmings and debris. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 3) 
Sec. 10-33. - Contract haulers, etc., to remove substances at own expense with their equipment. 
    It shall be the duty of all haulers, contract haulers and other removers of kitchen and table waste from commercial establishments, such as hotels, restaurants, drugstores, and the like, dirt haulers and haulers of trash, rubbish, refuse, tree trimmings and the like resulting from the operation of a contractor in the building and construction business and tree trimmings, landscapers and the like to remove same at their own expense and with their own means. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 4) 
Sec. 10-34. - Removal of waste material from tire recapping plants, filling stations, tire stores and garages. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners and operators of automobile tire recapping plants to remove all discarded tires and parts thereof from their premises, and the owners and operators of all filling stations, garages and tire stores shall be responsible for removal of such waste materials when directed to do so by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 3) 
Sec. 10-35. - Removal of waste material from slaughterhouses, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners and operators of milk processing plants, hatcheries, chicken processing plants, and slaughterhouses to remove waste materials from their premises when directed to do so by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 3) 
Secs. 10-36-10-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to compel and regulate the removal of garbage and filth beyond corporate limits, § 21-19-1. 

Sec. 10-56. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Residential Garbage and Trash Removal And Disposal Ordinance of the City." 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 1) 
Sec. 10-57. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Commissioner shall mean the city street commissioner. 
    Container shall mean a metal or plastic can of not more than ninety-six (96) gallons, being equipped with a closely fitting metal or plastic cover. 
    Garbage shall mean rubbish, trash, household wastepaper and the like which usually and customarily originates at a residence. "Garbage" does not include kitchen and table waste from commercial establishments such as hotels, restaurants, drugstores and the like nor discarded automobile tires and tubes at recapping plants and in unusual amounts at filling stations, garages and tire stores, in the discretion of the commissioner. 
    Trash shall mean rubbish, trash, tree trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds and refuse generally which usually and customarily originates outside of a residence. "Trash" does not include trash, rubbish and refuse resulting from building construction and repair, tree trimming and the like when done by a contractor or individual, other than a homeowner, who makes repairs or does construction for compensation. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 2; Res. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 10-58. - Duty to provide service; schedule of service. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner to pick up and remove garbage and trash from the residential sections of the city on such a schedule and at such times as may be designated and fixed by orders of the mayor and board of aldermen. It shall be his duty to remove, except as provided in sections 10-32, 10-34 and 10-35 hereof, trash from the residential sections of the city under the same type of direction from the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 5) 
Sec. 10-59. - Fees. 
(a)  A minimum monthly garbage and trash fee of nine dollars ninety-five cents ($9.95) shall be charged each person or family occupying a house, apartment or mobile home as a residence within the city. 
(b)  The garbage fee provided by subsection (a) of this section is levied against all occupants, tenants or lessees using any building, house, structure, or part of any building, house or structure, or house trailer or mobile home in the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 11, 12; Res. of 9-5-06; Ord. of 5-3-11) 
Sec. 10-60. - Billing and collecting. 
(a)  The billing and collecting of the fees levied by this article shall be done by the office of the city clerk. Said fees shall be set out on the electricity, water and sewer bills in a manner convenient to distinguish said charge from the other charges. 
(b)  Said bills shall be payable monthly at the same time electric, water and sewer bills are paid at the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall not accept the payment of any utility bill unless the fee for garbage and trash service is also paid. 
(c)  All fees collected hereunder shall be net and, if the current monthly fee for service is not paid within ten (10) days from the date of the bill for same, the gross rate shall apply and be collected. Such gross rate shall be ten (10) percent higher than the net fee. When collected, said fees shall be paid into the city's general fund. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 13, 14) 
Sec. 10-61. - Container size. 
    The container size set forth in section 10-57 may be reviewed at any time by the mayor and board of aldermen and may be altered, changed or modified by an order to that effect entered by the mayor and board upon its minutes without further amendment of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 6) 
Editor's note- Changes in container size, as authorized herein, are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-62. - Plastic bags and containers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all households within the city to place garbage in plastic bags of sufficient strength not to tear, break or otherwise fail while being handled by city employees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person to place any and all animal, game, fowl, fish, human or other waste or discarded portions thereof in a separate plastic container, sealed and in an airtight condition, and thereafter the same shall be placed within containers as defined herein. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, §§ 6, 10; Res. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 10-63. - Tree trimmings, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of every householder in the residential section of the city having trees, tree trimmings, shrubbery, shrubbery trimmings and the like, except as provided in sections 10-32, 10-34 and 10-35, to cut the same in lengths not to exceed four (4) feet, weighing one hundred (100) pounds, or less, and place same within five (5) feet of the traveled portion of the street or sidewalk in a uniform and even manner so that the same may be conveniently handled by men of the street department. The commissioner may refuse to remove any such refuse unless the same is placed in a manner required hereby. However, it shall be unlawful for such refuse to be placed in side-drain ditches, gutters or within the traveled portion of any street or alley so as to constitute a hazard or danger to the traveling public. 
(Ord. of 1-8-74, § 7) 
Sec. 10-64. - Other regulations. 
(a)  No container used for holding garbage may be placed in the front yard of the residence or adjacent to the street except as follows: containers as defined in section 10-57 may be placed near the street for collection at any time after 6:00 p.m. on the day before the garbage is to be collected. Such containers must be removed following collection of the garbage by the sanitation department no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day garbage is collected. No containers of any type used for garbage by households may be left in the front yard or adjacent to the street at times other than those stated. 
(b)  In the event the homeowner elects to remove the bagged garbage from the container, placing the plastic bags as described in section 10-62 near the street for collection, such may be done no earlier than 6:00 a.m. on the day of garbage collection. If the homeowner places his garbage for collection earlier than 6:00 a.m. on the day of garbage collection, the same must be in a container or containers as described in section 10-57. 
(c)  All containers used for the collection of garbage must be of commercial manufacture made expressly for such purpose. No drums, cans, plastic containers or other "homemade" containers, originally intended for use as something other than a container for garbage, may be used and the same will be removed and disposed of by the sanitation department should they find such container being used for garbage collection. All containers used must be of the "roll-out" type or otherwise easily portable. 
(d)  No container for the collection of garbage shall be placed or stored on or in any public street, sidewalk, foot path or public place other than hereinabove provided. Containers, except when placed near the street for collection, must not be visible from the street and may not be placed in a front yard or side yard of the residence. 
(e)  It is the responsibility of the householder to pick up all loose debris around the collection area. 
(Res. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 10-65. - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, the city may pursue civil remedies for violations of this chapter, all as provided under the laws of the State of Mississippi. 
(Res. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 10-66-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTERING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Apr. 6, 1982, §§ 1-15, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been included herein as Art. IV, §§ 10-71-10-85, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-71. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of New Albany anti-litter ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 1) 
Sec. 10-72. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, and when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number; the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory: 
    Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter is "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public. 
    Public is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, clothing, furniture and similar materials. 
    Vehicle is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 2) 
Sec. 10-73. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 3) 
Sec. 10-74. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 4) 
Sec. 10-75. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 5) 
Sec. 10-76. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 6) 
Sec. 10-77. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 7) 
Sec. 10-78. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 8) 
Sec. 10-79. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 9) 
Sec. 10-80. - Posting notices prohibited. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or tree on public property, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 10) 
Sec. 10-81. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 11) 
Sec. 10-82. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 12) 
Sec. 10-83. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 13) 
Sec. 10-84. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)  Notice to remove. The manager of the sanitation department is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be sent by registered mail, addressed to said owner or agent of such owner at his known address; or by personal service of such notice on said owner or agent of such owner by any officer of the New Albany police department. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within seven (7) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a) above, or within fourteen (14) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city post office department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the manager of the sanitation department is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. 
(c)  Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty (30) days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, then, and in that case, the manager of the sanitation department shall cause to be recorded in the office of the city tax collector a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which the work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of six (6) percent in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 14) 
Sec. 10-85. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or be imprisoned in the city jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 15) 
Secs. 10-86-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 2, 1993, §§ 1-6, enacted provisions pertaining to maintenance of private property. Such provisions, being undesignated, have been codified by the editor as Art. V, §§ 10-91-10-95. 

Sec. 10-91. - Overgrown, unkempt conditions; inspection and report. 
    The city building inspector, in consultation with the mayor and other city officials, shall be charged with responsibility for periodic routine inspection of all areas of the city to determine if there are parcels which, because of their overgrown and untended condition, pose a threat to the health and welfare of the residents of the city, and to report the parcel identified by address or otherwise and the name and address of the owner thereof to the mayor. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93, § 1) 
Sec. 10-92. - Notice to owner; time limitation for remedy. 
    Should the mayor concur in the finding of the building inspector that the condition of the property constitutes a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the city, he shall cause to be hand-delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the owner stating the condition of the property and directing that the situation be remedied within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93, § 2) 
Sec. 10-93. - Failure of owner to act; remedy by city at owner's expense. 
    Upon the expiration of ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice by the owner, the building inspector or the mayor shall make an inspection of the property to determine if the condition has been properly corrected. In the event the problem remains uncorrected, the city may immediately proceed to rectify the problem through the use of city equipment and employees, and accurate records of the equipment and personnel performing such work shall be kept. The actual cost of performing such work shall be computed using prevailing rates for similar services existing at the time in the private sector, and a statement for such work shall be made up and sent or delivered to the owner, making demand that said statement be paid in full within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93, § 3) 
Sec. 10-94. - Collection of unsatisfied amount. 
    In the event any such statements remain unsatisfied thirty (30) days after receipt thereof by the owner, the city may proceed to collect such amounts by all appropriate legal means including proceedings in a court of law. 
(Ord, of 11-2-93, § 4) 
Sec. 10-95. - Posting of notice in lieu of hand/mail delivery. 
    In the event, for any reason, the owner of the property cannot be located or cannot be actually served with the notices contemplated herein, it shall be deemed sufficient for the notices to be posted on the property by the building inspector or other city official designated by the mayor for a period of seven (7) days. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93, § 5) 
Sec. 10-96. - Repeat occurrence. 
    Should any particular parcel of property, at any time within one (1) calendar year period, require action under this article by the city more than once, then the second notice to the owner may contain language that the city will continue to monitor the condition of the property and take all necessary steps on a recurring basis to maintain the property in a condition that would protect and preserve the public health and welfare and would continue to seek reimbursement for such efforts, and that such steps would continue to be taken without further additional notice to the owner. Upon the sending of such notice, no further notice of intention to perform work on the parcel in question shall be necessary; however, statements for the work performed shall continue to be sent immediately upon completion of any such additional work. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93, § 6) 
Sec. 10-97. - Additional abatement procedures. 
(a)  The city, acting through this board is authorized on its own motion, or upon the receipt of a petition requesting the municipal authority to so act signed by a majority of the residents residing within four hundred (400) feet of any parcel of land alleged to be in need of cleaning, to give notice to the property owner by U.S. mail two (2) weeks before the date of a hearing, or by service of notice as provided in this section by a police officer at least two (2) weeks before the date of a hearing, or if the property owner or his address is unknown, then by two (2) weeks' notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality, of a hearing to determine whether or not the property or land is in such a state of uncleanliness as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community. If, at such hearing, the board shall adjudicate the property or land in its then condition to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community, the governing authority shall, if the owner does not do so himself, proceed to clean the land, by the use of municipal employees or by contract, by cutting weeds; filling cisterns; removing rubbish, dilapidated fences, outside toilets, dilapidated buildings and other debris; and draining cesspools and standing water therefrom. Thereafter, the mayor and board may, at its next regular meeting, by resolution adjudicate the actual cost of cleaning the property and may also impose a penalty of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or fifty (50) percent of such actual cost, whichever is more. The cost and any penalty may become a civil debt against the property owner, or, at the option of the board, an assessment against the property. The cost assessed against the property means the cost of the municipality of using its own employees to do the work or the cost to the municipality of any contract executed by the municipality to have the work done. The action herein authorized shall not be undertaken against any one (1) parcel of land more than six (6) times in any one (1) calendar year, and the expense of cleaning of said property shall not exceed an aggregate amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per year, or the fair market value of the property subsequent to cleaning, whichever is less. If it is determined by the board that it is necessary to clean any property or land more than once within a calendar year, then the municipality may clean it provided notice to the property owner is given by United States mail to the last known address at least ten (10) days before cleaning the property. The board may assess the same penalty for each time the property or land is cleaned as otherwise provided in this section. The penalty provided herein shall not be assessed against the State of Mississippi upon request for reimbursement under Section 29-1-145, nor shall a municipality clean a parcel owned by the State of Mississippi without first giving notice. 
(b)  In the event the board declares, by resolution, that the cost and any penalty shall be collected as a civil debt, the board may authorize the institution of a suit on open account against the owner of the property in a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law for the cost and any penalty, plus court costs, reasonable attorney's fees and interest from the date that the property was cleaned. 
(c)  In the event that the board does not declare that the cost and any penalty shall be collected as a civil debt, then the assessment above provided for shall be a lien against the property and may be enrolled in the office of the circuit clerk of the county as other judgments are enrolled, and the tax collector of the municipality shall, upon order of the board, proceed to sell the land to satisfy the lien as now provided by law for the sale of lands for delinquent municipal taxes. 
(d)  All decisions rendered under the provisions of this section may be appealed in the same manner as other appeals from municipal boards or courts are taken. 
(e)  The police officer's return on the notice may be in one (1) of the following forms: 
(1)  Form of personal notice: 
"I have this day delivered the within notice personally, by delivering to the within named property owner, ____________ (here state name of party summoned), a true copy of this notice. 
This, the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ (Police Officer)" 
(2)  Form of notice where copy left at residence: 
"I have this day delivered the within notice to ____________ , within named property owner, by leaving a true copy of the same at his (or her) usual place of abode in my municipality, with ____________ , his (or her) (here insert wife, husband, son, daughter or some other person, as the case may be), ____________ a member of his (or her) family above the age of sixteen (16) years, and willing to receive such copy. The said property owner is not found in my municipality. 
This, the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ (Police Officer)" 
(3)  Form of return when property owner not found within municipality and is a nonresident thereof: 
"I have this day attempted to deliver the within notice to ____________ , the within named property owner, and after diligent search and inquiry, I failed to find the same property owner within my municipality, nor could I ascertain the location of any residence of the property owner within my municipality. 
This, the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ (Police Officer)" 
    The first mode of notice should be made, if it can be; if not, then the second mode should be made, if it can be; and the return of the second mode of service must negate the officer's ability to make the first. If neither the first not second mode of service can be made, then the third mode should be made, and the return thereof must negate the officer's ability to make both the first and second. In the event the third mode of service is made, then service shall also be made by publication as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  The officer shall mark on all notices the day of the receipt thereof by him, and he shall return the same on or before the day of the hearing, with a written statement of his proceedings thereon. For failing to note the time of the receipt of notice or for failing to return the same, the officer shall forfeit to the party aggrieved the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(g)  Nothing contained under this section shall prevent any municipality from enacting criminal penalties for failure to maintain property so as not to constitute a menace to public health, safety and welfare. 
(h)  Conflicting ordinances. Where in conflict with any other ordinance of the city, this section shall supersede all other ordinances, rules and regulations and codes adopted by the city relative to the matters addressed in this section. However, where not in conflict, this section shall be in addition to, and not in place of such other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99; Ord. of 7-18-2005) 
Sec. 10-98. - Abatement procedures against the storage or accumulation of abandoned and/or junk motor vehicles within the city limits. 
(a)  The storage and accumulation of abandoned and/or junk motor vehicles shall be prohibited within the city limits except where such vehicles are located within completely enclosed buildings or garages or at vehicle salvage yards, vehicle repair shops and wrecker services. Within a residentially zoned district, no more than two (2) abandoned or junk vehicles may be stored on each separate lot or tract of property. The terms "abandoned or junk motor vehicles" for the purposes of this section are hereby defined as any motor vehicle which cannot be driven on the public streets for reasons, including but not limited to, the absence of current licenses plates and safety inspection stickers, being wrecked or one which is incapable of moving under its own power and has been in such a state of disrepair for a minimum of thirty (30) days. Within a residential zoning district, abandoned and/or junk vehicles may be stored within a building enclosed in all four (4) sides or behind opaque fencing so long as the same obscures a view of the vehicle from all surrounding property and the public streets. This section further prohibits any garage, salvage yard or wrecker service from taking an inoperable motor vehicle from the site where it has been involved in a collision and transporting it to any place where this section makes the storage of the same unlawful. 
(b)  Enforcement responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this section with the assistance of the police department if need be. The building inspector shall report, on a regular basis, to the mayor and board of aldermen regarding his activities under this section. 
(c)  Notice of violation and citation procedures. 
(1)  Notice of violation and opportunity to cure: The building inspector shall be responsible for the periodic routine inspection of all areas of the city to determine if any violations of this section exist. Upon a determination that an owner and/or occupier of real property is in violation of the provisions of this section, the city shall immediately notify that person of the violation. If the owner and occupier of the real property are not the same person, notice shall be given to both parties. Further, the city shall take all reasonable steps to ascertain the record titleholder to the abandoned and/or junk motor vehicle in question. If that person is not the owner or occupier of the real property in question, all reasonable efforts shall be made to notify the record title holder of the motor vehicle. Notice of violation under this section shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery to the person or persons having an interest in this matter or by first class mail to the address of the subject property and to the last known address of the owner of the real property if the property is not occupied by the owner, and to the last known address of the record title holder of the motor vehicle if different from either the owner or occupier of the real property. The notice of violation shall direct this person or these persons to correct the violation with ten (10) days of the date of receipt of such notice. The notice must also inform these persons of the possible civil and criminal penalties which may be assessed against them. Further, a brightly colored sign, being no smaller than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size shall be taped or otherwise affixed to the offending vehicle or vehicles. This sign shall notify those reading the same of the violation of the applicable city code section and shall give the name and telephone number of the city building inspector charged with enforcing the ordinances. If the violation is corrected within the time specified in the notice, the city shall take no further action until additional violations occur. 
(2)  Liability for violation: Any person who, alter having been given notice pursuant to subsection (1), does not correct the violation within the specified time period stated in the notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to the provision of section 1-8 of the Code of the city. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(3)  Notice of hearing. Those persons charged with a violation of this section shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the mayor and board of aldermen at the next regular meeting of the mayor and board, the same being held on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. in the board room located at the City Hall of New Albany, Mississippi. This hearing shall take place at the next regular board meeting following the expiration of the ten-day opportunity to cure the violation set forth in subsection (c)(1) at such hearing, the person alleged to be in violation of this section shall be given the opportunity to explain why he or she is not in violation of the ordinance and why the subject automobile should not be removed. Following this, the mayor and board of aldermen will make a determination as to whether or not a violation has occurred. In the event the mayor and board determine that a violation of the ordinance has occurred, the violator will be given an additional ten (10) days from the date of hearing to correct the violation. Notice of the right to such hearing shall be included in the notice of violation set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
In addition, once a person has received notice of a violation so as to come into compliance with the provision of this section, the city shall be empowered to enter upon the property upon which the offending vehicle(s) is located and may, through the use of municipal employees or by contract, remove any vehicle(s) determined to be in violation. The city may, at its option, and depending upon the particular circumstances involved in the violation, charge the costs of removal and disposal of such abandoned and/or junk vehicles and any fine imposed may be subject to being collected against the owner and/or occupier of the real property or the record title holder to the subject motor vehicle as a civil debt. It the particular circumstances of the violation warrant the same, the board, at its option, may enter the costs of removal, disposal and fine as an assessment against the real property. This assessment shall be a lien against the real property and may be enrolled in the office of the circuit clerk of the county as other judgments are enrolled and the tax collector of the municipality shall, upon order of the board, proceed to sell the land to satisfy the lien as now provided by law for the sale of lands for delinquent municipal taxes. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2001; Ord. of 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 10-99. - Outdoor furniture restriction; defenses. 
(1)  Keeping upholstered furniture which is not manufactured for outdoor use in outdoor areas where such furniture is visible to neighbors and passersby in the public right-of-way is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Accordingly, no person shall place, use, keep, store or maintain any upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, without limitation, upholstered chairs, upholstered couches and mattresses, in or on any porch, patio or other unenclosed structure where such furniture is visible from a public right-of-way or from the ground level of adjacent property, and no property owner or property manager shall knowingly permit any such activity to occur on property owned or managed by such person. 
(2)  The following shall constitute specific defenses to any alleged violation of this section: 
(a)  That such furniture was placed in the location in question in order to allow it to be moved during a move of a resident or residents of the premises or has been removed as part of a trash or recycling program on a day scheduled for such moving or removal. 
(b)  That such furniture was temporarily placed in the location in question in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage sale if each of the following conditions exists; provided, however, that this defense shall not apply if upholstered furniture is located in an outside location for more than two (2) days in any six-month period: 
(i)  The furniture is located in an outside location only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(ii)  The person attempting to sell the furniture, or that person's agent, is outside during the period of the yard or garage sale in order to monitor the sale; and 
(iii)  A sign is placed on or near the furniture indicating that it is for sale. 
(3)  A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus any assessments. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section; however, the New Albany Municipal Court shall have full authority to enforce its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(4)  The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2012) 
Chapter 11 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License to operate mobile home park, § 12-67; peddlers, Ch. 15; taxicabs, § 20-21 et seq.; franchises, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL PRIVILEGE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Permit fee for shows, circuses, etc., § 5-22; annual license tax for poolrooms and billiard halls, § 5-98; licenses and bonds for builders and contractors, § 7-6; mobile home parks, § 12-19 et seq.; peddlers, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Local privilege tax law, Miss. Code Ann. § 27-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-21. - Adoption of state local privilege tax code. 
    The state local privilege tax code, Mississippi Code Annotated 1972, Sections 27-17-1 through 27-17-5, is hereby adopted, levied and imposed as the privilege tax code of the city. 
Sec. 11-22. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and imprisonment shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any particular section of this article or applicable provision of state law. 
(b)  Any person failing to pay the privilege taxes imposed by this article and to obtain a license as required, but pursuing the business for which a privilege tax is imposed, may be proceeded against by suit, in addition to being dealt with criminally. The tax collector may seize and sell any property of such person liable for such tax and penalty, in the same manner as he may distrain and sell property of delinquent taxpayers for the payment of ad valorem taxes due on personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-521. 
Sec. 11-23. - Application of other provisions. 
    All privilege licenses provided for by this article shall be granted subject to any other applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 11-24. - Collection, payment of taxes generally. 
    The tax collector shall collect, and all persons liable therefor shall pay to the tax collector, all privilege taxes levied and imposed by the provisions of this article before commencing the business for which a privilege tax is required, and annually thereafter. 
State Law reference- Where license obtained, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-451; application, § 27-17-453. 
Sec. 11-25. - Tax collector to issue privilege license. 
    The tax collector shall, upon payment of the privilege tax levied and imposed by this article, issue a privilege license evidencing such payment. 
State Law reference- Issuance of license, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-455. 
Sec. 11-26. - Payment of tax, issuance of license not to make lawful any business transactions, etc. 
    The issuance of a privilege license, and the payment of a tax therefor, shall not make lawful any business, employment, transaction, article or device, or the operation thereof, contrary to any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-473. 
Sec. 11-27. - Separate businesses, locations. 
    Any person engaging in more than one of the businesses for which a privilege tax is imposed shall pay separately the privilege tax imposed upon each separate business, except as may be otherwise specifically provided by the privilege tax code. Also, if the business taxed is carried on at two (2) or more separate locations or places, a separate license for each location of such business shall be obtained. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss Code Ann. § 27-17-459. 
Sec. 11-28. - Effect of change in nature of business. 
    When a privilege license is issued under the provisions of this article to carry on a certain line of business, and if, after the issuance of the license, the licensee shall so change or alter his business as to bring under a classification for which a higher license tax is required, before making such change, he shall deliver his license to the tax collector, together with a written and signed statement as to the nature of such proposed change, and shall pay to the tax collector the proper additional license tax. The tax collector shall thereupon cancel the old license and shall issue to the licensee a new and appropriate license. 
State Law reference- License to be taken out an increased business, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-461. 
Sec. 11-29. - Display, possession of privilege license. 
    Each privilege license issued under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous part of the place of business for which the license was issued. In the event the licensee does not have a fixed, permanent location, or in the event the business is such that the license cannot be displayed as required by this section, the licensee shall have such license in his actual possession at the time of carrying on such business. Every automatic vending machine for which a license is issued shall have such license conspicuously attached thereto. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-469. 
Sec. 11-30. - Transferability of license. 
    All privilege licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable to any other person or location. 
State Law reference- Transferability, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-17-471. 
Sec. 11-31. - Duty of licensee to furnish information. 
    Any person licensed pursuant to this article, when duly and legally directed by the mayor and board of aldermen to produce and exhibit to the board any information or statement in connection with the use or sale of any object or thing subject to regulation by the city, shall produce or exhibit such information or statement. 
Sec. 11-32. - Duration of privilege licenses. 
    Pursuant to authority contained in section 27-17-463 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, it is hereby ordained that all privilege licenses issued to businesses by the City of New Albany pursuant to state laws pertaining thereto shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 7-5-88, § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 5, 1988, § 1, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as § 11-32 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 11-33-11-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE, ETC., SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory provisions enacted in an ordinance adopted Apr. 6, 1982, §§ 1-4, have been included herein as Art. III, §§ 11-41-11-44, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 11-41. - Frequency of sales. 
    Individuals, businesses or other entities may conduct garage, yard, rummage, or other similar outdoor sales within the city limits of the City of New Albany, regardless of the zoning type of the land on which the sale is to be held, but such sales shall not be conducted more frequently than once every ninety (90) days. Further, no such sale shall occur without the consent of the land owner(s) and tenants. If such sale is to occur on property zoned commercial or industrial, no such sale shall occur without the express written consent of the owner(s) and all tenants of the property, including any tenants sharing a parking lot within which such sale is to occur. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-15) 
Sec. 11-42. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained by each individual, business or other entity desiring to conduct such sales, rather than a single permit for each location, from the city clerk's office during normal business hours, and no garage, yard, rummage or home sale may be conducted without such a permit. The permit fee for sales to be held on residential [property] shall be five dollars ($5.00). The permit fee for sales to be held on commercial or industrial property shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). Permit fees shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall keep a record of the permits issued. Permits will not be issued to any individual or business entity for separate locations more frequently than every ninety (90) days. 
(b)  (1)  A person present at such sales shall be deemed as conducting a sale if they sell items owned by them or consigned to them or if they sell merchandise for commissions on such sales. 
(2)  Persons merely assisting a person, business or entity conducting a sale for no remuneration or for hourly wages from the permit holder, and not otherwise in violation of paragraph (b)(1), shall not be deemed as conducting a sale so long as the permit holder is present. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 2; Ord. of 10-6-15) 
Sec. 11-43. - Duration of sale; prohibited on Sunday. 
    Permits when issued shall authorize the sale, generally for a weekend, or for a period not to exceed three (3) days, and no sales shall be authorized on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 3) 
Sec. 11-44. - Violation; penalty. 
    Sales conducted without the issuance of a permit and without complying with the terms of this article shall be in violation of the article and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 4-6-82, § 4) 
Secs. 11-45-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TATTOO PARLORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 13, 1993, §§ 1-4, enacted provisions pertaining to permits for tattoo parlors. Such provisions did not specify manner of codification, but have been designated by the editor as Art. IV, §§ 11-51-11-54. 

Sec. 11-51. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article, a "tattoo parlor" shall be defined as any business which provides or offers the service of marking or coloring the skin of human beings by the insertion of pigments, inks, dyes or similar materials under the skin by the use of a needle or other intrusive procedure of like nature. 
(Ord. of 9-13-93, § 1) 
Sec. 11-52. - Inspection prerequisite to permitting. 
    Tattoo parlors shall, as a prerequisite to the issuance of business permit by the city clerk's office, file with the clerk a written statement signed by a medical doctor licensed to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi that such doctor has made an inspection of the premises and equipment proposed to be used in the business and has reviewed the techniques and procedures proposed to be used in the practice of tattooing and that, based upon such inspection and analysis, it would appear that the business is reasonably safe and reliable to provide tattooing services to the public without undue risk to the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 9-13-93, § 2) 
Sec. 11-53. - Bond. 
    Further, as a prerequisite to the issuance of such business permit, the applicant shall furnish a bond in standard form in favor of the city for the benefit of the patrons of said establishment in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to secure the prompt payment of any medical costs and associated damages incurred by any such patron as a result of any infection or other personal injury arising out of improper procedures in the tattooing process. 
(Ord. of 9-13-93, § 3) 
Sec. 11-54. - Term of permit and certificate. 
    The certificate set forth in section 11-52 hereof shall be deemed of six (6) month's duration, and any permit issued in relation thereon shall be deemed to automatically expire after six (6) months unless an updated certificate of similar nature dated within thirty (30) days of the expiration date is filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-13-93, § 4) 
Sec. 11-55. - Zoning district where allowed. 
    All tattoo parlors as defined herein shall be located in areas zoned I-1 (Industrial). 
(Ord. of 9-13-93, § 5) 
Secs. 11-56-11-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREE TRIMMING SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Mar. 17, 1994, §§ 1-5, enacted provisions pertaining to tree trimming services. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification, but has been designated by the editor as Art. V, §§ 11-61-11-65. 

Sec. 11-61. - Permit required. 
    Any person or other legal entity engaged in the business of tree trimming, tree pruning, tree removal and related services offering its services to the general public shall, prior to commencing such business, obtain a permit from the office of the city clerk. Upon the filing of an application for such permit, the clerk shall refer the application to the city building inspector who shall conduct appropriate inquiry into the training, experience and business history of the applicant and shall approve the application upon a finding that the applicant appears to have the skill and business integrity to perform such services without undue risk of injury to persons or property. An adverse finding by the building inspector shall be in writing and state the specific basis for the adverse finding and such determination may be appealed to the mayor and board of aldermen who shall conduct such further inquiry as necessary and rule on the appealed decision. 
(Ord. of 3-17-94, § 1) 
Sec. 11-62. - Bond. 
    Assuming approval of the applicant by the building inspector, or the mayor and board of aldermen in the event of an appeal, the applicant shall, prior to commencing business, post a performance bond in standard form with satisfactory sureties in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in favor of the city for the benefit of those citizens engaging the applicant's services to cover any loss, damage or injury occasioned by the actions of the applicant in performing services. 
(Ord. of 3-17-94, § 2) 
Sec. 11-63. - Administrative fee. 
    The fee for the investigation contemplated by section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) payable in advance and shall be in addition to any privilege license fees required under any other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 3-17-94, § 3) 
Sec. 11-64. - Term of permit; renewal review. 
    Permits granted under this article shall be of one (1) year's duration and must be renewed by appropriate application. The building inspector shall keep a file of complaints, inquiries and related matters pertaining to each entity licensed under this article which shall be reviewed and considered for appropriate action at the time of renewal of any permit. 
(Ord. of 3-17-94, § 4) 
Sec. 11-65. - Work involving city property; bond recovery for damages. 
    Any work performed under license obtained under this article that poses the potential damage to utility poles, lines, or related equipment belonging to any city utility shall be undertaken only after consultation with an appropriate representative of the city utility. Damages or loss to city property arising out of work or procedures undertaken in violation of this section shall be specifically recoverable by the city under the bond contemplated in section 11-62. 
(Ord. of 3-17-94, § 5) 
Secs. 11-66-11-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS FOR DISPLAY FOR SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES, MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT, BOATS, TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND CAMPERS 

Sec. 11-70. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    In this article: 
    Dwelling, single-family shall mean a building designed for or used for residence purposes by one (1) family or housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family shall mean a building designed for or used for two (2) families or housekeeping units. 
    Owner shall mean a person, persons or legal entity listed as the current title holder of real property, as recorded in the official records of the Office of the Union County Chancery Clerk. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility cooperative, interstate body or other legal entity. 
    Right-of-way shall mean an area owned or maintained by the City of New Albany, the State of Mississippi, a public utility, or a private concern for the placement of such utilities and/or facilities for the passage of vehicles or pedestrians, including roads and streets, pedestrian walkways, and utilities. 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Sec. 11-71. - Unlawful display. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park and display for sale upon a public right-of-way or other public property, or upon vacant or improved private property, any motor vehicle, salvage vehicle, motorized equipment, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle or camper (collectively referred to as "vehicle" or "vehicles") having displayed thereon any writing indicating such vehicle is for sale. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, any vehicle found to be parked on public right-of-way or public property in violation of this article may be towed away and impounded at the vehicle owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Sec. 11-72. - Exemption clause. 
    Neither this article nor any provision thereof shall apply to any person properly licensed to engage in the business of selling vehicles as defined herein and engaging in said business only at the location designated upon such license, or to any person undertaking business activity incidental to the primary purpose of conducting the business to which they hold a valid license. 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Sec. 11-73. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Sec. 11-74. - Each violation a separate offense. 
    Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Sec. 11-75. - Permits required. 
    Any person holding a license to operate a business or resident of a single or two-family dwelling shall have the right to park and display for sale on the premises of his business or residence a vehicle as defined herein upon issuance of a permit from the code enforcement office under the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle upon the vehicle owner producing proof of ownership of the subject vehicle. 
(2)  If displayed on residential property, the owner of the vehicle must also provide proof of residency for the property upon which the subject vehicle will be displayed. If displayed on commercial property, written authorization of the business owner to park and display the subject vehicle for sale on his property is required. 
(3)  The permit shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days from and after issuance of the permit and the permit shall be displayed on the front dashboard of the subject vehicle in a manner that is readily visible. 
(4)  No more than two (2) vehicles shall be offered for sale in this manner at any location at any given time and no more than four (4) vehicles shall be offered for sale in this manner at any location during a twelve-month period. 
(5)  The cost of the permit is five dollars ($5.00) for a residence and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a business. This cost is nonrefundable. The code enforcement [office] shall keep records of all permits issued each year reflecting the identity of both the vehicle owner and property at which the vehicle shall be offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 6-5-18(2)) 
Chapter 12 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; garbage and trash, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 21; 
State Law reference- Movable homes, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 75-49-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "New Albany Mobile Home Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to control development of mobile home parks to insure the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of these areas and to prohibit the placement of mobile homes in the city on any property other than authorized mobile home parks. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Accessory building use: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises. 
    Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Easement: A grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation, or a person of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
    Family: A group of one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel. 
    Frontage: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Mobile home: A single-family dwelling unit that has the following characteristics: 
(1)  Designed for long-term occupancy containing sleeping accommodations, flush toilet, tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(2)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, flat bed, other trailers or detachable wheels. 
(3)  Arrives at site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete with major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
(4)  Does not include any vehicle sold for recreational purposes unless the vehicle is set up for permanent occupancy. 
    Mobile home park: A mobile home park is any parcel of land upon which three (3) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, if a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Mobile home space: A mobile home space means the area within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Parking space: A surfaced area, either paved, crushed stone or gravel, having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile, and connected with a street or alley by a surface driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles. 
    Planning commission: The mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
    Public sewage system: A system serving two (2) or more dwelling units and approved by the state health department or the county health department. 
    Public water supply: A system serving three (3) or more dwelling units and approved by the state health department or the county health department. 
    Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Tourist or travel trailer camp: An area where one or more tents or auto trailers can be or are intended to be parked, designed or intended to be used as temporary living facilities by one or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients. 
    Trailer: A vehicle other than a motor vehicle, designed or intended for use for dwelling purposes, whether or not such vehicle is attached to or resting on the ground or something having a location on the ground. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between a mobile home or building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front: A yard extending across the front of a lot oriented to the front of the mobile home and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot oriented to the rear of the mobile home and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On all lots, the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
    Yard, side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.4) 
Sec. 12-4. - Application of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to existing mobile home parks and mobile homes and to future mobile home parks; provided, however, that sections 12-19 and 12-22 and Division 2 of Article II shall be applicable to new construction, alterations and extensions of mobile home parks which occur after December 6, 1977. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.3) 
Sec. 12-5. - Variances from chapter generally. 
    Where the planning commission finds that individuals are affected by extraordinary hardships which may result from strict compliance with the regulations set out in this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of such regulations. In granting variances, the planning commission may require such conditions that are necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
    When a citizen requests a variance under this chapter and section wherein they seek approval to place a mobile home in an area not designated as a mobile home park, this shall be known as a "hardship request" and the office of the building inspector of the city shall provide an application form to be completed by the applicant, upon the face of which certain restrictions are clearly shown. These restrictions shall be as follows: 
(1)  The mobile home shall have a minimum length of fifty (50) feet and a maximum width of twelve (12) feet. 
(2)  The mobile home may only be placed in the back yard of the dwelling which will be adjacent to the mobile home. 
(3)  The mobile home must be moved within thirty (30) days after the "hardship status" ceases to exist by reason of death or otherwise. 
(4)  A reinspection will be made on an annual basis to re-evaluate the hardship status of variances granted under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.8; Ord. of 11-4-97) 
Sec. 12-6. - Variance with respect to mobile homes located outside mobile home park. 
    Any person desiring to establish, construct, erect, locate, keep or maintain a mobile home within the city other than in an area in a mobile home park specifically permitted, may petition the mayor and board of aldermen for an exception or variance from the provisions of this chapter, and upon good cause shown for so doing, the mayor and board of aldermen may grant such exception or variation after first determining that such exception or variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent property or impair established property values within the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.9) 
Sec. 12-7. - Notice of and hearings concerning alleged violations of chapter. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the planning commission shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance. 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires. 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require. Provided : That such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by personal service by a city policeman or by publication, if a nonresident. The general publication statute shall be followed for nonresidents. 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the planning commission; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the planning commission a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension. Upon receipt of such petition, the planning commission shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  After such hearing, the planning commission shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in subsection (a) (4) above. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing a notice, the license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.10) 
Sec. 12-8. - Amendments to chapter. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen may from time to time adopt amendments that will tend to increase the effectiveness of the regulations set out in this chapter. The mobile home regulations may be revised or amended by the mayor and board of aldermen as required by law. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.12) 
Secs. 12-9-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Approval of location; compliance with article. 
    A mobile home park or travel trailer park may be located anywhere within the incorporated area of the city, provided its location is approved by the planning commission. Its location, design, layout and management must conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.1.1) 
Sec. 12-20. - Permit to construct, alter or extend; inspection of work. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home park, the developer shall obtain from the building inspector a construction permit. This permit authorizes the construction of only those improvements or facilities for which final plans have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. The fee charged for said permit shall be based on the cost of the installation at the current, established rates for building permit fees. Such fee shall be used to defray the cost of inspection of the improvements during the construction period. One inspection shall be made before permanent improvements are put in and another inspection made after the installation of improvements. 
(b)  In addition to the inspections provided for herein, the developer shall arrange for inspections by the state board of health. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, §§ 1.5.1, 1.7) 
Sec. 12-21. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to administer any mobile home park within the designated areas of the city, unless he holds a valid license issued by the city in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. Applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk. The license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the mobile home park. License applications for mobile home parks developed or extended after December 6, 1977, shall be accompanied with a copy of the mobile home park plans, as required in this article. The license shall be annually renewable by or on July first the first year and the annual date of issue thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.6) 
Sec. 12-22. - Permitted uses generally. 
    All buildings and land within a mobile home park shall be limited to the following uses: 
(1)  Mobile homes. 
(2)  Accessory buildings customarily incidental and subordinate to the use of mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.1.2) 
Sec. 12-23. - Permit to place mobile home within park. 
    Before a mobile home is placed in a licensed mobile home park, a permit must be obtained from the building inspector. Once a mobile home has received a permit to locate in a mobile home park, it shall not be necessary to obtain an additional permit for relocation in that mobile home park. The fee for such permit shall be five dollars ($5.00) per mobile home. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 1.5.2) 
Secs. 12-24-12-28. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-29. - Plans showing intent to comply with division. 
    Plans clearly indicating the developer's intention to comply with the provisions of this division shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission. Such plans must be drawn to a scale of not less than 1"=50'. Such plans must show the area to be used for the proposed mobile home park; the ownership and use of neighboring properties, all proposed entrances, exits, driveways, walkways and off-street parking spaces ; the location of mobile home lots, recreation areas and service buildings ; the location of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, laundries and refuse receptacles; and the proposed plan of water supply, sewage disposal and electric lighting. The planning commission shall have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and safeguards on the proposed development as it deems necessary for the protection of adjoining properties and the public interest. Dimensions must be shown of land and all lots and improvements within the mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.8) 
Sec. 12-30. - Mobile homes to occupy designated lots; minimum widths of lots. 
(a)  Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall occupy a designated lot area. 
(b)  Each mobile home lot shall have a width of at least forty (40) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, §§ 2.2.1, 2.2.2) 
Sec. 12-31. - Density of occupancy. 
    The density of occupancy of a mobile home park shall be no greater than eight (8) mobile homes per gross acre. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.4) 
Sec. 12-32. - Buffer zones. 
    A five (5) foot buffer zone shall be provided on the rear and side boundary lines of a mobile home park and a thirty-five (35) foot buffer zone shall border the street or right-of-way line on which the property fronts. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.5) 
Sec. 12-33. - Setback lines for mobile homes. 
    The minimum front yard setback line for mobile homes shall be ten (10) feet and the minimum side yard setback shall also be ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.6) 
Sec. 12-34. - Water and sewerage systems. 
    The water system and sewerage system in a mobile home park shall be approved by the state board of health. Water and sewerage plans must be reviewed by the city water and light department manager and a letter of approval submitted with the mobile home park plans. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.3) 
Sec. 12-35. - Streets. 
    All streets within a mobile home park shall be forty (40) feet in width. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate surface drainage. All streets shall either be paved, meeting the specifications of the city subdivision ordinances, or shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.7) 
Sec. 12-36. - Blocking, anchors and tie downs. 
    The minimum standards for blocking, anchors and tie downs in mobile home parks shall be the rules and regulations of the mobile home division of the state fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. of 12-6-77, § 2.2.9) 
Chapter 12.5 - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 12.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Mosquito Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 1) 
Sec. 12.5-2. - Definitions. 
    Any collection of water considered in this chapter shall be held to be that contained in ditches, pools, ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, tires, receptacles of any kind or other containers or devices which may hold water. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 2) 
Sec. 12.5-3. - Right of entry to enforce chapter. 
    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the health officer or his representative, or the mayor or his representative, acting under their respective authorities, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within their jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 7) 
Sec. 12.5-4. - Treatment of collections of water required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep maintain, cause or permit, within the limits of the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 3) 
Sec. 12.5-5. - Methods of treatment; regulations of health officer. 
    The methods used or treatment directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes in collections of water shall be of a type approved by the health officer. The health officer shall, from time to time, issue mosquito control regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 4) 
Sec. 12-5.6. - Failure to prevent breeding after notice to do so-Generally. 
    The presence of mosquito larvae in collections of water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice by the health officer or his authorized representative, or the mayor or his authorized representative, be it policeman, housing inspector or street supervisor, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 5) 
Sec. 12.5-7. - Same-Corrective action by city. 
    Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three (3) days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his representative, or the mayor or his representative, is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 8-20-76, § 6) 
Chapter 13 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Placing handbills on or in vehicles or handing same to drivers thereof, § 3-27; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18; hedge or shrubbery on corner lots, § 18-9; riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 18-11; vehicles for hire, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 63-1-1 et seq.; enactment of traffic regulations by local authorities, § 63-3-211. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Provisions of state law adopted; local variances. 
    The provisions of Title 63 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, insofar as the same are applicable within the city and consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, are hereby adopted by the city and made applicable within the city; provided, however, where there are permissible variances between state and local regulations, local regulations shall prevail. 
Secs. 13-2-13-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic regulations and rules of the road, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 63-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-22. - Operation of commercial trucks on portion of Bank-head Street. 
    No person shall operate or have operated any commercial truck, other than farm trucks, on Bankhead Street (former United States Highway 78) from its intersection with the east corporate limits of the city westward through the business section of the city across the Tallahatchie River bridge and to its intersection with present United States Highway 78, unless such truck has cargo to deliver or pick up within the city which, for the purpose of egress and ingress, would require the use of said portion of Bankhead Street. 
(Ord. of 1-4-72, § 1) 
Sec. 13-23. - Operation of vehicles exceeding five tons over certain streets. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated, frequently or regularly, any motor vehicle weighing over five (5) tons, loaded or unloaded, on any street within the city other than the following streets: 
Apple, Washington, Wilbanks, Main, Carter, Cleveland, Highland, North, Central, and all streets or alleys in the city which are a portion of a United States or state highway, Randolph, Snyder, McGill, Summer, Winter and Collins, Wilson and Clark. 
This subsection shall apply to the owner or person having control over the prohibited vehicle and shall also apply to the operator or driver thereof. 
(b)  There is excepted from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section the occasional or necessary use of the prohibited streets for individual trips of motor vehicles exceeding the five (5) ton weight limit for the purpose of loading or unloading their cargo. 
(Ord. of 3-2-71, §§ 1, 3, 4) 
Secs. 13-24-13-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 63-3-901. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-44. - Parking or stopping motor tractors or truck trailers on certain streets. 
    No person shall park or stop any motor tractor or any truck trailer, connected or disconnected, on Oak Street, on either side, from the intersection of Oak Street and Camp Avenue east to the intersection of Oak Street and Central Avenue; on Camp Avenue, on either side thereof, from the intersection of Camp Avenue and Main Street south to the intersection of Camp Avenue with the east right-of-way line of the Gulf, Mobile & Ohio Railroad Company; and on Railroad Avenue, on either side, from the intersection of Railroad Avenue and Main Street south across the tracks of said railroad to the intersection of Railroad Avenue with Camp Avenue; provided, however, that this prohibi tion shall not apply to the temporary parking or stopping of said described vehicles or trailers for the purpose of loading or unloading. 
(Ord. of 11-3-70, § 1) 
Sec. 13-45. - Limited parking in certain zones. 
(a)  Whenever in this section the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Street. Every way set apart for public travel except alleys. 
(2)  Vehicle. Every conveyance using the public streets, except emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Parking zones. That portion of streets designated and established as zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be limited, regulated and controlled and inspected by a member of the police department. 
(b)  Short term parking of vehicles shall be limited, regulated and controlled and inspected in the manner hereinafter prescribed in the following described zone. 
Bankhead Street and Main Street, beginning at the intersection of each such street with Court Avenue and continuing westwardly until each such street reaches the east side of the Tallahatchie River Bridge; and Railroad Avenue from its intersection with Bankhead Street northwardly until it intersects the south line of Highland Street. 
(c)  Lines or markings shall be plainly painted upon the streets in the parking zone, designating the parking space for each vehicle to use and each vehicle parked shall be parked within such lines or markings. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park any vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle operated or controlled by such person to be upon any street within a parking zone for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday. Any person causing, allowing, permitting or suffering his vehicle to remain in any space for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive minutes in violation of the subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first offense, and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent offense committed within a year of the date of the first offense. 
(Ord. of 4-4-78, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 10-6-15) 
Sec. 13-46. - Commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
    No commercial vehicle rated greater than three-quarter (3/4) ton, bus, trailer, exceeding fifteen (15) feet in length, tractor or heavy equipment such as bulldozers and road graders shall be parked or stored in any R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts within the city. Recreational vehicles, boats, campers shall not be parked or stored in the front yard except in a paved driveway and shall not be used for sleeping quarters while in such residential district for a period greater than fifteen (15) days per year. 
(Ord. of 10-21-97, § 1; Amend. of 1-19-06; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Secs. 13-47-13-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to provide parking meters, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-37-29. 

Sec. 13-65. - "Parking meter zone" defined. 
    For the purposes of this division, the phrase "parking meter zone" shall mean a portion of a street described and established as a zone within which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of timing devices or meters. 
Sec. 13-66. - Provisions declared cumulative. 
    This division shall be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city regulating traffic and traffic conditions except as to provisions of such other ordinances as are in conflict with or inconsistent with this division. 
Sec. 13-67. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-68. - Establishment of zones. 
    Parking meter zones shall be as established from time to time by the board of aldermen by order or resolution. 
Sec. 13-69. - Installation, maintenance of meters; spaces to be marked. 
(a)  Parking meters shall be installed by the city upon the curb next to individual parking spaces in the parking meter zone and shall, at all times, be maintained in good workable condition so that such meters shall display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of the proper coin or coins of the United States in conformity with the requirements of this division, such signal to remain in evidence until the expiration of such parking period at which time a dropping of signals or other mechanical operation shall indicate the expiration of such parking period and violation of this division. 
(b)  There shall be painted by the city upon the streets and curbs within such parking meter zones lines for either parallel or diagonal parking, opposite parking meters, such lines to be maintained by the city in proper condition for the guidance of persons who park vehicles within such parking meter zones. 
Sec. 13-70. - Days, hours of operation; duties when parking in metered space; time allowed. 
    When any vehicle shall be parked next to a parking meter on any day, except holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, the owner or operator of such vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb and street marking lines as indicated for parallel or diagonal parking, and upon entering such parking spaces shall immediately, except for the immediate loading or unloading of persons or property, deposit in such parking meter a coin of the United States depending on the length of time such vehicle shall be parked, no vehicle to be parked for a longer period of time than two (2) hours. Each five-cent coin shall entitle the vehicle to be parked for one hour, with said limitation of the maximum time to be parked. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to deposit the proper coin or coins upon parking within the parking meter zones or to fail to park within the designated area if parking within the parking meter zones, and any vehicle not parked within the designated area in the parking meter zones or parked in the designated area for a longer period of time than the maximum provided by this division or when the meter opposite such designated area displays a signal showing the expiration of the parking period, shall be unlawfully parked. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this section. 
Sec. 13-71. - Use of receipts. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters are hereby levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters and the installation and maintenance thereof; the cost of regulation, inspection, operation, control and use of parking meter spaces and zones created herein; for the regulation and control of traffic moving in and out of, and parking in, such parking spaces and zones so created; and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration expense. 
Sec. 13-72. - Days when coins not required. 
    The placing of coins in such parking meters in the parking meter zones shall not be required on any holiday declared by the city or on Sundays. 
Sec. 13-73. - Use of defaced or substitute coins. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced coin or any coin covered with any substance or a substitute for a coin of the United States. 
Sec. 13-74. - Damaging, tampering with meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, open, willfully break or destroy any parking meter, or for any unauthorized person to open or attempt to open such meter. 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of state misdemeanors. 
    All offenses under the penal laws of the state which are misdemeanors shall be offenses against the city when said offenses are committed within the corporate limits of the city, and, upon conviction thereof, the same punishment shall be imposed by the city as provided by the laws of the state with regard to such offenses against the state but not in excess of the maximum penalty which may be imposed by municipal corporations. 
(Ord. of 3-2-37, § 1) 
State Law reference- State misdemeanors shall be offenses against municipalities without further action by the municipalities, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-13-19. 
Sec. 14-2. - Use of roadblocks for collection of funds. 
(a)  The use of roadblocks on city streets for the collection of funds for any purpose is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  A roadblock in any one location shall be a violation of this Code, and each roadblock used by any organization for the collection of funds shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-75, §§ I, III) 
Sec. 14-3. - Discharging firearms and explosives prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully shoot or discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearms, discharge any explosives, Roman candles, torpedoes, firecrackers, cannon-crackers, skyrockets or other like explosives, or guns capable of doing physical harm to a human being, within the corporate limits of the city except as permitted under paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  The mayor and board of aldermen may, in connection with celebrations associated with holidays or other special events, grant a one-time permit for a fireworks display, on the condition that such display shall be performed by a person or persons with demonstrated expertise in such matters, and after such person or persons shall have filed with the police department and the fire department a written plan reasonably satisfactory to such departments for the display, including therein a listing of appropriate safety precautions to be observed to protect persons and property from injury. Such displays shall only be conducted under the direct supervision of such police and/or fire department personnel as the mayor and board of aldermen may direct. The mayor and board of aldermen reserve the right, as a condition to granting such permit, to require the posting of a reasonable cash bond to cover anticipated costs of cleanup and to require proof of public liability insurance in limits reasonably satisfactory to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 1, 9-5-12; Ord. of 9-5-78, § 1; Ord. of 4-10-90, § 1) 
State Law reference- Weapons and explosives generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 97-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-3.1. - Sale of fireworks prohibited; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within the corporate boundaries of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, any firecrackers, Roman candles, torpedoes, sky rockets, and any and all explosives commonly known and referred to as fireworks. 
    The violation hereof shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-1-86, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 1986, §§ 1, 2, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as § 14-3.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 14-4. - Obstructing sidewalks, streets, gutters or ditches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed in any manner any sidewalk, street, gutter, ditch or any part of the same. 
(Ord. No. 35, § I) 
Cross reference- Obstructing streets and sidewalks, § 18-2 et seq.; depositing refuse, trash, debris in streets, § 10-2. 
State Law reference- Obstructing streets, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, §§ 97-15-35, 97-15-37, 97-35-23 and 97-35-25. 
Sec. 14-5. - Hunting activities within city prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in "hunting activities" within the municipal boundaries of the city. These "hunting activities" shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the pursuit of both game and non-game species of wildlife through the use of firearms, bow-and-arrow or other such devices manufactured primarily for use in "hunting activities" or target practice. 
(b)  Exempted from the provisions of subsection (a) are all legitimate activities of governmental bodies relative to the control and removal of pests and problem animals, whether wild or domestic, within the municipal boundaries. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96) 
Sec. 14-6. - Prohibition of the use, purchase, possession, distribution, sale or offering for sale of synthetic cannabinoids or other synthetic products. 
(a)  No person shall use, possess, purchase, distribute, sale or attempt to use, possess, purchase, distribute or sale or publicly display for sale any one (1) or more of the following chemicals within the city limits of New Albany: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A: all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof an extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacturate salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6 dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)-6a7, 10. 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol - some trade or other names: HU-210; 
(3)  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names: JWH-018/spice; 
(4)  1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names: JWH-073; 
(5)  1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine - some trade or other names: TFMIP; 
(6)  4-methoxymethcathione and Ethylcathinone; 
(7)  Mitragyna speciosa korth, Mitragyna speciosa leaf extract, Mitragyna speciosa extract, and M. speciosa alkaloids, including ajmalicine, mitraphylline, rhynchophylline and mitragynine pseudoindoxyl, raubasine, pausin ystalia johimbe and corynantheidine, 7-acetoxymitragynine, Corynoxein, Corinoxin, 3-Dehydromitragynin, (-)-Epicatechin, 3-Isocorynantheidin, 3-Isopaynanthein, Isomitraphyllin, Isospeciofolin, Isospecionoxein, Mitraciliatin, Mitrafolin, Mitragynalin, Mitraphylin, Mitraspecin, Mitraversin, Paynanthein, Speciociliatin, Speciofolin, Speciogynine, Specionoxein, Speciogynin, Speciofolin, Stipulatin. Some trade or other names, including, but not limited to: Kratom, krathom, kakuam, ketum, ithang, thorn, biak-biak, kratum, mambog, Super K, Life Force K, K-Chill, K-shot; 
(8)  Or any similar structural analogs. 
(b)  Immediate effect of prohibition. The mayor and board of aldermen have further determined that the immediate prohibition of the sale, possession and use of such substances is necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, and that these prohibitions should become effective prior to the ordinance being recorded and published, as permitted in certain circumstances under authority of M.C.A. 1972, § 21-13-11. 
(Ord. of 8-16-10, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 11-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-7. - Smoking in public places and places of employment. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Bars means any premises where non-alcoholic or alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed including but not limited to taverns, nightclubs, and cocktail lounges. 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, formed either for non-profit or profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
    Childcare facility means any state licensed childcare facility including, but not limited to licensed family daycare or licensed group daycare centers, licensed day camps, certified school-age programs and Head Start programs. 
    City buildings means all city-owned and operated buildings and those portions of buildings leased and operated by the city. 
    Common areas of buildings means all areas not part of a tenant's leased premises, including but not limited to lobbies, community rooms, hallways, laundry rooms, stairwells, elevators, enclosed parking facilities, pool areas, and restrooms contiguous thereto. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, including those full time, part-time, temporary or contacted from a third-party; employee also means any person who serves as a volunteer for a business or nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, business, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity, including a public or non-profit entity that employs the services of one (1) or more individual persons, not including the owner(s) of such entity. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doors or passage ways) which extend from floor to ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, or similar structures. 
    Entrance means a doorway and adjacent area which gives direct access to a building from a contiguous street, plaza, sidewalk, or parking lot. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms, wards within and entrances into health care facilities. 
    Hotel and motel means any commercial establishment that offers rooms that contain a bed and toilet facilities to the general public for rent, that is not an apartment complex or home. 
    Mall means an enclosed, indoor area containing common areas and discrete businesses primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods and services. 
    Place of employment means an enclosed area controlled by the employer, which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles. This also includes private offices, elevators, medical facilities, stairs, vehicles and all other enclosed facilities. A private residence is not a "place of employment" within the meaning of this section unless used as a childcare facility, an adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Private club means a facility owned or operated by an association or corporation, which does not operate for pecuniary gain or have regular employees and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. Affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established by-laws and/or a constitution to govern activities. The organization has been granted a Section 501 exemption from the payment of Federal Income Taxes as a club under 26 U.S.C. Entry into and use of a private club is restricted to members only. When a private club is open to the public, it does not meet this definition. Private club also means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purposes, but not for pecuniary gain. 
    Private residence means premises owned, rented or leased for temporary or permanent habitation. 
    Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, parking garages, public parks, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms, game rooms, billiard halls and pool halls. A public place also includes the entire building if the building also includes portions of the building to which the general public is not generally invited except private living quarters. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Service line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the services involve the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lit cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette or other similar device which creates vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibitions on smoking in this chapter. 
    Sports arena or venue means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and indoor ice rinks, bowling centers and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to participate in or to witness sports cultural, recreational, or other events. 
(b)  Application of article to city-owned facilities. All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city, shall be subject to the provisions of the section. 
(c)  Smoking prohibited in indoor public places. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in indoor public places and in places of employment as defined in this section, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in business and non-profit entities, patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Childcare facilities. 
(6)  City buildings. 
(7)  Common areas in bed and breakfast establishments, hotels and motels, including lobbies. 
(8)  Convention facilities. 
(9)  Educational facilities. 
(10)  Jails. 
(11)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(12)  Health care facilities. 
(13)  Service lines. 
(14)  Indoor shopping malls. 
(15)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(16)  Elevators and stairwells in buildings open to the public or where employees are regularly employed. 
(17)  Polling places. 
(18)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(19)  Public forms of transportation, including but not limited to motor buses, taxicabs, or other public passenger vehicles. 
(20)  Public bus and transfer point shelters. 
(21)  Public parking garages open to the public. 
(22)  Retail stores. 
(23)  Restaurants. 
(24)  Restrooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(25)  Self-service laundry facilities. 
(26)  Service lobbies, waiting areas, and the common areas open to the public of financial institutions, business and professional offices, and multi-unit commercial facilities. 
(27)  Sports arenas and venues. 
(28)  Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms in offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, chiropractor, optometrist or optician, or other medical services provider. 
(29)  Game rooms, billiard halls or pool halls. 
(d)  Exceptions. The following areas shall not be subjected to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Rooms that are rented to guests in bed and breakfast facilities, hotel rooms and motel rooms that are designated as smoking rooms. 
(2)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(3)  Private residences, except those being used for child care, adult day care or healthcare facility. 
(e)  Smoking prohibited in certain outdoor areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in certain outdoor areas: 
(1)  Within a reasonable distance of twenty-five (25) feet immediately preceding the entrance to and ten (10) feet from the exit of any area where smoking is prohibited. 
(2)  Attached areas of restaurants that are covered or partially covered with more than fifty (50) percent of the perimeter of the outside area walled or otherwise closed to the outside. 
(3)  Seating areas of outdoor sports arenas, stadiums, amphitheaters and other venues. 
(4)  Any area of property owned by the city whether improved, unimproved, occupied, or vacant. 
(f)  Signage. 
(1)  Signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted conspicuously at the primary entrance of the premises by the proprietor, employer or other person in charge of the building. 
(2)  Signage shall include the international no smoking symbol and be no smaller than five (5) inches by five (5) inches. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or destroy any sign required by this section, or to smoke in a place where any such sign is posted. 
(g)  Proprietor's responsibilities. 
(1)  The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises regulated hereunder upon either observing or being advised of violation, shall advise the smoker of this section and request that they extinguish their cigarette or tobacco product and refrain from smoking. 
(2)  The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises, shall post signage as required by this section. 
(3)  The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises, shall not provide ashtrays in areas where smoking is prohibited. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(h)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The chief of police, any officer under his command, or designee shall have the power, subject to law, to enter upon the premises named in this section to ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this section. Enforcement will be through issuance of a summons and complaint and/or appropriate affidavit. 
(2)  Any person who desires to register a complaint under this section may contact the city police department. 
(3)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(4)  The city code enforcement officer or zoning officer, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with the article. 
(i)  Violation and penalties. 
(1)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine in the following amounts: no more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second and subsequent offenses within one (1) year. 
(2)  Any person or entity who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by: 
(3)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(4)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year. 
(5)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year. 
(6)  The mayor and board of aldermen shall suspend or revoke any business license or permits issued by the city for three (3) or more violations of this section involving the licensed premises within a twelve-month period. 
(7)  Violations of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the mayor or anyone designated by him, by restraining order, preliminary and/or permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(8)  Each day on which violation of the section occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(j)  Non-retaliation; non-waiver of rights. 
(1)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this section. 
(2)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(k)  Jurisdiction clause. This section shall be subject to all other governmental jurisdictions rules and regulations and laws pertaining to smoking. 
(Ord. of 11-1-11, §§ 1-11; Ord. of 2-7-17, §§ 1-11) 
Sec. 14-8. - Unnecessary or excessive noise. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  Excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise within the city is detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city and therefore, is declared a public nuisance. 
(2)  Each person in the city is entitled to live in an environment which is free from excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise levels. 
(3)  The establishment of maximum permissible noise levels within the city will further the public health, safety, welfare and peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  General noise regulations. The creation of any unreasonable, unnecessary or excessive noise which results in the disturbance of the public peace and welfare and complaints to local government agencies is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute disorderly conduct. 
For purposes of this section, "noise" is defined as any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological effect on human beings. 
Those actions or activities which are prohibited by this ordinance include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The operation of a motorized device that lacks adequate and appropriate muffling devices or muffle the engine sound emissions; 
(2)  The operation of musical reproduction devices, whether in vehicles or otherwise, at volume levels sufficiently loud to create a distraction to other motorists and other persons near the noise-producing apparatus; 
(3)  The keeping of any animal which creates frequent or long continued noise to the extent that it disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Any other activity, whether through the use of mechanical or electronic sound producing equipment or through the use of the human voice, that produces a level of sound that would reasonably meet the definition of noise as defined herein. 
(c)  Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit responsible organizations from broadcasting programs music, speeches or general entertainment as part of the community celebration of national, state or city events, public festivals or the events of a noncommercial character. 
(d)  Violations; penalties. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article [section] shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine in the following amounts: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(2)  For a second offense within two (2) years of an adjudicated first offense, a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  For any third and subsequent offenses within the said two-year period, a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 1-4-11; Ord. of 4-5-11(1)) 
Sec. 14-9. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Public indecency. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully perform any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals; 
(2)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(3)  Urination or defecation; 
(4)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(5)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse; or 
(6)  Intentionally wearing pants or skirts more than three (3) inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus any assessments. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section; however, the New Albany Municipal Court shall have full authority to enforce its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense under this section if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this section must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Ord. of 2-5-2013(2)) 
Editor's note- Full copies of this section are available at City Hall. 
Secs. 14-10-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE, PURCHASE, POSSESSION AND USE OF CERTAIN CAFFEINATED PRODUCTS BY MINORS PROHIBITED 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Caffeine product or caffeinated product means any caffeine pill or caffeine powder with more than twenty-five (25) percent of caffeine. 
    Dealer means every person, firm, corporation or association of persons, except retailers as defined herein, who receives the caffeine product from the manufacturer of caffeine pills or caffeine powder for distribution, for sale, for use, or for consumption in the State of Mississippi. 
    Person means any natural person. 
    Photographic identification means any government-issued card that includes a photograph of the person seeking to purchase caffeine products and that is accepted as proof of age under Mississippi law. 
    Point of sale means a store, stand, or any other place of business or point of distribution maintained by a seller from which caffeine pills and caffeine powder are made available for sale or distribution to consumers. 
    Retailer includes every company, corporation, partnership, business association, joint venture, estate, trust, or any other combination acting as a unit or legal entity other than a wholesale dealer as defined below, whose business is that of selling merchandise at retail, who shall sell or offer for sale a caffeine product to the consumer. 
    Seller means any natural person, company, corporation, firm, partnership, organization or other legal entity who sells, dispenses, distributes or issues caffeine pills or caffeine powder for commercial purposes. 
    Wholesaler includes dealers whose principal business is that of wholesale dealer or jobber, who is known to the retail trade as such, and whose place of business is located in Mississippi or in a state which affords reciprocity to wholesalers domiciled in Mississippi, who shall sell any taxable caffeine pill or caffeine powder to retail dealers only for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 1) 
Sec. 14-22. - Prohibition of sale to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, or retailer, to sell, barter, deliver or give caffeine products to any individual under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  It shall be an absolute affirmative defense that the person selling, bartering, delivering or giving caffeine products over the counter in a retail establishment to an individual under eighteen (18) years of age in violation of this article had requested and examined a government-issued photographic identification from such person establishing his age as at least eighteen (18) years prior to selling such person a caffeine product. The failure of a seller, barterer, deliverer or giver of caffeine products over the counter in a retail establishment to request and examine photographic identification from a person under eighteen (18) years of age prior to the sale of a caffeine product to such person if the individual is not known to the seller, barterer, deliverer or giver of the caffeine product to be over the age of eighteen (18) years, shall be construed against the seller, barterer, deliverer or giver and form a conclusive basis for the seller's violation of this section. 
(c)  It shall be an absolute affirmative defense that the person or entity giving caffeine products through the mail to an individual under eighteen (18) years of age in violation of this act had requested and received documentary or written evidence from such person purportedly establishing his age to be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be liable as follows: 
(1)  For a first conviction, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  For a second conviction, a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00); and 
(3)  For all subsequent convictions, a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed. 
(e)  Any person, including, but not limited to, the owner and seller of the caffeine product, found in violation of this section shall be issued a citation by any proper law enforcement officer and the owner of the business shall be sent notification of this citation by registered mail by the law enforcement agency issuing the citation. Notification shall include the opportunity for hearing before the appropriate court. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the New Albany Police Department to ensure that the provisions of this act are enforced. 
(g)  It shall not be considered a violation of this section on the part of any law enforcement officer or person under eighteen (18) years of age for any law enforcement officer to use persons under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase prohibited caffeine products for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this section, as long as those persons are supervised by duly authorized law enforcement agency officials. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 2) 
Sec. 14-23. - Retailer instructions to employees. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of selling caffeine products shall notify each individual employed by that person as a retail sales clerk that New Albany ordinances: 
(1)  Prohibit the sale or distribution of certain caffeine products, including samples, to any person under eighteen (18) years of age and the purchase or receipt of such caffeine products by any person under eighteen (18) years of age, and 
(2)  Require that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser or recipient if the prospective purchaser or recipient is under the age of eighteen (18) years. Every person employed by a person engaged in the business of selling caffeine products at retail shall sign an agreement with his employer in substantially the following or similar form: 
"I understand that New Albany Ordinances prohibit the sale or distribution of certain caffeine products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years and out-of-package sales, and requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser or recipient under eighteen (18) years of age if the individual is not known to the seller, barterer, deliverer or giver of the prohibited caffeine product to be over the age of eighteen (18) years. I promise, as a condition of my employment, to observe this law." 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be penalized not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  No retailer who instructs his employee as provided in this section shall be liable for any violations committed by such employees. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 3) 
Sec. 14-24. - Prohibition of purchase, use and possession. 
(a)  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase any caffeine product prohibited by this article. No student of any high school, junior high school or elementary school shall possess or use caffeine products that are prohibited by this article on any educational property as defined in Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 97-37-17(a). 
(1)  If a person under eighteen (18) years of age is found by a court to be in violation of this article, the court may order the minor to perform up to three (3) hours of community service, in addition to any other punishment imposed by the court. 
(2)  A violation under this section is not to be recorded on the criminal history of the minor and, upon proof of satisfaction of the court's order, the record shall be expunged from any records other than youth court records. 
(b)  (1)  No person shall use any caffeine product on any educational property. Any adult who violates this section shall be subject to a fine and shall be liable as follows: 
a.  For a first conviction, a warning; 
b.  For a second conviction, a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00); and 
c.  For all subsequent convictions, a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be imposed. 
(2)  Any adult found in violation of this section shall be issued a citation by a law enforcement officer, which citation shall include notice of the date, time and location for hearing before the New Albany Municipal Court. For the purposes of this section, "subsequent convictions" are for violations committed on any educational property within the State of Mississippi. 
(c)  Anyone convicted under this article shall be recorded as being fined for a civil violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 4) 
Sec. 14-25. - Point of sale warning. 
(a)  Point of sale warning signs are required, and each seller shall place and maintain in legible condition, at each point of sale of prohibited caffeine products to consumers, a sign no smaller than eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches or ninety-three (93) square inches stating: 
"NEW ALBANY ORDINANCE PROHIBITS THE SALE OF CERTAIN CAFFEINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS. PROOF OF AGE REQUIRED." 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 5) 
Sec. 14-26. - Penalty for falsely representing age. 
    Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who falsely states he is eighteen (18) years of age or older, or presents any document that indicates he is eighteen (18) years of age or older, for the purpose of purchasing or possessing prohibited caffeine products shall be penalized not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or required to complete at least eight (8) hours of community service, or both. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 6) 
Sec. 14-27. - Vending sales. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell caffeine products that are prohibited by this article through a vending machine, unless the vending machine is located in an establishment to which individuals under the age of eighteen (18) years are denied access or are required to be accompanied by an adult. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 7) 
Sec. 14-28. - Distribution. 
    No retailer shall distribute caffeine products that are prohibited by this article other than in a sealed package provided by the manufacturer. A retailer who is in violation of this section shall be liable for a penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year of a prior violation; and a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for all subsequent violations. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 8) 
Sec. 14-29. - Confidentiality of minor information. 
    It shall be unlawful to publish the name or identity of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is convicted or adjudicated of any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15, § 9) 
Chapter 15 - PEDDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 11; vending on streets and sidewalks, § 18-8. 
State Law reference- Authority for municipalities to regulate transient vendors, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - "Peddler" defined. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the word "peddler" shall include solicitors and transient merchants ; shall mean any person who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services, or who solicits orders for such goods, wares, merchandise or service by going from house to house or place to place and who does not have a permanent place of business in the city and is not employed by any person having a permanent place of business in the city; provided, however, the word "peddler" shall not include persons selling, distributing or soliciting orders for newspapers or selling, distributing or soliciting orders for milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs or other farm and garden produce raised by the vendor or members of his family so far as the sale of such commodities is authorized by law. 
Sec. 15-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity in the city. 
Sec. 15-3. - Refusing to leave premises. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premices, or his agent, to leave the same and not return thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 15-4. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to that effect. 
Sec. 15-5. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
Sec. 15-6. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m., except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer, or at any time on Sunday. 
Sec. 15-7. - Noise. 
    The shouting and crying out, and the use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device by peddlers for the purpose of attracting attention is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
Secs. 15-8-15-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-28. - Duty to pay privilege tax, obtain permit and furnish bond. 
    Peddlers shall pay all privilege taxes required by state law, and shall furnish a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that if such peddlers comply with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances relating to them, such obligation shall be void, otherwise it shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 15-29. - Application. 
    Applicants for peddlers' permits shall file with the city clerk a sworn application giving the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  The address, legal and local; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold ; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number or other means of identification; 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
Sec. 15-30. - Applicant to present driver's license to chief of police. 
    The applicant, at the time of filing his application for a permit required by this article, shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the chief of police. 
Sec. 15-31. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this article. 
Sec. 15-32. - Service of process. 
    Before any permit shall be issued under this article, there shall also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the city clerk. 
Sec. 15-33. - Investigation of applicant. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
Sec. 15-34. - Denial authorized. 
    If, as a result of the investigation authorized by section 15-33, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
Sec. 15-35. - Limitation on issuance. 
    No peddler's permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other impersonal legal entity, but each individual person engaging in the business of peddling within the city shall be required to have a permit whether acting for himself or as an agent or representative of another. 
Sec. 15-36. - Issuance required. 
    If, as a result of the investigation authorized by section 15-33, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit, along with the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed privilege license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. 
Sec. 15-37. - Record. 
    The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 15-38. - Contents. 
    Every permit issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. 
Sec. 15-39. - Duration. 
    Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of twelve (12) months. 
Sec. 15-40. - Not transferable. 
    No peddler's permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
Sec. 15-41. - Display. 
    Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 15-42. - Altering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or deface any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 15-43. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance. Upon such revocation, such permit shall immediately be surrendered to the city clerk, and failure to do so shall be a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 15-44. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for a peddler's permit or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a peddler's permit as provided in this article shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and board of aldermen. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the mayor and board, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The mayor and board shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. 
Sec. 15-45. - Disposition of receipts. 
    The taxes and penalties collected under this article shall be paid into the city general fund in the same manner as other taxes collected by the city clerk. 
Chapter 16 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 20, 1990, §§ 1-5, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, inclusion of its provisions as Art. II, §§ 16-21-16-25 of a new Chapter 16, Planning and Development, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks, and other public places, Ch. 18; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 21; design/construction regulations, App. B; zoning, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16-21. - Filling and excavation> 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No filling of low-lying lands, ditches, canals, or drainageways shall be permitted without first having obtained a permit for such work from the building inspector of the city. 
(2)  No blocking, overlaying, damming, rerouting, covering, or otherwise interfering with the existing natural surfacewater drainageways within the corporate limits shall be permitted without having first having obtained a permit for such work from the building inspector of the city. 
(3)  No excavation, digging or soil removal or soil redistribution that would materially alter the flow of surface water onto adjacent property owners shall be permitted without first having obtained a permit for such work from the building inspector of the city. 
(4)  All fill material shall be free of all roofing, glass, trees, brush, building materials, vehicles, refrigerators or similar items. Only clean dirt, bricks, blocks or concrete shall be used. All bricks, blocks or concrete shall be covered with clean fill dirt as required by the city building inspector. 
(b)  Permit fee; issuance of permit; standards for approval. Such permits shall require the payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00) and shall not be issued until the building inspector, with the advice and consultation of the city engineer as appropriate, shall have made a determination that such proposed work will not contribute adversely to surface water runoff in and around the property, taking into account the previously existing drainage conditions and the drainage conditions as will exist after such alterations in the land surface. 
(c)  Plans, sketches, diagrams, etc. The building inspector may require such written plans, sketches, diagrams and related documentation as he shall reasonably require to insure that all questions of surface water runoff have been assessed and an adequate and workable drainage plan has been devised. 
(d)  Separate permits not required under certain conditions. Filling and excavation undertaken as a part of a building project or a subdivision development project that requires a building permit from the building inspector or a plat approved by the city shall not require a separate permit under this section; and such work shall be authorized under the building permit issued or pursuant to the approved plat, as appropriate; however, the considerations itemized in this section shall be considered and addressed to the satisfaction of the building inspector before such construction permit shall be issued. 
(e)  Violations, penalties. The building inspector shall monitor the actual work on a periodic basis to insure that the work is being carried out according to plan, and any deviations from the plan shall constitute a violation of this section if not corrected within ten (10) days of the receipt by the permittee of written notice from the building inspector. Permitting such plan deviations to continue uncorrected after the aforesaid ten-day period shall subject the permittee to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and each continuing day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 11-20-90, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-98) 
Cross reference- Protection of underground utilities from excavation and demolition, § 7-131 et seq.; street and sidewalk excavations, § 18-32 et seq.; excavations, backfilling, etc., for installation of building sewers, § 21-66. 
Sec. 16-22. - Driveway connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No property owner shall be allowed to connect a private driveway for motor vehicles to enter from private property onto the public streets of this city without having first obtained a permit for such connection from the city building inspector. 
(b)  Permit fee; issuance of permit; standards for approval. Such permit shall require the payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00), and shall be issued only after the building inspector, with the advice and consultation of the city engineer as appropriate, has determined that such driveway connection will not adversely affect surface water runoff in the area, will not pose a hazard to the motoring public, and will not interfere with other public utilities or amenities in the area. Among other considerations, the building inspector shall, in evaluating such application for a permit, assess the following items: 
(1)  Satisfactory provision for repair and replacement of any public sidewalks affected and restoration of any public utilities interrupted. 
(2)  Satisfactory provision to prevent interference with existing roadside drainageways; including consideration that, if a culvert is to be substituted for an open drainageway, the proposed culvert is of satisfactory dimension. 
(3)  Consideration of the location of the drive in relation to other drives, intersections, roadways, and consideration of lines of sight and other similar matters that might adversely affect the safety of the motoring public. 
(4)  Consideration of the contours of the proposed driveway and the construction of curbing so as to prevent, insofar as possible, the channelization of large amounts of surfacewater onto the public roadway creating thereby a driving hazard. 
(5)  Consideration of the anticipated volume of traffic on the public roadway in the area of the entrance and a proper design of the driveway in terms of width and turning radius to prevent dangerous traffic blockages and delays. 
(c)  Plats, plans, drawings, etc. The building inspector shall require such plats, plans, drawings, construction specifications and other documentation as he shall deem reasonably necessary to ensure that the considerations outlined in subsection (b) have been properly addressed, which documentation shall become a part of the application package. 
(d)  Separate permits not required for certain applicants. Applicants for building permits for commercial developments or for approval of subdivision development plats shall not be required to obtain a separate permit under this section, but shall be required to file, as a part of the permit application or proposed plat, as appropriate, a proposed layout of the planned provisions for handling vehicular traffic, including paved parking areas, internal roadways and all proposed entranceways into the public roadways of the city, and such building permit shall not be issued until the matters addressed in subsection (b) hereof have been considered and addressed to the satisfaction of the building inspector on the advice and consultation of the city engineer as appropriate. 
(e)  Violations; penalties. The building inspector shall monitor the actual work on a periodic basis to insure that the work is being carried out according to plan, and any deviations from the plan shall constitute a violation of this section if not corrected within ten (10) days of the receipt by the permittee of written notice from the building inspector. Permitting such plan deviations to continue uncorrected after the aforesaid ten-day period shall subject the permittee to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and each continuing day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 11-20-90, § 2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 16-23. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  Permission required before performing work upon public right-of-way. No abutting landowner, or anyone occupying the property under authority of the landowner, shall undertake any activity or perform any work of construction, filling, excavation, or otherwise as to any property constituting a part of the dedicated right-of-way of any public street of the city without having first obtained the written permission of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  Violations; penalties. The building inspector shall be charged with detecting and bringing to the attention of the landowner any violation of subsection (a), and any such violation, if not corrected within ten (10) days of the receipt by the permittee of written notice from the building inspector, shall subject the permittee to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and each continuing day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 11-20-90, § 3) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 16-24. - Construction in potential flood-prone areas. 
(a)  Issuance of permit; standards for approval; drawings, plans, etc. It appearing to the mayor and board of aldermen that there are, within the corporate limits of the city, a number of areas that, based upon past history, are subject to periodic flooding, either from rising waters or from flash flooding, and it further appearing that other areas in the city, while not subject to flooding themselves, are capable of contributing to the flooding problems in other areas if improperly developed, it is hereby ordained that, as a part of the issuance process for any further building permits for construction within the corporate limits, the building inspector, with the advice and consultation of the city engineer as appropriate, shall consider the effect such construction shall have on surface water runoff from the property, and the applicant shall be required to provide, as a part of the application package, such drawings, plats, narrative reports, plans, and letters of assurance as the building inspector shall reasonably require to establish what plans have been made to deal with surface water runoff. No such permit shall be issued unless it is demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the building inspector, with the advice and consultation of the city engineer as appropriate, that adequate provision for handling of surface water runoff has been made and the construction as proposed will not contribute to a detrimental increase in the hazard of flooding to other property owners in the city. 
(b)  Signed certification required. It is further ordained that each applicant for a building permit in the city shall be required to sign a certification in the following form, to wit: 
I AM AN APPLICANT FOR A BUILDING PERMIT IN THE CITY OF NEW ALBANY. I UNDERSTAND THAT CERTAIN LOWER-LYING AREAS OF THE CITY ARE SUBJECT TO PERIODIC FLOODING DURING PERIODS OF EXCESSIVE RAINFALL. I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE CITY WILL BE ASSESSING THE IMPACT THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION MIGHT HAVE ON INCREASING THE FLOOD HAZARD TO OTHER PROPERTY OWNERS, BUT THAT THE RISK THAT CONSTRUCTION ON MY PROPERTY MIGHT BE SUBJECT TO FLOODING IS NOT A CONSIDERATION IN THE ISSUANCE OF THE PERMIT. I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE CONSTRUCTION DESIGN, INCLUDING BUILDING ELEVATION AND RELATED MATTERS THAT MIGHT AFFECT THE PROPENSITY OF THE CONSTRUCTION TO FLOOD, ARE SOLELY MY RESPONSIBILITY INSOFAR AS THE ISSUE OF FLOODING FROM NATURAL CAUSES IS CONCERNED. ANY OPINIONS, ADVICE OR COMMENTS MADE BY THE CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR, THE CITY ENGINEER, OR ANY OTHER CITY OFFICIAL ARE RECOGNIZED TO BE PURELY INFORMATIONAL IN NATURE AND WILL NOT BE RELIED UPON BY ME IN MAKING ANY FINAL DECISIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION DESIGN. 
(Ord. of 11-20-90, § 4) 
Sec. 16-25. - Right of appeal upon denial of building permit; additional enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Any applicant or other interested party aggrieved by any action of the city building inspector in denying a permit under this article may, within ten (10) days of the action, file a written notice of appeal to the planning and zoning commission by filing same with the building inspector, which appeal shall be set down for hearing at the next regular monthly meeting of the commission and disposed of after such consideration and discussion as the commission deems appropriate. Any interested party aggrieved with the decision of the commission may file a written notice of appeal with the mayor and board of aldermen, which appeal shall be set down for hearing at the next regular monthly meeting of the board and disposed of after such consideration and discussion as the board deems appropriate. 
(b)  In addition to any fines imposed for violations of the provisions of this article, the mayor and board of aldermen shall be empowered to enforce the terms hereof by suit for injunction in the Chancery Court of Union County, Mississippi, it being declared that enforcement of this article by specific performance is deemed critical to properly address the matters regulated hereby. 
(Ord. of 11-20-90, § 5) 
Sec. 16-26. - Commercial development. 
    This section contains four (4) drawings which are attached hereto and incorporated herein. These drawings included a drawing labeled driveway connections-Driveways with curb to roadways without curb and being sheet number 271A and prepared by city engineer. The next drawing is a document labeled rural driveway, prepared by the Mississippi Department of Transportation dated October 1, 1988, and being sheet number 271. The third drawing is a document labeled driveways, intregal curb and sidewalk prepared by the Mississippi Department of Transportation and dated October 1, 1998 and being sheet number 288. The fourth drawingis labeled driveways, curb and gutter and sidewalk, prepared by the Mississippi Department of Transportation and dated October 1, 1998 and being sheet number 287. 
(Mins. of 12-3-2002) 
Editor's note- The four drawings are not included herein but are on file and available in the office of the building inspector and zoning administrator. 
Chapter 17 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate railroads, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-19-31; railroads and other common carriers, § 77-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 17-1. - Obstructing streets; penalty. 
(a)  Every railroad company, upon stopping any train at a place where such railroad shall cross a street, shall so uncouple its cars as not to obstruct travel upon such street for a longer period than five (5) minutes. 
(b)  A failure to observe this section shall cause a railroad company to be liable to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. The conductor or any other person in charge of any train so violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) on conviction thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-5-47, §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference- Obstructing streets and sidewalks, § 18-2 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 77-9-235. 
Sec. 17-2. - City drainage not to be obstructed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever. 
Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Working of prisoners on streets, § 1-9; erecting, maintaining advertisements, etc., on public property, § 3-1; handbills, § 3-24 et seq.; fowl running at large, § 6-4; street department responsible for picking up and disposal of garbage, § 10-28; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; use of roadblocks for collection of funds, § 14-2; vehicles for hire, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Streets, parks and other public property, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-37-1 et seq.; public roads and streets, § 65-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Specifications generally. 
    The plans and specifications for the construction, alteration or repair of all streets, sidewalks and other public ways in the city shall be as determined by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. Copies of such plans and specifications shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 18-2. - Obstructions generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, or cause, maintain or permit an obstruction, of any street, sidewalk or other public way within this city in any manner whatever. In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this Code, any obstruction found in violation of the provisions of this section may be summarily abated as a nuisance. 
Cross reference- Depositing refuse, trash and debris in streets, § 10-2; obstructing sidewalks, streets, gutters and ditches, § 14-4; rail-roads obstructing streets, § 17-1. 
Sec. 18-3. - Obstruction of sidewalk permits. 
    When and where it shall be necessary in the construction or repair of buildings, sheds, sidewalks, etc., and any other proper cases, the mayor and board of aldermen may issue written permits for definite lengths of time, not exceeding one year, permitting the applicant therefor to obstruct the free and unimpeded use of the sidewalks of the city by depositing on such sidewalks, or fixing or suspending over such sidewalks, any object or body. The provisions of and conditions which may be stated in such permit shall be strictly adhered to. 
Sec. 18-4. - Display of merchandise. 
    It shall be unlawful for merchants and others doing business in the city to expose their goods and property for sale in such a manner as to rest upon or project over the sidewalks of the city, or in any manner obstruct the free passage of such sidewalks or the use thereof by the public. 
Sec. 18-5. - Sidewalks and gutters to be kept clean. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep the sidewalks and gutters in front of his place of business, residence or other property clear and free from all trash, dirt, slush or slops, and any or all obstructions whatsoever. 
Sec. 18-6. - Street numbering. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of a house, building or lot in the city to have the same numbered in accordance with the official numbering system prescribed by the city. 
Sec. 18-7. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-8. - Vending on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  "Vending," as used in this section, does not include or embrace the parking of vehicles in streets for the purpose of making deliveries. 
(b)  No person shall park on and use any portion of the public sidewalks or streets of the city for the purpose of vending goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables and other perishables. 
(Ord. of 12-7-54, §§ 1, 3) 
Cross reference- Peddlers, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 18-9. - Hedge or shrubbery on corner lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any corner lot, at the intersection of any street or alley, to permit any hedge or shrubbery adjacent to or abutting the sidewalk or curb on any such street or alley to grow to a height of more than four (4) feet or to extend outwardly over or beyond the property line of such owner, without immediately cutting, pruning or clipping the same. 
(Ord. of 6-1-43, § 1) 
Cross reference- Corner visibility in residence and local business districts, § 7-1(b) (3). 
State Law reference- Hedges along roadside to be trimmed, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 65-7-11. 
Sec. 18-10. - Roller-skating on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to roller-skate on any sidewalk in the city. 
(Ord. No. 38, 1-3-07) 
Sec. 18-11. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk or pavement within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 41, 5-7-07) 
Secs. 18-12-18-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Protection of underground utilities from excavation operations, § 7-131 et seq. 

Sec. 18-32. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or otherwise cut or dig in any street or sidewalk within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city. 
Sec. 18-33. - Liability generally. 
    Liability for paying the cost of making refills and repairing and restoring streets and sidewalks to their former condition shall be a joint liability upon the property owner, lessee of the property or other persons for whose benefit such work is done or attempted to be done, and the plumber, contractor or other persons actually doing or attempting to do such work. 
Sec. 18-34. - Approval. 
    Before any person making an excavation or other cutting in the streets or sidewalks of the city is released from liability therefor, such work shall be approved by the street superintendent. 
Sec. 18-35. - Refilling and surfacing generally. 
    All refilling and resurfacing of excavations made in the public streets and sidewalks shall be done by the person making such excavation, and the surface of the streets and sidewalks shall be restored to at least their original condition. 
Sec. 18-36. - Protection of public. 
    It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the streets and sidewalks of the city to adequately and sufficiently protect such excavation by guardrails or other obstructions, including not less than one red light on each side of such fill during the nighttime, so as to prevent accidents and injury to persons or property. 
Secs. 18-37-18-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING PLAN 

Sec. 18-47. - Adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of officially designating names or numbers for the present road pattern in the city and to implement the assignment of house and building numbers, a uniform street naming and property numbering plan for the city is hereby adopted as shown on the map entitled "Official Property Numbering Plan," dated August 1, 1978. 
(b)  The roadway names and property numbers indicated on the map referred to in subsection (a) above are hereby designated as the official names of existing roads, streets, lanes and drives and official numbers of property. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 18-48. - Base lines established. 
(a)  Zero base point. The zero base point is located at the intersection of Bankhead Street and the Mobile & Ohio Railroad, almost in the geographical center of the central business district. More specifically, it is described as lying in Section 8, Township 7 South, Range 3 East. 
(b)  Base line dividing area into east and west parts; definition of E-W base line. The east-west line begins at the intersection of the Mobile & Ohio Railroad and the southwestern corporate limits and extends northward along the Mobile & Ohio Railroad through the zero base point and thence to the intersection of the Mobile & Ohio Railroad and the northern corporate limits. 
(c)  Base line dividing area into north and south parts; definition of N-S base line. The north-south line begins at the intersection of Bankhead Street and the northwestern corporate limits and extends southeastward along Bankhead Street through the zero base point and thence to the intersection with the southeastern corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 2) 
Sec. 18-49. - Method of building number assignment. 
(a)  The numbering of buildings on each street shall begin at the base line. All numbers shall be assigned to the general basis of one number for each building or lot along the roadway. All buildings on the south side of east-west roadways and the west side of north-south roadways shall bear even numbers, and likewise all buildings on the north and east side of roadways shall bear odd numbers. With the exception of where block numbers start and stop at side streets, each block will be approximately seven hundred twenty (720) feet in length, with each area with no buildings being assigned a number for each ninety (90) feet of frontage. 
(b)  Where any building has more than one entrance serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance serving an occupant. 
(c)  A multiple-family dwelling having only one main entrance shall be assigned only one number, and separate apartments in the building will carry a letter designation such as A, B or C, in addition to the number assigned to the main entrance of the building. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 4) 
Sec. 18-50. - Notification of change of address and installation of numbers. 
(a)  The board of aldermen shall make arrangement for the written notification of all occupants and owners of buildings of the new house numbers assigned to each existing building under the new property identification plan provided for in this article. The attachment of numbers to buildings shall be done by a private firm and will commence after August 1, 1978. 
(b)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above or on the side of the proper door on each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the roadway line. The numbers should be placed at such a location that they will not be hidden at any time by obstructions, screens, storm doors or shrubbery. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 5) 
Sec. 18-51. - Duties of building inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to assign the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided in this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the building inspector shall determine the number of such building and will make such assignment when building permits are issued or as necessary to implement this article. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77, § 6) 
Sec. 18-52. - Duties of property owners. 
    Whenever any house, building or structure is erected or located in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers when a building permit is issued for the property and to immediately affix the number or numbers so assigned upon the building, as provided in this article. Final occupancy approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified shall be withheld by the building inspector, until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to the structure. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 7) 
Sec. 18-53. - Naming of new roadways. 
    Every subdivision plat submitted to the planning commission for its approval shall show the proper names of any and all roadways and these names shall be approved by the planning commission before such new roadways are officially named and dedicated. In cases of duplication of roadway names, it shall be the responsibility of the planning commission to assign a different name. Such commission, if it sees fit, may hold public hearings at which interested parties may express their views concerning the changing of names of such roadways. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 8) 
Sec. 18-54. - Change of roadway names. 
    The board of aldermen, by resolution, may change, rename or name an existing dedicated roadway within the limits of its jurisdiction upon recommendation of the planning commission and after consultation with any governmental unit or agency directly affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 10) 
Sec. 18-55. - Violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five dollars ($5.00). Each separate day such violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-1-78, § 11) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation and finance, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-33-1 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, § 27-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 19-1. - City clerk designated as city tax assessor and collector. 
    The city clerk is hereby named and designated and shall serve as the city tax assessor and the city tax collector for and in behalf of the city and the New Albany Municipal Separate School District. 
(Ord. of 6-3-47, § 1) 
State Law reference- Authority to combine above offices, Miss. Code Ann. § 21-3-3. 
Sec. 19-2. - Adoption of state procedures and law. 
    The following procedures with reference to city taxes shall conform, as nearly as practicable, to state law for the assessment and collection of taxes on real and personal property in the city: 
(1)  The date taxes are due and payable; 
(2)  The assessment of property both real and personal, except that the assessment rolls shall be made up and revised each year by the city tax assessor and revised by the board of aldermen; 
(3)  All notices to property owners, notice of sale and all other notices; 
(4)  Filling of assessment roll, except that the tax collector may collect from either the original or the revised assessment roll; 
(5)  Sale and notice of sale of property for delinquent taxes; 
(6)  Filing list of land sold with the city clerk; 
(7)  Redemption of land from tax sale, except that the party redeeming the land from the sale shall be required to pay ten (10) per cent on the amount of taxes for which it was sold in addition to all taxes and damages and costs incident to the sale; 
(8)  Delivery of deed for lands not redeemed from tax sale; 
(9)  Damages and cost chargeable and collectible; and 
(10)  All other things with reference to assessment, notice, sale or redemption shall be done and performed at the same time and in the same manner as provided by state law for like purposes in the county. 
Sec. 19-3. - Assessment rolls. 
    The form of the personal and land assessment rolls of the city shall conform, insofar as applicable, to the personal and land assessment rolls of the county. 
State Law reference- Form of land assessment rolls, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-33-5; requirement that municipal personal rolls generally conform to county rolls, § 21-33-7. 
Sec. 19-4. - Payment of assessments in installments. 
(a)  Any or all taxes assessed or levied for the payment of bonds and interest thereon, other evidences of indebtedness for money borrowed and interest thereon, betterment or improvement assessments, or special street improvements, may be paid in installments, and if such taxes are elected to be paid in installments, as follows: 
(1)  One-half (1/2) of all taxes due shall be paid on or before February 1. 
(2)  One-fourth (1/4) of all taxes, interest and penalty due shall be paid on or before May 1. 
(3)  One-fourth (1/4) of all taxes, interest and penalty due shall be paid on or before July 1. 
(b)  If any person elects to pay the tax levied and assessed against him in installments, he shall be required to pay, in addition to the amount of taxes unpaid after February first, interest thereon at the rate of one per cent per month, or fractional part thereof, from February first to the date of payment of such taxes. 
(c)  In the event such person shall fail to pay his installments when due, he shall also be required to pay all other fees, penalties and costs prescribed by law for failure to pay taxes when due. 
(d)  The interest charge of one (1) per cent shall be collected and apportioned and paid into the treasury as provided for by law. 
(e)  If any unpaid balance exists on August 1, then the lands shall be sold at the land sale on the last Monday in August for such unpaid balance. 
Editor's note- In § 19-4, subsections (a) and (b) were amended and (e) was added in order to conform to Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-41-1, as amended. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 27-41-1 et seq.; installment payment of taxes for bonds, § 27-41-3; authority of municipalities with regard to collection of taxes, installment method of payment, § 27-41-5. 
Sec. 19-5. - Sales tax prescribed. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed upon all persons engaged in any of the businesses enumerated in Mississippi Code Annotated 1972, Sections 27-65-17, 27-65-19 and related statutes, the amounts prescribed therein. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61) 
Chapter 20 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 11; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for city to regulate taxicabs, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-121; taxicabs generally, § 21-27-131 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-21. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Taxicab Ordinance of the City of New Albany," and may be cited as such. 
Sec. 20-22. - Purpose of article. 
    This article is enacted for the purpose of providing protection for the public safety of people traveling the streets of the city and providing for the peace and good order of the community. 
Sec. 20-23. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Cruising shall mean the driving of a taxicab on the streets or public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    Rate card shall mean a card issued by the owner or operator of a taxicab for display in such taxicab, which card contains the rates of fare then in force. 
    Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying one or more passengers for hire and not operated on a fixed route, but excludes vehicles that are subject to the jurisdiction of the state public service commission or the interstate commerce commission of the United States of America. 
    Waiting time shall mean the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger for hire to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of the passenger. 
Sec. 20-24. - Registration generally. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any taxicab within the city shall, before causing or permitting the same to be operated, register the same with the city clerk in the name of the owner, giving the taxicab's make, model, motor number and license tag number for the current year. If the taxicab is owned by a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be given, and if owned by a corporation, the name and address of the principal officers and address of its principal office shall be given. The city clerk shall keep such registration in a book kept for that purpose and shall assign a registration number to each taxicab so registered; provided, however, that no taxicab shall be registered by the city clerk until the owner or operator has complied with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  Each taxicab shall be registered in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) above on or before the first day of February of each year. The same registration number previously assigned to such taxicab may be reassigned to it when it is so reregistered. 
State Law reference- Taxicab to be registered and numbered, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-139. 
Sec. 20-25. - Limitation on number to be registered. 
    The number of taxicabs for which registration permits or certificates may be issued by the city clerk shall be prescribed by the board of aldermen, who shall determine, from time to time, the number of taxicabs which are necessary and convenient for the public. The city clerk shall not register any taxicabs in excess of the number so prescribed by the board. 
Sec. 20-26. - Forfeiture of registration. 
    In the event the owner or operator of a taxicab registered under this article ceases to operate such taxicab for a period of thirty (30) days, he shall lose or forfeit his registration, after written notice given by the city, and such taxicab shall not thereafter be operated within the city. 
Sec. 20-27. - Inspections. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be permitted to operate on the streets of the City of New Albany unless it shall display a current motor vehicle inspection sticker as required by state law for all passenger motor vehicles. 
(b)  The police department is hereby authorized and directed to make periodic inspections of every taxicab operating under this article, and if found defective, to direct the owner or operator to comply with the terms of this section as to certificates of inspection, and to take appropriate action with respect to any violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-3-82) 
Sec. 20-28. - Identification. 
    The registration number assigned to a taxicab under this article, prefixed by the letters "Reg. No.," together with the owner's or operator's name and the word "Taxicab," shall be painted or stenciled on both sides and on the rear of such taxicab, in letters and figures not less than two (2) inches in height. In addition, each taxicab may bear an identifying design of the owner ; provided, no taxicab shall be registered under this article if its color scheme, identifying design monogram or insignia is so similar to that used on a taxicab already registered as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. 
State Law reference- Registration number to be displayed on taxicab, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-139. 
Sec. 20-29. - Insurance or bond. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be registered under this article and no owner or operator shall cause or permit any taxicab to be operated in the city, unless and until such owner or operator shall have filed with, and the same has been approved by the board of aldermen, an insurance policy, or certificate of insurance in lieu thereof, issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in the state, or bond approved by the board, conditioned to pay any final judgment against such owner or operator for personal injuries, including death, or property damages resulting from or arising out of the use, maintenance or operation of such taxicab. The minimum amount of such insurance policy or bond shall be as follows: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the death or injury to any one person. 
(2)  Subject to such limit for one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) total public liability for any one accident. 
(3)  Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. 
(b)  The insurance policy or bond filed with the board as required by this section shall contain a provision or endorsement to the effect that the same shall not be cancelled for any cause by either party thereto unless and until ten (10) days' written notice thereof shall have been given to the city, addressed to the attention of the city clerk at the city hall, and such notice, when given, shall commence to run from the date such notice is actually received at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-3-82) 
State Law reference- Liability insurance or bond requirement, penalty, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, §§ 21-27-133, 21-27-141. 
Sec. 20-30. - Maintenance. 
    The owner or operator shall keep each taxicab registered under this article in a clean, sanitary and safe operating condition. 
Sec. 20-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Aug. 3, 1982, provided for the repeal of § 20-31 which required the issuance and wearing of a driver's badge. Such section bore no history note. 
Sec. 20-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 18, 1999, provided for the deletion of § 20-32 which were rates prescribed for taxicabs. Such section was derived from an ordinance adopted August 3, 1982. 
Sec. 20-33. - Rate card to be displayed. 
    Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate card, setting forth the authorized rates of fare, displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. 
Sec. 20-34. - Passenger's receipt. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by any passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner of the taxicab, the license number or motor number of the taxicab, the amount of meter reading or charges and the date of the transaction. Such receipt shall be legibly signed by the driver. 
Sec. 20-35. - Hiring with intent to defraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
Sec. 20-36. - Soliciting by drivers; driver to remain in or adjacent to vehicle. 
(a)  No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his taxicab at all times when such vehicle is upon the public streets or places, except, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than five (5) minutes, and for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of his taxicab. 
(b)  No taxicab driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
Sec. 20-37. - Cruising. 
    No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the police department and then only when the police department finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
Sec. 20-38. - Only bona fide passengers to be carried; loitering in vehicle prohibited. 
    A driver shall not carry or permit to ride in his taxicab any person except a bona fide passenger ; and he shall not permit any loitering in his vehicle while the same is being held out for hire upon the public streets and places in the city. 
Sec. 20-39. - Acceptance of additional passengers while engaged. 
    No taxicab driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in his taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination and then only for the additional distance so traveled. 
Sec. 20-40. - Excess passengers. 
    No taxicab driver shall permit more passengers or more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his taxicab. A child-in-arms shall not be counted as a passenger for the purposes of this section. 
Sec. 20-41. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
    Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
Secs. 20-42-20-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 20-62. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab upon or over the streets or other public ways or places within the corporate limits of the city unless he has a current permit so to do issued under this division. 
State Law reference- Drivers of motor vehicles for hire to be licensed, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-63. - Filing, verification and contents of application. 
    An application for a permit to drive or operate a taxicab in the city shall be filed with the mayor on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be signed by the applicant and verified under oath and shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)  The age, date and place of birth of the applicant. 
(3)  Physical characteristics of the applicant, such as height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes, complexion and identifying physical marks or scars. 
(4)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(5)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(6)  A concise history of his employment. 
(7)  Satisfactory evidence that the applicant has secured and is then in possession of a valid commercial operator's license as required by state law. 
(8)  A statement from some reputable citizen of the city that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years, an experienced driver, of good moral character and physically and mentally capacitated to drive and operate a taxicab. 
(Ord. of 8-3-82) 
State Law reference- Application to be filed with mayor and accompanied by statement referred to in paragraph (9) above, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-64. - Investigation of applicant; approval or rejection of application. 
    When an application is filed pursuant to this division, the mayor shall place the same before the board of aldermen, whereupon inquiry may be made by the board into the moral character and mental and physical fitness of the applicant. The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. The board, upon consideration of the application and the reports and statements required to be attached thereto, shall approve or reject the application. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-65. - Appeal when refused. 
    If the board of aldermen shall reject an application for a permit under this division and refuse to grant the permit to the applicant, an appeal may be taken to the circuit court of the county in the manner and within the time provided by the laws of the state for appealing from other orders of the mayor and board of aldermen, and the questions to be tried upon appeal will be as to the age and experience and the moral, mental and physical fitness of the applicant to pursue such vocation in the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-66. - Applicant's bond. 
    Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this division, the applicant shall furnish and file with the board of aldermen a good and valid bond, payable to the city in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to guarantee the faithful observance of state law and ordinances of the city. Such bond shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in the state and shall be approved by the mayor and city clerk. 
State Law reference- Authority to require bond, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-67. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a taxicab driver's permit shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
State Law reference- Authority to require payment of fee, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-131. 
Sec. 20-68. - Issuance; contents. 
    Upon approval of an application for a permit under this division, and upon payment of the prescribed fee and filing of the required bond, the board of aldermen shall issue the permit to drive a taxicab. Such permit shall be delivered to the applicant, shall be signed by the mayor and shall bear the name, address, sex, color, age, right thumbprint and two (2) fingerprints of the right hand, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
Sec. 20-69. - Posting. 
    Every holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall post his permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while he is operating a taxicab. 
Sec. 20-70. - Transfer, lending, borrowing, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, lend or borrow a permit issued under this division or to display or use such a permit not issued to himself. 
Sec. 20-71. - Term; renewal. 
    A permit issued under this division shall remain in effect for the remainder of the calendar year, unless sooner revoked. A permit for every calendar year thereafter may be issued to the applicant, upon the payment of the prescribed fee and renewal of the required bond, unless the permit for the preceding year has been revoked. 
Sec. 20-72. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this division and demand the return of such permit upon proof that the holder thereof, while driving or while in charge of a taxicab: 
(1)  Was intoxicated, or noticeably under the influence of intoxicating liquor; or 
(2)  Disturbed the peace while so engaged; or 
(3)  Recklessly disregarded the speed regulations prescribed by law; or 
(4)  Knowingly transported intoxicating liquor; or 
(5)  Carried concealed weapons in violation of law; or 
(6)  Knowingly transported persons for the purpose of gaming or prostitution, or for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor; or 
(7)  Did not have a current and valid bond required by this division; or 
(8)  Failed or refused to comply with the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city or of the laws of the state or the United States of America. 
    Such a permit may also be suspended or revoked if the holder thereof is convicted of three (3) traffic violations within the city within one year. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-137. 
Secs. 20-73-20-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HORSE CARRIAGES 

Sec. 20-80. - Registration required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or cause to be operated, a horse-drawn carriage upon the streets of the city for the purpose of transporting persons for hire or as a contractual service, unless the carriage first is registered with the license administrator as provided in this article. 
(b)  The annual fee for registration of a horse-drawn carriage shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), being in addition to a city business privilege license. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-81. - Registration information required. 
(a)  Registrations of horse-drawn carriages shall be made with the code enforcement officer on forms provided by that office, and the registrant shall be the owner or operator of the carriage. The registration shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The seating capacity, manufacturer, and scale drawing or photograph of each carriage to be registered; 
(2)  The name, age, address, and state motor vehicle operator's license number of each person who will act as a coachman on any registered carriage, along with written evidence of such person's experience in driving a horse-drawn carriage; 
(3)  If the registrant is an individual, whether any of the owners and operators have ever been convicted of a felony. If the registrant is a business entity, whether any of the partners, owners, corporate officers, directors and operators have been convicted of a felony; 
(4)  The site or sites off-street to be used to store, stable, and load carriages and horses; 
(5)  A schedule of rates and charges to be made to passengers; and 
(6)  Proof of examination of each animal to be employed with the carriage pursuant to section 20-85(4). 
(b)  The registrant shall further submit a certificate of insurance or bond issued by an insurance company licensed to transact business in the state conditioned to pay any final judgment against such owner or operator for property damage or personal injuries, including death, resulting from or arising out of the use, maintenance or operation of such horse carriage. The minimum amount of such insurance policy or bond shall be as follows: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the death or injury to any one (1) person. 
(2)  Subject to such limit for one (1) person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) total public liability for any one (1) accident. 
(3)  Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. 
(4)  The insurance policy or bond filed as required by this section shall contain a provision or endorsement to the effect that the same shall not be cancelled for any cause by either party thereto unless and until ten (10) days' written notice thereof shall have been given to the city, addressed to the attention of the city clerk at the city hall, and such notice, when given, shall commence to run from the date such notice is actually received at the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  The information on the registration form shall be verified under oath and shall include a written agreement by the registrant to operate the carriage, once registered, strictly in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and all applicable city ordinances, specifically including the New Albany Animal Control Act, and to indemnify and hold harmless the city for all judgments, losses and expenses arising out of the operations permitted by the registration. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-82. - Certificate of registration; issuance and term. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of a completed registration form, approval of the application by the code enforcement officer, and the filing of a bond or insurance under section 20-81(b) of this article, the license administrator shall issue a certificate of registration for each registered carriage. 
(b)  Registrations of horse-drawn carriages under this article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-83. - Restrictions on hours of operation, and streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon any public street in the city except between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, or any other days specifically authorized by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon any public street in the city except for the downtown area and specifically on Carter Avenue from the library parking to Main Street, on Main Street between Bankhead Street and Railroad Avenue, on Bankhead Street between the Tallahatchie River Bridge and Railroad Avenue, and on Railroad Avenue from the City Hall parking lot to Bankhead Street, as well as any connector streets. 
(c)  The operation of horse-drawn carriages upon any public street and at any time may be prohibited by the city police department when such operation would be inconsistent with other special events or public safety requirements. The police department is directed to give forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice of such prohibition whenever reasonably possible, but such notice is not mandatory. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-84. - Required construction and equipment of carriages. 
    It shall be unlawful for a registrant under this article to cause, suffer or allow the operation of a horse-drawn carriage upon any public street in the city unless such carriage shall: 
(1)  Be equipped with taillights and rear turn signals; 
(2)  Have attached to the vehicle any other sign required by the state for horse carriages driven on a public road and any other reflectors, lighting or caution signs required by the code enforcement officer; and 
(3)  Not be larger in capacity than to transport six (6) passengers. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-85. - General requirements of operation. 
    Horse-drawn carriages shall be operated only in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Occupancy of a horse-drawn carriage shall not exceed the rated seating capacity of the carriage. 
(2)  A copy of the permit shall be displayed in all carriages. 
(3)  Operators shall carry rate cards and exhibit them on demand. 
(4)  Horse-drawn carriage owners and operators shall maintain their horses in good health abiding by the rules of good animal husbandry. This shall include an annual health examination of each animal by a veterinarian licensed by the state. A copy of such examination shall be submitted to the license administrator to be placed on file. 
(5)  No passenger shall be allowed to ride on any part of the carriage while in motion except seated inside the carriage. 
(6)  Each horse pulling a carriage on the city streets shall be equipped with manure-catching devices to prevent manure from falling to the street surface. 
(7)  Each carriage shall be equipped with a chemical to be poured over horse urine so as to break down and eliminate accumulated agents and odor, and coachmen shall use the chemical each time a horse urinates on the street surface. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-86. - Limitation on number of carriages in the downtown area. 
    The board of aldermen determines that to prevent disruption of the primary public uses of the city streets by pedestrians, bicyclists and motor vehicles, the number of carriages permitted in the downtown area should be limited. The license administrator shall authorize no more than two (2) registered carriages to operate in the area designated in section 20-83(b). 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-87. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city police department and code enforcement officer are hereby authorized, ordered and directed to enforce this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. In addition, in lieu of imprisonment the judge may, at his or her discretion, impose not more than thirty (30) days community service. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 20-88. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article and demand the return of such registration or permit upon proof that the driver of a horse carriage under permit, while driving or while in charge of a horse carriage: 
(1)  Was intoxicated, or noticeably under the influence of intoxicating liquor; or 
(2)  Disturbed the peace while so engaged; or 
(3)  Recklessly or repeatedly (three (3) times in a year), disregarded state or local traffic regulations prescribed by law; or 
(4)  Carried concealed weapons in violation of state law; or 
(5)  Did not have a current and valid bond required by this division. 
(b)  The board of aldermen shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any permit or registration issued under the provisions of this article and demand the return of such permit upon proof that the holder of the permit or any driver of a permitted horse carriage failed or refused to comply with the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city or of the laws of the state or of the United States of America. 
(Ord. of 11-7-17(2)) 
Chapter 21 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; drainage in mobile home parks, § 12-32; city drainage not to be obstructed by railroad companies, § 17-2; plumbing code, § 7-118 et seq.; design/construction regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference- Waterworks generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-27-7; general authority of municipality with regard to sewers, § 21-37-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Fluoridation. 
    The city water department shall provide the means and shall proceed with the introduction of approximately one to 1.2 parts of fluoride to every million parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-4-58, § 1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 4, 1992, amended this Code by repealing § 21-2, pertaining to sprinkler systems attached to the city owned water system, as derived from an ordinance adopted May 5, 1987. 
Sec. 21-3. - Emergency water shortage procedure. 
(a)  During times that, for any cause, it appears that demand for water for all or for any part of the city-owned water system shall exceed the capacity of the system, the city shall have the right to order the termination of private water use for nonessential purposes such as watering, sprinkling or irrigating lawns or gardens, washing of vehicles, or other similar uses throughout the system or in that part of the system where the problem exists. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the manager of the city water system, such a situation exists as described in paragraph (a), he shall describe the situation in a letter addressed to the mayor setting out the nature of the problem, the portion of the system affected by the problem, the potential dangers associated with the situation, and the extent of termination of activities he deems appropriate to reduce demand to acceptable levels. 
(c)  The mayor shall be authorized, after such further consultation with the manager and others, to enter an executive order effective immediately or at such time as he deems appropriate setting forth the existence of a water emergency and stating what activities shall be terminated and to what part of the system these limitations of activities shall apply. 
(d)  Notice of such limitation in water use shall be publicized to the maximum extent possible through the use of newspaper notices, radio notices and such other communication methods as shall be found appropriate. 
(e)  Water system customers within the affected area found to be in violation of the executive order shall be entitled to one oral warning to cease and desist, such warnings to be given by any city employee observing such violation. The employee giving such warning shall keep a written log of the date, time and nature of the violation. 
(f)  In the event another violation is observed by the same customer during the same emergency period, the city shall have the right to immediately terminate water service during the remaining term of the emergency condition, or such shorter time as shall be approved by the mayor on advice and consultation of the manager. In addition, each such succeeding violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. 
(g)  The manager shall be responsible for advising the mayor at the earliest possible time that he deems the emergency situation to no longer exist, at which time the mayor shall terminate his executive order. 
(h)  Any person aggrieved by any action of the manager or the mayor under this section may appeal such action to the board of aldermen by filing a written protest of such action within ten (10) days with the clerk. The board shall hear the facts concerning the controversy at the next board meeting and shall either affirm the action or rescind or modify the action as the board shall find fit and proper. 
(Ord. of 6-15-88, § 8) 
Editor's note- Ord. of June 15, 1988, §§ 1-8, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as § 21-3 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 21-4-21-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-22. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Superintendent shall mean the superintendent as manager of the sewage works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 101-118) 
Sec. 21-23. - Unlawful disposal generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 201) 
Sec. 21-24. - Unlawful discharge into natural outlets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 202) 
Sec. 21-25. - When connection to public sewer required. 
    The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose within the corporate limits of the city and located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a line of public sanitary sewer to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewerline by gravity, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 204) 
Sec. 21-26. - Prohibited sewer deposits generally. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 503) 
Sec. 21-27. - Disposal of unpolluted drainage and industrial cooling or process waters. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the superintendent to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 501, 502) 
Sec. 21-28. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 504, 505) 
Sec. 21-29. - Approval and preliminary treatment required for certain wastes; approval of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having: 
(1)  A 5-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics in section 21-26; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two (2) per cent of the average daily sewage flow of the city; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(a)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight; or 
(b)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 21-26; or 
(c)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 506) 
Sec. 21-30. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 507) 
Sec. 21-31. - Control manhole for observation, sampling and measurement of industrial wastes. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 508) 
Sec. 21-32. - Method of measuring, testing, etc., wastes and water. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 21-26 and 21-29 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," shall be determined at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 509) 
Sec. 21-33. - Special arrangements or agreements concerning industrial wastes. 
    The city will accept no industrial process water that has not been pretreated. The minimum pretreatment requirements are as follows: 
PARAMETER MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION EPA METHOD BOD5 300.0 MG/L * Suspended Solids 300.0 MG/L * TKN 30.0 MG/L * 350.3 Oil or grease 5.0 MG/L * 413.1 TOTALPHENOLS <0.002 MG/L * 604 Phenol < 0.5 PPB 604 Pentachlorophenol <7.0 PPB 604 Arsenic <2.0 PPB 200.9 Beryllium <0.3 PPB 200.7 Cadmium <1.0 PPB 200.7 Chromium <1 1.0 PPB 200.7 Copper <1.0 PPB 200.7 Cyanide <1.0 PPB 335.2 Lead <3.0 PPB 239.2 Mercury <0.2 PPB 245.1 Nickel <7.0 PPB 200.7 Selenium <2.0 PPB 200.9 Silver <2.0 PPB 200.7 Zinc <2.0 PPB 200.7 Antimony <78.0 PPB 200.7 Thallium <71.0 PPB 200.7 Barium A Boron A Manganese A  
    Any violation of the maximum concentration parameter for BOD, TSS, TKN, and oil and grease will result in a fine of $.10 per pound. Violations of maximum concentration parameters in parts per billion, will result in a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
    *Any nonconventional parameter that is specific to an industrial process that results in a discharge of BOD5, TSS, TKN may be increased by written approval of superintendent for limited periods of time. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 510; Ord. of 6-6-2000; Ord. of 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 21-34. - Right of entry to enforce article. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 701) 
Sec. 21-35. - Tampering with, destroying, damaging municipal sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which is part of the municipal sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 601) 
Sec. 21-36. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 21-35 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 21-35 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 21-25 hereof, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of section 1-8. Each day in which such a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 801, 802) 
Secs. 21-37-21-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS 

Sec. 21-57. - Installation permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent or the building inspector. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: One (1) for residential and commercial service, and one (1) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. All such permits and inspection fees shall be set by the zoning board and shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 401, 402; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 21-58. - Costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of city from damages caused by installation. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 403) 
Sec. 21-59. - Separate sewer required for each building; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 404) 
Sec. 21-60. - Use of old sewers for new buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 405) 
Sec. 21-61. - Materials. 
    The building sewer shall be constructed of cast-iron pipe conforming to ASTM Specification A 74, or of vitrified clay sewer pipe conforming to ASTM Specification C 13, or of concrete sewer pipe conforming to ASTM Specification C 14, or of other suitable material approved by the superintendent. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nometallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 406) 
Sec. 21-62. - Joints. 
    All joints and connections shall be made gastight, watertight and waterproof. Cast-iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification QQL-156, not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material, as specified below. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved material. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 406, 411) 
Sec. 21-63. - Size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 407) 
Sec. 21-64. - Elevation; location near bearing wall; depth; grade and alignment; changes in direction. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 408) 
Sec. 21-65. - Lifting facilities. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 409) 
Sec. 21-66. - Excavations, backfilling, etc. 
(a)  All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C 12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(b)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 410, 414) 
Sec. 21-67. - Notice when installation complete; connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(b)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall have the "Y" branch installed in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A forty-five-degree ell may be used to make such connection with the spigot and may be cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, §§ 412, 413) 
Secs. 21-68-21-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 21-88. - General prohibition. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or cause or permit to be constructed or maintained, within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 203) 
Sec. 21-89. - When required. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 21-25, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 301) 
Sec. 21-90. - Compliance with regulations and recommendations of state health department. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the state. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 304) 
Sec. 21-91. - Permit generally. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the building inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the building inspector. A permit and inspection fee set by the zoning board shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 302; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
Sec. 21-92. - When permit effective; inspection of work. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the building inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 303) 
Sec. 21-93. - Minimum lot area for subsurface soil absorption facilities. 
    No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface oil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 304) 
Sec. 21-94. - Discharge to public sewer or natural outlet prohibited. 
    No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 304) 
Sec. 21-95. - To be maintained in sanitary manner at no expense to city. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 306) 
Sec. 21-96. - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 21-25, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with said section, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 305) 
Sec. 21-97. - Additional requirements of health officer. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 307) 
Secs. 21-98-21-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MANDATORY FLOW OF SOLID WASTE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 3, 2006, §§ 1-5, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 4, §§ 21-109-21-113, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 21-109. - Adoption of resolution. 
    The City of New Albany, Mississippi has received a copy of a resolution adopted by the Three Rivers Solid Waste Management Authority (the "authority") dated September 19, 2006, directing each member of the authority to adopt a resolution or ordinance to require the mandatory flow of solid waste to the authority's landfill in Pontotoc County, Mississippi. 
    The City of New Albany, Mississippi is a member of the authority and is required to adopt such ordinance or resolution by Section 17-17-319 of Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 21-110. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under subtitle C of RCRA. Such waste may include, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing process: Electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil gas waste. 
    Municipal solid waste means any nonhazardous solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, governmental, industrial or institutional establishments except oil field exploration and production waste, sewage sludge, rubbish which is disposed of in a Class I rubbish site or a Class II rubbish site and recycled material. 
    Municipal solid waste management facility means any land, building, plant, system, motor vehicles, equipment or other property, whether real, personal or mixed, or any combination of either thereof, used or useful or capital of future use in the collection, storage, treatment, utilization recycling, processing, transporting or disposal of municipal solid waste, including transfer stations, incinerators, sanitary landfill facilities or other facilities necessary or desirable. 
    Person means a person as defined by Section 17-17-3(u), of Mississippi Code of 1972 as amended. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, or refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. 1342, or source, special nuclear, or by product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 21-111. - Geographic boundaries. 
    All municipal solid waste generated with the geographic boundaries of the City of New Albany, Mississippi that is placed in the waste stream for disposal within the State of Mississippi shall be transported to, stored and managed at the Three Rivers Solid Waste Management Authority Landfill in Pontotoc County, Mississippi or at a transfer station owned by the Three Rivers Solid Waste Management Authority or its members. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 21-112. - Industrial solid waste. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this division shall not be applicable to any solid waste disposed of by a generator of industrial solid waste within the region which has provided for the collection, transportation and disposal of its solid wastes either directly or by contract for at least ten (10) consecutive years or since the inception of the generator within the region if less than ten (10) years immediately prior to enactment of this division at a single municipal solid waste management facility. 
(b)  A generator of industrial solid waste within the region which meets the criteria for this exemption shall seek a permit confirming this exemption from the authority pursuant to a procedure established by the authority. The permit for an exemption shall be valid for five (5) years from the date of issuance and may be reissued for consecutive five-year periods as long as the generator continues disposal in the same single municipal solid waste management facility. 
(c)  Any generator of industrial solid waste which locates within the region after the effective date of this division [December 1, 2006] shall comply with the mandatory flow requirements set forth herein and shall not be entitled to this exemption. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 21-113. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this division. Such violation shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For purpose of this division, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 5) 
Secs. 21-114-21-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC SEWAGE USER CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 2, 2012 did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as §§ 21-136-21-139 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 21-136. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
    City shall mean the City of New Albany Union, County Mississippi, or, when appropriate to the context, its duly authorized representative. 
    May is permissive. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 21-137. - Sewer user charge system. 
(a)  The approved sewer user charge system, included herein by reference shall include an itemized budget reflecting the costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the public sewage works and retirement of existing debt including repayment of any water pollution control revolving fund loans. It shall also include the revenues dedicated to these costs and demonstrate that they are adequate based on the use of the system and the sewer user charge rates in section 21-138. 
(b)  The superintendent of utilities shall review the sewer user charge system periodically, and shall make recommendations to the city board of aldermen to revise the sewer user charge system and/or rates, if necessary, to generate sufficient revenue to pay the total costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of the sewage works and retirement of existing debt including the repayment of any water pollution control revolving fund loan. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 21-138. - Sewer user charge rates. 
(a)  Sewer user charge rates shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the public sewage works. 
(b)  The following sewer rate schedule shall apply to each user of the sewage works. 
RATES 
Water inside city limits: 
0-2,000 gallons\minimum charge 
All over 2,000 gallons\$2.30 per 1,000 gallons 
Minimum bill per month: The minimum bill for individually metered accounts will be determined by tile size of tile water meter: 
Residential Commercial 5/8 ? or 3/4? Meter $8.60 $10.00 1? Meter 9.75 11.25 11/4? Meter 13.25 13.50 11/2? Meter 15.50 19.25 2? Meter 24.75 31.00 3? Meter 42.00 48.00 4? Meter 59.00 71.00 6? Meter 76.00 88.00  
Water outside city limits: For service to water customers outside the city limits, the minimum water bill will be determined by the size of the water meter. the schedule of rates and charges will be increased by fifteen (15) percent. 
Sanitary sewer rates: Sanitary sewer service will be one hundred (100) percent of net water bill taxes are not applicable for sanitary sewer service. 
Sanitary sewer charges for residential or small commercial customers who do not use city water will be ten dollars ($10.00) per month. 
Sanitary sewer charges for large commercial or industrial customers who do not use city water will be as follows: 
(Number of employees x 30 gallons per day x 21.67 work days per month x 2.30 per 1,000 gallons). 
(c)  Industrial waste surcharge. The industrial waste surcharge shall be based on the formula and conditions as presented in the City of New Albany Sewer Use Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 21-139. - Amendments. 
    This division shall be amended, as necessary, to comply with Federal or State Regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2012) 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
CABLE TELEVISION 
[Ordinance of June 6, 1967] 
An ordinance by the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, granting unto New Albany T.V. Cable, Inc., the nonexclusive right and privilege to use and occupy for its poles, lines and related accessories, the streets, avenues, highways, bridges, alleys, and public places within the City of New Albany and subsequent additions thereto. For the purpose of furnishing television service of all kinds to the people of and in the City of New Albany Mississippi, and prescribing terms and conditions therefor. 
Be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen of New Albany Mississippi, in council convened: 
    Section I. In consideration of the benefits which will accrue to the City of New Albany and the inhabitants thereof, the City of New Albany does hereby grant, operative from the effective date of this ordinance unto New Albany T.V. Cable, Inc., a Mississippi corporation, the nonexclusive right, authority, easement and privilege to use and occupy for its poles, lines and related accessories, the streets, avenues, highways, bridges, alleys and other public places within the City of New Albany, for the installation, operation and maintenance solely relative to the furnishing or supplying unto the people of said city television service of all kinds, and said right, authority, easement and privilege to be specifically subject to the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
(a)  The location of any and all poles installed by grantee pursuant hereto shall be situated so as to avoid their interference with facilities of existing permit and/or franchise holders and City of New Albany properties and all such installation by the grantee shall be approved in advance by the board or by its duly constituted agent; that any and all public passage and rights-ofway which are disturbed and/or damaged in the construction and maintenance of said facilities shall immediately be restored by the grantee to an as-before status quo at its expense; that construction, maintenance or removal procedures performed by grantee under the terms hereof shall not bar normal usage of any public passage or right-of-way for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours in duration, and no obstruction whatsoever of this nature shall be made unless previously approved by the board or by its duly constituted agent; that all right, authority, easement and privilege granted and vested in grantee hereunder is subject to all ordinances of the City of New Albany presently in force or which may be hereafter enacted relative to public rights-of-way within said city; 
(b)  That construction materials, manner of erection and assembly of the physical plant, maintenance standards and procedures, as employed by grantee pursuant thereto, shall meet the minimum level of standards and requirements of the National Electrical Code, regulatory enactments now in force or hereafter promulgated by the City of New Albany, and as prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(c)  That service available to subscribers from and after activation of the system shall include a minimum of seven (7) television channels, two (2) F.M. music channels; that the system will have capacity for twelve (12) channels, and will have color usage; that the quality of reception rendered subscribers shall equal the character thereof received at the tower site; 
(d)  That three (3) percent of the subscriber rentals collected by grantee from subscribers shall be payable to the city, with accounting settlements to be made annually; that upon request the grantee will permit the city to examine its accounting record applicable hereto by a certified public accountant; 
(e)  That twenty-four (24) hour attendance to requirements of subscribers for maintenance service shall be provided; that television set maintenance or repair service shall not be rendered by grantee in competition with local such enterprises; 
(f)  All rights vested in the licensee/grantee under this franchise are assignable for security purposes to Stromberg-Carlson, its subsidiaries, successors and assigns; 
(g)  A rental agreement will be executed covering pole use, rental, etc. 
    Section II. Grantee may, from time to time, declare, make and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations in the supplying of its services to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on file at all times with the clerk of the City of New Albany. 
    Section III. That the grantee shall indemnify and hold the City of New Albany harmless at all times during the term of this grant from and against all claims for injury or damages to persons or property, both real and personal, resulting from the negligence on the part of grantee incurred by it in pursuit of the activities authorized by this ordinance, and the grantee shall carry insurance against liability due to damages to property in an amount not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) as to any one accident, and against liability due to injury or death of persons in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) as to any one person, and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one accident; the grantee, upon receipt of due notice in writing from the city, shall defend at its own expense any action or proceedings against the city in which it is claimed that the damage or injury arose from the grantee's negligence in the operation of its activities hereunder. 
    Section IV. That upon termination of the period of this au-' thority by any of the methods herein provided, grantee shall, within a reasonable time, remove its poles, lines and related accessories from all public passages and rights-of-way within the city and any subsequent additions thereto; that should grantee fail as stated aforesaid, then the city shall have the right to make written demand on grantee for such performance, and in event grantee fails to complete removal of its equipment within thirty (30) days from the date of such demand, the city shall have the right to remove and retain said equipment as the city's credit for the value, if any, of the property removed by the city. 
    Section V. The rights hereby granted shall continue operative for a term of fifteen (15) years, from and after the effective date of this ordinance; that the grantee shall pay the city the cost of publishing this ordinance according to law, and shall pay any and all other costs incurred by the city as a result of the adoption of this ordinance. 
    Section VI. That this ordinance shall become effective as provided by law; that this ordinance shall be accepted by the grantee, and which acceptance shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after its final adoption by the board. 
    The within and foregoing ordinance was reduced to writing, introduced in the form in which it is hereby finally adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen, read by the clerk at the regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen held on the second day of May, 1967, and thereafter remained on file with the city clerk for public inspection for at least two (2) weeks before the final passage thereof, and was read and considered section by section at a public meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen and duly passed and adopted by a final vote which resulted as follows: 
Aldermen voting "yea": Harry W. Caldwell, Laurence G. Bennett, Jr., Donald Baggett, C.V. Medlin, and Herman R. Hendrix. 
Aldermen voting "nay": None. 
Whereupon it was declared adopted. 
Adopted this the 6th day of June, 1967. 
Certified: 
_________________________ 
City Clerk 
Approved: 
_________________________ 
Mayor 
This is to certify that the foregoing ordinance was passed and adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of New Albany on the 6th day of June, 1967, as shown on minute Book 8, page ____. 
[ORDINANCE OF MAY 4, 1982] 
An Ordinance by the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, granting unto Mississippi Cablevision, Inc., D/B/A Heritage Cablevision, Inc., nonexclusive right and privilege to use and occupy for its poles, lines and related accessories, the streets, avenues, highways, bridges, alleys, and public places within the City of New Albany and subsequent additions thereto for the purpose of furnishing cable television service of all kinds to the people of and in the City of New Albany, Mississippi, and prescribing terms and conditions therefor. 
Be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen of New Albany, Mississippi, in council convened: 
    Section I .In consideration of the benefits which will accrue to the City of New Albany and the inhabitants thereof, the City of New Albany does hereby grant, operative from the effective date of this ordinance unto Mississippi Cablevision, Inc., d/b/a Heritage Cablevision, Inc., a Mississippi Corporation, (the "grantee") the nonexclusive right, authority, easement and privilege to use and occupy for its poles, lines and related accessories, the streets, avenues, highways, bridges, alleys and other public places within the City of New Albany, for the installation, operation and maintenance solely relative to the furnishings or supplying unto the people of said city television service of all kinds, and said right, authority, easement and privilege to be specifically subject to the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
(a)  The location of any and all poles installed by grantee pursuant hereto shall be situated so as to avoid their interference with facilities of existing permit and/or franchise holders and City of New Albany properties, and all such installations by the grantee shall be approved in advance by the board or by its duly constituted agent; that any and all public passages and rights-of-way which are disturbed and/or damaged in the construction and maintenance of said facilities, shall immediately be restored by the grantee to an as-before status-quo at its expense; that construction, maintenance or removal procedures performed by grantee under the terms hereof shall not bar normal usage of any public passage or right-of-way for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours in duration, and no obstruction whatsoever of this nature shall be made unless previously approved by the board or by its duly constituted agent; that all right, authority, easement and privilege granted and vested in grantee hereunder is subject to all ordinances of the City of New Albany presently in force or which may be hereafter enacted relative to public rights-of-way within said city; 
(b)  That construction materials, manner of erection and assembly of the physical plant, maintenance standards and procedures, as employed by grantee pursuant hereto, shall meet the minimum level of standards and requirements of the National Electrical Code, regulatory enactments now in force or hereafter promulgated by the City of New Albany, and as prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(c)  That service available to subscribers shall include a minimum of twelve (12) television channels inclusive of pay services; that within three (3) years of the date that this ordinance is adopted, three (3) additional television channels shall be made available to system subscribers; that the system will have color usage; that the picture reception rendered subscribers shall be of high quality accompanied by proper sound on typical standard television sets in good repair; 
(d)  The grantee shall pay to city three (3) percent of its annual net revenues from the pay and expanded basic or tier of services; such net revenue to be defined as the gross revenue derived therefrom by grantee, less the fee or charge paid by grantee to the furnisher or supplier or provider of such services to the grantee. In addition, grantee shall pay to the city three (3) percent of its annual gross revenue from installation fees, and "basic monthly cable television service" revenue for the service rendered to customers within the franchise area. For the purposes of this subparagraph, "basic monthly cable television service" is the provision of cable television broadcast signals and access and origination channels, if any, and does not include advertising services, rental of studios or equipment, provision of program production services, per-channel or per-program charges to subscribers ("pay cable"), rental of channels, sale of channel time, provision of commercial services such as security systems, or any other services of the system, the rates and charges for which shall not require approval of the city; 
(e)  Grantee shall maintain an office in the city open during regular business hours and a published telephone listing in the city for the purpose of receiving twenty-four (24) hours per day inquiries, complaints and requests for maintenance service from its customers and the general public. For purposes of this subparagraph, this requirement shall be met by use of an automatic answering machine or service. Grantee shall investigate all complaints and shall in good faith, attempt to resolve them swiftly and equitably. Cable service shall ordinarily be restored within twenty-four (24) hours of the reporting of interruptions, provided, however, that repair services will not be required to be performed under conditions which might jeopardize safety or health of employees of grantee. Television set maintenance or repair service shall not be rendered by grantee in competition with local such enterprises; 
(f)  Assignment. The grantee shall not assign or transfer any right granted under this ordinance to any other person, company, or corporation without prior consent of the mayor and board of aldermen, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided that the grantee shall have the right to assign the provisions of this ordinance to a corporation wholly owned by the grantee, or to a limited partnership of which the grantee or other wholly owned subsidiary of Heritage Communications, Inc., is a general partner, without prior consent of the city; 
(g)  The grantee shall have the right, privilege, and authority to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the use of wooden poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the city, and to use such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, and cables in the course of its business. The grantee shall install its cable on the existing poles owned by other holders of public licenses and franchises with the city whenever possible for the installation of its cable; 
(h)  Temporary removal of cables. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its cable to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five (5) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary cable charges. 
    Section II. Grantee may from time to time declare, make and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations in the supplying of its services to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on file at all times with the clerk of the City of New Albany. 
    Section III. That the grantee shall indemnify and hold the City of New Albany harmless at all times during the term of this grant from and against all claims for injury or damages to persons or property, both real and personal, resulting from the negligence on the part of the grantee incurred by it in pursuit of the activities authorized by this ordinance, and the grantee shall carry insurance against liability due to damages to property in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per accident as to any one accident, and against liability due to injury or death of persons in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) as to any one person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to any one accident, such policies to show the City of New Albany as additional insured and to provide that such policies may not be cancelled or reduced until after thirty (30) days' notice of such action to the City of New Albany. 
    Section IV. In the event of termination or nonrenewal of the franchise, grantee at its own expense will remove all coaxial cable, amplifiers and any other items of equipment which may have been installed from time to time, provided, however, that in the event that grantee is successful in concluding a sale or transfer of its system to a successor or substituted grantee, grantee shall be relieved of its obligation to perform under the terms of this section. 
    Section V. The rights hereby granted shall continue operative for a term of fifteen (15) years, from and after the effective date of this ordinance; that the grantee shall pay the city the cost of publishing this ordinance according to law, and shall pay any and all other costs incurred by the city as a result of the adoption of this ordinance. 
    Section VI. That this ordinance shall become effective as provided by law; that this ordinance shall be accepted by the grantee, and which acceptance shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after its final adoption by the board. 
    Section VII. Line extensions: 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of the grantee to make available all services furnished by grantee to all homes within the City of New Albany at the regular published rates and installation charges within eighteen (18) months of the effective date of this ordinance. In the event the city limits of New Albany are expanded during the franchise period, grantee shall extend service to new subscribers in that area at the regular published rates and installation charges where there are an average of thirty (30) homes per each linear mile of new cable construction; otherwise, such service shall be required only where the new subscriber or subscribers agree to contribute one-half (1/2) of the costs of such extension. 
(b)  In the event the requirements of subsection (a) are not met, extensions of service shall be required only on a basis which is reasonable and compensatory. 
    Section VIII. Change of subscriber rates and charges: 
(a)  Grantee's rates and charges presently in effect for installation, moving of equipment and for basic monthly cable television service are hereby approved by the city. A current schedule of rates will be kept on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "basic monthly cable television service" is the provision of television broadcast signals and access and origination channels, if any, and does not include advertising services, rental of studios or equipment, provision of program production services, rental of channels, sale of channel time, provision of commercial services such as security systems, or any other services of the system, the rates and charges for which shall not require approval of the city. 
(c)  Grantee shall have the right to change the rates for basic monthly cable television service. Such rate change normally will be permitted only once each year and ordinarily shall not exceed the increase in the Consumer Price Index since the last rate increase as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Approval of such rate change shall rest with the mayor and board of aldermen, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Approval for a rate change beyond the Consumer Price Index increase will be given only if grantee proves that the increase will result in improved cable television service to the community or permit grantee a fair rate of return on its investment. 
(d)  Before instituting an increase pursuant to subparagraph (c), grantee will furnish to the mayor and board of aldermen a copy of the new rates and changes, as well as information regarding Bureau of Labor Statistics figures on the Consumer Price Index. Such notification shall precede any increase by not less than thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days. 
(e)  Before approving an increase pursuant to subparagraph (c), the city shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall cause to be published for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a public notice setting forth the proposed rates and charges and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. At such public hearing, any interested party shall have the right to give testimony and present evidence on the rates and charges proposed. 
    Section IX. Crimes and penalties: 
(a)  Injury to property of the grantee. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully injure the property of the grantee. 
(b)  Interception signals of the grantee. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully intercept the signals of the grantee. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of subparagraphs (a) or (b) of this ordinance section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
    The within and foregoing ordinance was reduced to writing, introduced in the form in which it is hereby finally adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen, read by the clerk at the regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen held on the 19th day of April, 1982, and thereafter remained on file with the city clerk for public inspection for at least two (2) weeks before the final passage thereof, and was read and considered two (2) weeks before the final passage thereof, and was read and considered section by section at a public meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen and duly passed and adopted by a final vote which resulted as follows: 
Aldermen voting "yea": Walter Johnson, Herman Hendrix, Thomas R. Cooper, Bill Powell, Kenneth Beasley. 
Aldermen voting "nay": None. 
Whereupon, it was declared adopted. 
Adopted, this the 4th day of May, 1982. 
Certified: Approved: ________________ _________________________ City Clerk Mayor  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A contains franchise ordinances of the city as enacted. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Franchise ordinances generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1972, § 21-13-3. 

APPENDIX B - DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND SUBMITTAL REGULATIONS FOR SITE PLANS, STREETS, STORM WATER, WATER DISTRIBUTION AND SANITARY SEWER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 11-7-2017(3) amended Appendix B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Amendments to said ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. The section numbering, capitalization, and expression of numbers in text have been maintained per the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The former Appendix B pertained to subdivision regulations and derived from Ord. of 11-6-1979; and Ord. of 7-6-1989. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 18; street naming and property numbering plan, § 18-47 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Town empowered to enact subdivision regulations and provide for their administration, enforcement, and amendment, Miss. Code of 1972, §§ 17-1-23, 17-1-25. 

ARTICLE II. - GENERAL 

200. - Title. 
    200.01 These regulations shall be known as the "Design, Construction and Submittal Regulations For Site Plans, Streets, Storm Water, Water Distribution and Sanitary Sewer" for the City of New Albany, MS, and may be so cited. 
201. - Purpose. 
    201.01 These regulations have as their purpose and are designed to: 
    201.01-01 Establish procedures, guidelines, minimum standards and approval for the design and construction of properties, streets, storm water, water distribution and sanitary sewer improvements within the City of New Albany. 
    201.01-02 Ensure the proper coordination with City Departments and Personnel. 
    201.01-03 To maintain minimum acceptable design standards within the City of New Albany. 
    201.01-04 To assign fees for the review/approval process for Site Plans, as well as to fix penalties for the violation of the provisions of these regulations. 
    201.01-05 Provide that the City may vary these regulations in certain cases or under certain conditions. 
202. - Scope. 
    202.01 It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to lay out, subdivide, re-subdivide, plat, or re-plat any land into lots, blocks, or streets, or to sell property therein, which has not been subdivided, re-subdivided, platted, or re-platted according to these regulations. 
    202.02 The Mayor and Board of Alderman will withhold improvements of any nature whatsoever, including the acceptance and maintenance of streets or utilities, and the connection of water or sewer facilities, until a site plan or plat of the proposed development has been approved by the Mayor and Board of Alderman and the plat lawfully recorded in the Chancery Clerk's office. No property shall be sold nor any plat recorded until such plat has been approved as required herein. 
    202.03 All land subdivision of three (3) or more lots or parcels, any one of which has an area less than three (3) acres, either by plat or a metes and bounds description, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or regardless of size when the dedication or vacation of any street, road, or alley is involved, shall require a plat to be filed with an approval by the Mayor and Board of Alderman. 
    202.04 The policies and design information contained in this document are intended to be used for guidance with the development procedures and intentions of the City of New Albany, MS. They are also intended to provide minimum specifications for the construction of public infrastructure such as streets, storm water conveyance facilities, sanitary sewer and water distribution. The policies and guidelines set forth herein are based on accepted engineering principles and past practices of the City of New Albany. 
    202.05 Review of proposed projects, both public and private, by the City will be based upon the policies set forth herein. Exceptions may be applied for in writing to the City expressing the reason, nature and need for the exception. Exceptions may be granted in cases where adherence to these guidelines and specifications will cause excessive physical hardship and constraints on the project in question. Exceptions will not be granted in cases where financial hardship is the only reason for applying. 
203. - Definitions. 
    203.01 For the purpose of interpreting this regulation, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless other provisions of this regulation specifically indicate otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
    203.01-01 Alley : A small, low volume street, either publicly or privately owned, which typically serves as secondary access to the rear or side of properties whose principal frontage is on another street. 
    203.01-02 Appeal: A request for a review of the City's interpretation of any provision of this Regulation. 
    203.01-03 Area of shallow flooding: An "AO" zone designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    203.01-04 Area of special flood hazard: The land in the flood plain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    203.01-05 As-built plan: A reproducible Mylar plan showing the true and actual location and nature of buildings, structures, plant materials, underground utility lines, and other features or improvements which have been installed on or off the property pursuant to a development plan approved under this Regulation, to be used to determine compliance with the requirements of this Regulation. 
    203.01-06 Average percent slope: For the purpose of determining required buffers along watercourses, the sum of the slopes adjacent to a watercourse divided by the number of locations at which the slope was calculated. The determination of the average percent slope shall consist of not less than three (3) locations along the watercourse, with a distance of no greater than five hundred (500) feet between locations. All calculations of the average percent slope shall include the location along the watercourse with the steepest slope. For the purpose of measuring the slope of other land areas, the sum of the slopes of the land area shall be divided by the number of locations at which the slope was calculated. The determination of the average percent slope shall be made at intervals not less than five hundred (500) feet apart, and shall be measured from the top of the slope or the upper boundary of the land area being measured, whichever is lower, to the bottom of the slope or the lower boundary of the land area being measured, whichever is higher. 
    203.01-07 Base flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    203.01-08 Berm: An earthen structure that has been contoured so as to form a mound above the general elevation of the adjacent ground or surface. 
    203.01-09 Block: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    203.01-10 Board: The Mayor and Board of Alderman of the City of New Albany. 
    203.01-11 Borrow material: Fill material that is required for on-site construction and obtained from other locations. 
    203.01-12 Buffer: A portion of property designated to mitigate impacts between land uses or transportation routes, or to protect water features from pollutants. It may contain any combination of vegetative materials, berms, fences, and walls, and provide separation and screening to minimize potential adverse impacts. 
    203.01-13 Buildable area: That portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    203.01-14 Building: Any structure which is enclosed and isolated by exterior walls and constructed or used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private purpose, or accessory thereto, the construction of which requires or would require a building permit under the building Regulation. 
    203.01-15 Building setback line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building and a property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. 
    203.01-16 Certificate of occupancy: A certificate by the Chief Building Inspector that a building, structure or use conforms to the building permit, all applicable city ordinances and requirements and may be used or occupied as proposed and approved. 
    203.01-17 Change of use: A change of use of a building, structure or property to another use as permitted in the subject property's zoning district. 
    203.01-18 City engineer: The designated City Engineer, City Building Official or Manager of Light, Gas and Water Department. 
    203.01-19 Commercial: Any nonresidential use of land involving commerce or commercial activity such as wholesale or retail trade, or the provision of services. 
    203.01-20 Commercial vehicle: A motor vehicle or trailer designed for a commercial or industrial function or marked with commercial advertising. Such vehicle may display letters, numbers, logos, and/or symbols identifying a trade or business or advertising a business product or service (excluding bumper stickers and registration/license numbers or other such information required to be posted by law), have permanently mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, or similar equipment, or be licensed as a "for-hire" vehicle (e.g., a taxicab or limousine). 
    203.01-21 Conditional: Granted or made on provisions set forth in this Regulation. 
    203.01-22 Construction: Any new construction, building, reconstruction, erection, extension, betterment, or improvement of land providing a building or structure or any part thereof, which provides, adds to, repairs, or increases the floor area of a residential or nonresidential use. 
    203.01-23 Cul-de-sac: A street designed to have one (1) end permanently closed, with the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround, and which does not intersect with another street. 
    203.01-24 Demolition: The intentional removal of fifty (50) percent or more of a structure's external walls. 
    203.01-25 Demolition by neglect: Conditions of neglect in the maintenance of a building that constitutes or substantially contributes to deterioration threatening the structural integrity of the structure. 
    203.01-26 Detached: Not physically connected to another building or structure. 
    203.01-27 Detached dwelling: A residential unit such as a single-family home that is the primary structure on a lot and is not physically connected to another building or structure. 
    203.01-28 Detention facility: A natural or artificial facility that provides temporary storage of excess water runoff for the purpose of attenuating excess runoff and normally drains completely between spaced runoff events. 
    203.01-29 Developer: Any person engaged in the development or redevelopment of land, buildings or structures, or any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
    203.01-30 Development: The initiation, construction, change, or enlargement of any use or structure, the disturbance of land through the removal of ground cover, or the division of land into three (3) or more parcels. "Development" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
    203.01-30-1 Construction or enlargement of a building or structure; 
    203.01-30-2 Change in the type of use of a building, structure, or land; 
    203.01-30-3 Material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of businesses, offices, manufacturing establishments, or dwelling units located in a building or structure or on the land; 
    203.01-30-4 Commencement or expansion of resource extraction, agricultural, horticultural, or forestry activities on a parcel of land; 
    203.01-30-5 Demolition of a structure or the removal of trees from a parcel of land; 
    203.01-30-6 Deposition of refuse, solid or liquid wastes, or fill on a parcel of land; 
    203.01-30-7 Alteration, either physically or chemically, of the shore, bank, or channel of any stream, lake, or other body of water or alteration of any wetland; or, 
    203.01-30-8 Permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    203.01-31 [Reserved] 
    203.01-32 Diameter at breast height (DBH): The standard measure of a single (1) stemmed tree at four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade. When a tree has grown with cluster stems at breast height, DBH shall be equal to the sum or aggregate of the diameters of the individual stems measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet above the grade. 
    203.01-33 Drip line: An imaginary perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches (i.e., crown) to the ground. 
    203.01-34 Easement: A grant by a property owner, to the public, a corporation, or other person or persons, of the right to use or occupy designated land for specified purposes, such as for access, drainage, conservation, greenways, or the location of public improvements such as utility lines. An easement does not constitute fee simple ownership of the land. 
    203.01-35 Easement, major drainage: A grant by a property owner to the public of the right to use an identifiable piece of land for the purpose of constructing and/or maintaining drainage ways which receive surface water runoff from four (4) or more adjoining property parcels. 
    203.01-36 Easement, minor drainage: A grant by a property owner of the right to use an identifiable piece of land for the purpose of constructing, preserving and/or maintaining drainage ways which receive surface water runoff from three (3) or fewer adjoining property parcels. 
    203.01-37 Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    203.01-38 Encroachment: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    203.01-39 Energy dissipaters: A structure or a shaped channel section with mechanical armoring placed at the outlet of pipes or conduits to receive and break down the energy from high velocity flow. 
    203.01-40 Excessive growth: The growth of weeds, grass or plants which are not cultivated or landscaped or regularly tended and which may reach a height in excess of twelve (12) inches. 
    203.01-41 Frontage: The length of the property line for a parcel which runs parallel to and along a road right-of-way or street exclusive of alleyways. 
    203.01-42 Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    203.01-43 Flood boundary map: An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone "A." 
    203.01-44 Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    203.01-45 Flood insurance: The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    203.01-46 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard, the Future Conditions Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones. 
    203.01-47 Flood Insurance Study (FIS): A report that includes an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS). 
    203.01-48 Flood zone: A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
    203.01-49 Floodplain management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    203.01-50 Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    203.01-51 Impervious area: A portion of land which, due to human modification, allows little or no infiltration of precipitation into the soil. Impervious areas shall include, but are not limited to, buildings, decks and porches, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks, and paved recreation areas. 
    203.01-52 Impervious surface ratio (ISR): A measurement of intensity of hard surfaced development on a site. An impervious surface ratio is the relationship between the total impervious surface area on a site and the gross land area. The ISR is calculated by dividing the square footage of the area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the square footage of the gross land area. 
    203.01-53 Lake or natural watercourse: Any stream, river, swamp, canal, or other waterway, and any reservoir, lake, or pond, natural or impounded, in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension, and which could be damaged by the accumulation of sediment. 
    203.01-54 Land surveyor, licensed: A land surveyor who is certified and registered by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors pursuant to Title 73, Chapter 13, Sections 1-99 inclusive of the Mississippi Regulation 1972, Annotated, eligible to practice in Mississippi. 
    203.01-55 Land-disturbing activity: Any use of the land by any person for residential, industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, or for highway and road construction and maintenance, that results in a change in the natural cover or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. Within watershed management areas, land disturbing activity shall include the clear cutting of trees unless specifically exempted. 
    203.01-56 Lot: Any parcel of land having an area of less than three (3) acres. 
    203.01-57 Mean sea level: The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
    203.01-58 Multi-use trail: A hard-surface, off-road pathway used by bicyclists, pedestrians, and other non-motorized traffic typically located within or along a greenway or parallel to a street. 
    203.01-59 National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. These figures are used based on information as corrected in 1929. 
    203.01-60 Natural water erosion: The wearing away of the earth's surface by water, wind, or other natural agents under natural environmental conditions, not caused by man. 
    203.01-61 Obstruction: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channel, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    203.01-62 Outparcel: A portion of land in a subdivision, shopping center, or other development that does not contain the primary building associated with the development, that is intended for development of one (1) or more smaller independent buildings and that is usually located adjacent to a development's street frontage. Outparcels are typically smaller than the parent parcel and may not be contiguous to the parcel containing the primary building or buildings. 
    203.01-63 Parking lot: The portion of a site or development dedicated to vehicular ingress and egress, off-street parking, parking aisles, internal travel ways, fire lanes, and other areas dedicated to vehicular use, but not necessarily including vehicular storage areas. A parking lot shall not include the storage of vehicles for sale, wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle parts, or the repair of vehicles. 
    203.01-64 Pervious paving: Surface improvements such as interlocking concrete paving blocks, brick pavers, grid pavers, or other similar improvements which permit the infiltration of water through the improved surface. Gravel shall not be considered a pervious paving surface. 
    203.01-65 Planned unit development: A tract of land under single (1) ownership, or under common control, evidenced by duly recorded contracts or agreements approved by the Board of Alderman, that is planned and developed as an integral unit in a single (1) development operation or in a programmed series of development operations in accordance with a master land use plan and detailed engineering and architectural plans as approved by the Board of Alderman. 
    203.01-66 Planning Committee: The Planning Committee of the City of New Albany, Mississippi. In the absence of such appointed Planning Committee, the Mayor and Board of Alderman shall be considered the Planning Committee. 
    203.01-67 Plans: All drawings, including cross sections, profiles, working details, specifications, utility layouts, etc., which the Contractor prepares for the purpose of showing the type, character, extent, and details of the improvements required under these Regulations. 
    203.01-68 Plat: A map, chart or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been, subdivided. 
    203.01-69 Property: All real property, subject to the provisions of these Regulations. 
    203.01-70 Public right-of-way: Property dedicated for public use, usually for a public street, public infrastructure and/or waterway. 
    203.01-71 Public utility: A business or service that provides the public with electricity, gas, water and sewer service, telephone or cable television service. Any such use must be approved by the City of New Albany, constructed to City standards, sizes, and specifications, conform to the requirements of this Regulation, and be dedicated to and accepted by the City for operation and maintenance. 
    203.01-72 Public utility facilities: A building or structure, other than a water or sanitary sewer utility substation or transportation facility, which houses or contains facilities for the operation of publicly owned or publicly licensed water, wastewater, waste disposal, gas or electricity services. This includes, but is not limited to, wastewater and storm water treatment plants, electrical transformer stations, landfills, and solid-waste transfer stations. This does not include recycling and salvage operations. 
    203.01-73 Repetitive loss: The flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
    203.01-74 Re-subdivision: The re-division of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract of property. 
    203.01-75 [Reserved] 
    203.01-76 Right-of-way: An area owned or maintained by the City, the State of Mississippi, the United States, a public utility, a railroad, or a private concern for the placement of such utilities and/or facilities for the passage of vehicles or pedestrians, including roads, pedestrian walkways, utilities, or railroads. 
    203.01-77 Sediment: Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin. 
    203.01-78 Sedimentation: The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion has been or is being transported away from a land-disturbing activity or into a lake or natural watercourse. 
    203.01-79 Setback: The shortest horizontal distance from a lot line of a lot or abutting right-of-way to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. A parcel of land typically consists of a front setback on a street, two (2) side setbacks, and a rear setback. A corner lot shall typically have a front setback on each street it abuts and side setbacks on other sides. 
    203.01-80 Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced, all-weather pedestrian way, usually within a right-of-way line. 
    203.01-81 Sight visibility triangle: A triangular area at each corner of intersecting roadways, or at the intersection of a roadway and driveway, within which the structures and vegetation are regulated to ensure safe sight distance for drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection. A sight triangle is measured from the point where the extended curb or edge-of-pavement line of a roadway meets the extended curb or edge-of-pavement line of the intersecting roadway or the edge of the driveway, to a point a certain distance along the initial roadway curb or edge-of-pavement line, and then diagonally to a point a certain distance along the along the curb or edge-of-pavement line of the other roadway or the edge of the driveway. 
    203.01-82 Site plan: An accurately scaled development plan that shows existing conditions on a site as well as depicting details of proposed development. 
    203.01-83 Storm drainage facilities: The system of inlets, conduits, channels, ditches and appurtenances which serve to collect and convey storm water through and from a given drainage area. 
    203.01-84 Storm water runoff: The flow of water resulting from precipitation that flows over the surface or as concentrated flow in ditches, channels, storm sewers, or watercourses. 
    203.01-85 Street: A public or private thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The term includes all facilities that normally occur within the right-of-way. The following may also be considered streets: highways, parkways, throughways, roads, avenues, boulevards, lanes, places, courts, and alleys. 
    203.01-86 Street frontage: The distance that a lot line adjoins a public or private street from one (1) lot line intersecting the street to the furthest lot line intersecting the same street. 
    203.01-87 Structure: Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or movable building which can be used for residential, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently, and it includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, cisterns, sewage treatment plants, sheds, gas or liquid storage tanks, and impervious surfaces such as paved parking lots. 
    203.01-88 Subdivider: Any person, owner, contractor, agent or entity having control of any land within the City of New Albany and proposing to subdivide such land into lots. 
    203.01-89 Subdivision: The division of a tract of land into three (3) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions (such as condominium units through a vertical subdivision) for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale or building development. 
    203.01-90 Variance: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Regulation which permits construction or use in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where enforcement would result in unnecessary and unusual hardship. 
    203.01-91 Velocity of flow: The average velocity of flow through the cross section of the main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. The cross section of the main channel shall be that area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks. Overload flows are not to be included for the purpose of computing velocity of flow. 
    203.01-92 Waste: Surplus materials resulting from on-site construction which is disposed of at other locations. 
    203.01-93 Water surface elevation: The height in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    203.01-94 Watercourse: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. A watercourse may include specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    203.01-95 Watershed: All of the land area draining to a particular point on a water course or to a water body. 
    203.01-96 Wetlands: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly as hydrophyte vegetation, as defined by responsible State or Federal agencies such as the Army Corps of Engineers. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    203.01-97 Yard: An open space that lies between a building or set of buildings and the nearest property line. 
    203.01-98 Yard, front: The yard between a building and the front lot line, extending across the entire width of a lot, between side lot lines. 
    203.01-99 Yard, rear: The yard between a building and the rear lot line, extending from between side lot lines or from a corner side yard and opposite side lot line. 
    203.01-100 Yard, side: The yard between a building and the side lot line, extending between the front yard and the rear yard on a typical lot, or between two front yards or a front and side yard on a corner lot. Any such yard abutting a street shall be treated as a "front yard." 
    203.01-101 Zoning map: The Official Zoning Map upon which the boundaries of various zoning districts are drawn. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETS/HIGHWAYS/LANDSCAPING 

300. - General notes. 
    300.01 The following guidelines regarding street design and construction pertain to newly constructed corridors and reconstructed existing facilities. The design guidelines and procedures contained herein are considered minimum standards and are not intended to relieve the designer of his/her duty to perform the applicable calculations to determine an adequate roadway structure. The designer is expected to make investigations necessary to ascertain the physical characteristics of the site and make the proper design recommendations based upon those findings. As an accompaniment to this manual, the designer is referred to the following sources for design and construction criteria that may be referenced herein but are not intended to supersede the guidelines of this manual unless expressly mentioned. 
    300.01-01 "A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets," 2001 ed. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
    300.01-02 "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," 1999 ed. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
    300.01-03 "Guidelines For Geometric Design Of Very Low-Volume Local Roads," 2001 ed. Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
    300.01-04 "Mississippi Roadway Design Manual," 2001 ed. Mississippi Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
    300.01-05 "Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," 2004 ed. Mississippi Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
    300.02 Before construction begins on any street or highway project within the City of New Albany, three (3) sets of construction plans shall be submitted to City Hall for review in accordance with these policies. The plans must be stamped and considered the official sets of plans for the project, and should include at a minimum the following: 
    300.02-01 A title sheet indicating the project name and a vicinity map clearly showing the location and construction limits of the project. The title sheet should also bear the signature and stamp of the registered professional engineer in charge of the design and plan preparation for the project. All plans, unless otherwise allowed by the city engineer, should be prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer in the State of Mississippi. 
    300.02-02 A typical section sheet showing the proposed street cross section. Details on base and pavement materials and thickness should be clearly shown. In projects where an existing street is being reconstructed or over-laid, an existing cross section should also be shown. 
    300.02-03 Plan and Profile sheets depicting the projects horizontal and vertical alignments and the design details of the same. Details regarding drainage facilities, rights-of-way, easements and adjacent property owners affected should be clearly shown. 
    300.02-04 Additional sheets as necessary to convey details of traffic control and safety measures, erosion control and mitigation procedures. 
    300.03 Plans not meeting these minimum standards may be rejected. All plans should be submitted well before construction is scheduled to begin so that City Personnel, or the Cities' Representative has time to review the drawings and issue the applicable permits. 
    300.04 All work that is to be dedicated to the City of New Albany as public infrastructure shall be inspected by a representative from the City, or a "Letter of Certification shall be provided to the City from the Engineer of Record, to ensure compliance with the approved plans and specifications. Work that is not inspected by City Personnel, Cities' Representative, or certified to by the Engineer of Record, will be rejected. Applicable permits that are obtained and copies of the plans and specifications for the project should be kept on site during construction at all times. Prior to acceptance of any portion of the work (i.e., subgrade, base, pavement), City Personnel, or the Cities' Representative shall inspect the work for material quality, course thickness and workmanship. Any portion of the work or materials found to be unacceptable shall be removed and replaced. 
301. - Street classifications. 
    301.01 For purposes of identifying a street or highway's intended or actual use, three separate street classifications have been developed. These classifications generally adhere to nationally accepted standards but are defined here for clarity. 
    301.01-01 Arterials - Arterials may be classified as either principal or minor, but for purposes of this manual and within the context of the City of New Albany, no such separate distinction will be made. Arterials are defined as corridors generating the highest traffic volumes with the longest trip desires and are commonly referred to as major thoroughfares. The arterial system generally will consist of multiple lanes of traffic, will serve the major centers of activity and will be the primary routes entering and leaving the urban area as well as providing routes for intra-area travel, such as between business districts and outlying residential areas. For design considerations of this manual all arterials within the City of New Albany will be assumed to carry 5% heavy truck traffic. 
    301.01-02 Collectors - The collector system provides land service access and traffic circulation within business districts, residential neighborhoods and industrial areas. A collector gathers traffic from within specific land use zones and distributes it to the arterial system. Collectors within the City of New Albany function as primary routes between land use zones and tie directly into the arterial system. They will carry high volumes of traffic both commercial and residential traffic. Carter Avenue, Central Avenue Hillcrest Dr., Glendale Dr. and Main Street are examples of collectors within the City of New Albany. For design purposes, collectors within the City of New Albany will be anticipated to carry 2% heavy truck traffic unless the designer is directed to accommodate a higher or lower percentage by the City. 
    Heavy truck traffic will be considered negligible on collector streets with an ADT < 2000 unless special consideration is ordered by the City. Minimum design criteria for Collector Streets are show on Appendix 8 - Figure 1.A. 
    301.01-03 Local streets - Local streets comprise of all facilities that cannot be categorized into one of the other two classifications. These include mainly residential streets within distinct neighborhoods and subdivisions. They function to distribute traffic to the collector system and beyond and will often carry very low traffic volumes (ADT < 400). Except for industrial districts, local streets will be assumed to carry no truck traffic. In newly developed subdivisions local streets shall be designed so that blocks do not exceed 1,500 feet in length in the Agriculture/Open Space zone, 1,000 feet in the low-density residential zone or 750 feet in other residential zones unless severe topographic constraints or other unusual features make an excessive length necessary. Connections between streets shall be created in such a way that they do not encourage the use of such streets by substantial through traffic. A local street open at only one end should have a cul-de-sac turn around at the closed end. Such dead end streets should be kept to minimum length as possible and in no instance should a dead end street exceed 500 feet in length. Minimum design criteria for Local Streets are show on Appendix 8 - Figure 1.B. Minimum design criteria for cul-de-sacs are shown on Appendix 8 - Figure 1.E. 
    301.01-04 Alleys - Alleys are small, low volume streets that provide access to the side or rear of individual parcels of land in medium to high density residential and commercial areas. They are categorized separately from local streets in that they are intended, in many cases, to serve only a few individual parcels. In commercial districts they may be used primarily for loading and unloading of goods and other materials. In residential districts they may serve as few as two or three separate homes and provide a safer alternative to on street parking on the primary local and collector routes. Traditional housing developments with alleys will be allowed. They should be aligned parallel or perpendicular to adjoining street property lines and it is desirable to situate them where they connect to a local street or collector on both ends. Dead end alleys may be permissible in certain situations and where allowed should be equipped with a turnaround if their length exceeds 600 feet. Minimum design criteria for turnarounds are shown on Figure 1.E. Because of their intended use the geometric criteria for their design will be somewhat less intrusive than that of a local street and is illustrated in Appendix 8 - Figure 1.D. 
302. - General street design criteria. 
    302.01 Horizontal and vertical alignment. 
    302.01-01 Horizontal and vertical alignments for all streets shall be designed in accordance with the following resources: 
    302.01-01-1 "A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets," 2001 ed. Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
    302.01-01-2 "Guidelines For Geometric Design Of Very Low-Volume Local Roads," 2001 ed. Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
    302.01-01-3 "Mississippi Roadway Design Manual," 2001 ed. Mississippi Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
    302.01-02 The designer, unless otherwise instructed by the city engineer, shall utilize the following design requirements based upon the functional classification of the street in question: 
Type of Street ROW Width, 
Ft. (min) Pavement Width, 
Ft. (min) Design Speed, 
mph Sidewalks Req'd Curb & Gutter Req'd Collector 60 26 45 Yes Yes Local 50 24 30 Yes Yes Alley 25 15 n/a * *  
*Site specific per review 
    302.01-03 Streets shall be designed to intersect at approximate right angles (90 degrees). Skewed intersections shall be avoided and in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 75 degrees. Street intersections and approaches shall be designed on as flat a grade as possible. Street gradients within 100 feet of intersections shall not exceed 4% and every reasonable effort shall be made to keep the gradient below 2%. The minimum curb radius permitted at intersections shall be twenty (20) feet for local streets, and twenty-five (25) feet for collector streets and arterials. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point, unless the City certifies to the permit issuing authority that such an intersection can be constructed with no extraordinary danger to public safety. Turning lanes shall be provided at heavily traveled intersections as determined by the City. Care should be taken by the designer to provide the maximum amount of sight distance possible at all intersections. All traffic stripe shall contain reflectorized beads at the rate specified in the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition. 
    302.01-04 In cases where existing streets, which are slated to be reconstructed or widened, do not meet the above recommended design criteria, every effort should be made to during the design process to make the necessary adjustments to bring the street within these parameters. In instances where this is not feasible due to physical restraints or right-of-way restrictions the designer shall notify the City in writing and request a design exception for the project. 
    302.02 Base and paving-Design criteria and construction requirements. 
    302.02-01 If the Design Engineer chooses to use structure thicknesses other than the ones depicted in the typical sections, the following design criteria must be utilized. The base and pavement structure shall be designed in accordance with the following structure number guidelines: 
Classification Structure Number (Minimum) Arterial Calculated per MDOT 
design SOP for Pavements 
and Subgrades Collector 3.82 (min.) Collector (ADT < 2000) 3.38 Local Street (Residential) 2.32 Alleys N/A (See Fig. 1.D)  
    302.02-02 The following coefficients shall be used in structure number calculations: 
Component Coefficient (per inch) Crushed Limestone 0.14 Clay Gravel 0.11 Hot Mix Asphalt (where used as a base material) 0.34 Hot Mix Asphalt 0.44 Portland Cement Concrete 0.44  
    302.02-03 The following minimum conditions are to be considered in the pavement structure design. 
    302.02-03-1 Course thickness of a granular base material will be a minimum of 6 inches. 
    302.02-03-2 Total thickness of hot mix asphalt will be a minimum of 3.5 inches except on alleys. 
    302.02-03-3 Course thickness for Portland cement concrete pavement will be 6 inches minimum. 
    302.02-04 For street designs involving Arterials and collectors with ADT > 2000, the design engineer shall submit to the City the intended structure number to be used in pavement design and how the structure number was derived. The structure number shall be calculated using the standard operating procedures of the Mississippi Department of Transportation. For all local streets and collectors with ADT < 2000, the design engineer may use the above referenced minimums. In instances where a streets classification is in question, the city engineer shall make the final determination based on Developer provided traffic counts for existing corridors and traffic flow and impact studies for new streets or highways. 
    302.03 Subgrade. 
    302.03-01 The subgrade for all new and reconstructed streets shall be shaped to the lines and templates shown on the plans and specifications for the project. Grading of excavation, placement and compaction of embankment/fill material shall conform to the specific requirements of Section 203 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition, unless superseded by these specifications. All areas requiring embankment/fill greater than 8" shall be compacted to an average minimum of 95% of the Standard Proctor for the material being used. A field compaction report for embankment/fill areas signed and sealed by the project engineer shall be furnished to the City. All areas of subgrade will be inspected and proof-rolled by personnel from the City or a designated representative thereof prior to the placement of the base course. Areas that are found to be soft or unsuitable for traffic loads will be undercut to a depth specified by the city or project engineer and backfilled with suitable material. In lieu of extensive undercutting and backfilling, the use of approved Geogrids or Geotextile Fabrics may be acceptable. The installation of geogrids and geotextiles shall conform to the specific requirements found in Sections 204 and 209 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition, respectively. Prior to the installation of geogrids or geotextiles the project engineer shall notify the City of intent to make use of said materials and shall furnish drawings detailing their installation in accordance with an accompanied geotechnical recommendation. 
    302.04 Base. 
    302.04-01 The base course material shall be shaped to the lines and templates shown on the plans and specifications for the project. Base course material shall consist of crushed limestone and shall meet the requirements listed below: 
Gradation Requirements for Crushed Limestone
Base Course 
Sieve Size Percentage Passing 1" 100 ?" 50-85 No. 4 35-65 No. 10 25-50 No. 40 15-30 No. 200 5-15  
    302.04-02 Other base course materials may only be used with special permission from the City and shall be limited to the following: 
Clay Gravel (Class 4B or C) 
Granular Material (Class 9A) 
Hot Mix Asphalt, Base Course, 19 mm Mixture 
    302.04-03 Chemical stabilization of granular bases and subgrades may be considered where use of such methods will not adversely affect existing neighborhoods, business districts or other sensitive areas. For Collectors with an ADT < 2000 and Local Residential Streets, a minimum of 8" of soil cement at 8% by volume may be used in lieu of granular base material. For Collectors with an ADT > 2000 and Arterials, the design shall be calculated using the Standard Operating Procedure of the Mississippi Department of Transpiration for the design of subgrades. Specific requirements for the placement and compaction of granular base courses shall conform to Section 304 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition. Thickness of the base course will developed using the appropriate structure number for the applicable street classification. A base course whose compacted thickness is designated to be more than 8 inches shall be constructed in two or more layers of approximate equal thickness. For crushed limestone, the average compacted density shall exceed or be equal to 99% of the standard proctor, with no single test below 95%. For clay gravel courses, the average compacted density shall be equal to 100% of the standard proctor, with no single test below 96%. A field compaction report signed and sealed by the project engineer shall be furnished prior to placement of the pavement courses. Base courses will be inspected and proof rolled by personnel from the City or a designated representative thereof prior to placement of the pavement courses. 
    302.05 Pavement. 
    302.05-01 Pavement shall be placed to the lines and templates shown in the plans and specifications for the project. Design of pavements will be in accordance with the latest edition of The Guide for the Design of Pavement Structures published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, AASHTO. Hot bituminous pavements will be mixed, placed and compacted in accordance with Division 400 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition. Portland Cement Concrete pavements will be mixed and placed in accordance with Division 500 of the aforementioned reference. Portland Cement Concrete pavement Design shall be performed by a design professional and the design report shall be provided to the City during the design review process. After placement of asphalt pavements, a field compaction report signed and sealed by the project engineer shall be furnished prior to acceptance of the street. Concrete testing reports shall be provided after installation and prior to acceptance of the street, if Concrete pavements are used. Personnel from the City or a designated representative thereof prior will be on site to inspect all paving operations. 
    302.06 Typical sections. 
    302.06-01 The typical sections shown in Appendix 8 are examples of street cross section designs based upon the minimum guidelines discussed herein. For local streets and collectors with an ADT < 2000, the design engineer may incorporate these typical sections into the design unless extenuating circumstances (i.e., heavy truck traffic) dictate the use of a higher structure number. Pavement structure designs for collectors with an ADT > 2000 shall be submitted to the office of the City or a designated representative thereof prior for approval. 
    302.07 Curb and gutter. 
    302.07-01 Streets shall be designed with curb and gutter to allow for greater use of available width, control of drainage, protection of pedestrians, delineation and aesthetics. Types of curbs and gutters allowed and corresponding dimensions are contained Figure 1.E in Appendix 8. 
    302.07-02 Concrete curbs and curbs and gutters may be constructed with forms or a curb forming extruding machine. Forms, except for the divider plates, may be either wood or metal. Forms used shall be set to the line and grade shown on the plans and rigidly held in place by stakes or braces. The depth of the forms shall be equal to the depth of the curb, gutter or combination curb and gutter. Concrete used for construction of curbs, gutters or combinations curbs and gutters shall be a minimum 3,000 psi mix design. The concrete shall be placed on a moist grade and consolidated by vibration or other approved methods. Expansion and tooled joints will be placed in accordance with the plans. Once the concrete has been placed and consolidated, the concrete surface shall receive a floated finish. Special consideration should be given to protect fresh concrete at least for the first 72 hours after initial placement. Refer to Section 609 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Ed. for procedures on finishing and curing concrete used in curb and gutter construction. 
    302.08 Driveways and turnouts. 
    302.08-01 Driveways and turnouts that connect to public streets either concurrent with or after the time of construction of the street shall be built in accordance with the following: Residential driveways and turnouts shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and have a curb radius of not less than 7.5 feet as measured to the back of the curb. Residential driveways shall be paved (asphalt or concrete) for a minimum distance of 100 feet from the edge of pavement. Commercial driveways and turnouts shall be a maximum of 30 feet wide and have a curb radius of not less than 15 feet as measured to the back of the curb. Industrial driveways and turnouts shall be a maximum of 50 feet wide and have a curb radius of not less than 25 feet as measured to the back of the curb. Spacing between driveways on all streets shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet as measured from outside edge to outside edge. 
    302.08-02 Driveways and turnouts shall be constructed with materials and workmanship equal to or better than the adjoining curbs and gutters. The owner of the lot at which the driveway turnout is being constructed shall be responsible for any violation of the above requirements. No material will be placed in the street gutter that will impair the flow of storm water. Refer to Section 614 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Ed. for procedures on finishing and curing concrete used in driveway and turnout construction. 
    302.09 Concrete sidewalks. 
    302.09-01 Sidewalks will be required on all newly constructed and reconstructed roads and streets (see Figure 1.A and Figure 1.B in Appendix 8). Sidewalks shall be constructed along the entire distance of all street frontages and shall match the roadway typical section. Handicapped access ramps, complying with the requirements of federal law, shall be provided for all sidewalks. Sidewalks shall not installed in such a manner that they conflict with or are obstructed by power lines, telephone poles, fire hydrants, traffic/street signs, mailboxes, trees, buildings or any other structure. When there is an anticipated obstruction, the sidewalk shall be installed around the object and shall provide the required sidewalk width. When utility layouts are required as part of a plat, the location and extent of sidewalks within the subdivision shall be shown on the utility layout and shall be subject to the approval of the City Review Personnel, or Designee and the utility agencies. 
    302.09-02 The City may waive all or part of the sidewalk requirements in the following situations: 
    302.09-02-1 When the City determines that the sidewalks will interfere with or disrupt drainage. 
    302.09-02-2 When the City determines that public construction that requires sidewalk replacement will take place within three (3) years. 
    302.09-02-3 In single or two-family residential subdivisions with a density less than one dwelling unit per acre. 
    302.09-02-4 In instances where the City determines that sidewalks would incur excessive costs to the developer due to topographic or natural resource constraints. 
    302.09-03 Where the requirement for sidewalk construction is waived, adequate right-of-way shall be provided for future installation of sidewalk if necessary. 
    302.09-04 Concrete sidewalks may be constructed by the use of forms (wood or metal) or an approved automatic extrusion type paving machine. Forms used shall be set to the line and grade shown on the plans and rigidly held in place by stakes or braces. The depth of the forms shall be equal to the depth of the sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Excavation shall be made to the required depth of the sidewalk and wide enough to permit the placement of forms and braces. The subgrade shall be compacted and moistened prior to placement of any concrete. Any soft or spongy soil shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. At no time will concrete be placed on top of mud. Concrete used for construction of sidewalks shall be a minimum 3,000 psi mix design. Tooled joints will be placed at a spacing of five (5) feet. Expansion joints are to be placed at intervals of twenty-five (25) feet. Once the concrete has been deposited and consolidated, the concrete surface shall receive a float and broom finish. Refer to Section 608 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Ed. for more procedures on finishing and curing concrete used in sidewalk construction. 
303. - Perimeter landscaping. 
    303.01 A minimum of one (1) large deciduous shade tree for every thirty-five (35) lineal feet of street frontage or portion thereof shall be planted upon the subject property within the area five (5) feet behind the street right-of-way line. 
    303.02 Said trees may be clustered or arranged within the setback, and need not be placed in a uniform thirty-five-foot interval. 
    303.03 Parking areas shall be organized as a series of small parking bays with landscape islands separating them. 
    303.04 A landscape island shall be placed for each one hundred (100) lineal feet of parking. 
    303.05 The island shall contain a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW/APPROVAL 

400. - Pre-application review. 
    400.01 The Pre-Application Review step is optional, but strongly recommended. If the Developer elects to request a Pre-Application Review, the Developer applicant shall contact the City of New Albany. The requested review will be scheduled on the next agreed upon available date. The applicant shall submit to the City a conceptual drawing, or sketch plat, showing the boundaries of the proposed development, its relationship to surrounding properties, natural features on the site and surrounding area, and the proposed streets and lot pattern, and the proposed types of land uses planned. The sketch must also include topography. The conceptual drawing shall illustrate the entire proposed development and illustrate all phases of the development. The applicant must state his intentions regarding development or improvement of private or public roads. The purpose of this step is to provide the Developer the opportunity to consult early and informally with the City Staff before preparation of a site plan or preliminary plat and to make the City Staff and the applicant aware of potential problems involving the proposed development. The Application For Site Plan Approval (Appendix 1A) must accompany the above mentioned information. 
401. - Preliminary plat application review procedure. 
    401.01 After the pre-application review has been completed, the application and the application fee for Preliminary Plat approval of subdivision must be submitted to the City. 
    401.02 Within two weeks of receiving application for site plan approval, the City will place a conspicuous sign in a clearly visible spot on or near the property to be developed that will declare the nature of the planned development and the date and time upon which the Developer will appear before the City. 
    401.03 The Developer shall conduct a traffic impact study and provide a report to the City for a subdivision having more than 50 lots. 
    401.04 The condition of the City or county road system in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision will be subject to review by City Personnel or its representative. The review may require a site inspection by the City, the Developer, and the Developer's agent. The Developer may be required to grant additional right-of-way and/or improve existing county roads connecting to or serving the proposed subdivision. Any such improvements shall be negotiated with the City of New Albany and the County Supervisor for the District prior to the Preliminary Plat approval. 
    401.05 The Developer shall consult with other agencies having an interest or jurisdiction in the development, including but not limited to the County Health Department, County Solid Waste Department, Corps of Engineers, MDEQ, MDOH and other environmental regulatory agencies, and all utility providers to determine the availability of services and compliance with regulations of those agencies. 
    401.06 The Developer shall provide the names and addresses of all owners of all adjacent property to the City. If required by the City of New Albany, the Developer shall notify those property owners by US mail of the date of the Developer's appearance before the City. 
    401.07 If the Developer applicant elects to skip the Pre-Application Review step, then all applicable provisions of Pre Application Review Section must still be satisfied. 
    401.08 The Developer shall submit to the City for review the following information: 
    401.08-01 Application form (Appendix 1B). 
    401.08-02 Filing fee, (Appendix 6). 
    401.08-03 Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat. 
    401.08-04 Three (3) copies of construction plans (See Appendix 4) and technical specifications. 
    401.08-05 Completed preliminary plat approval checklist form (Appendix 3) and supporting documents. 
    401.08-06 Any variance requests, in written form only (Appendix 7). 
402. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
    402.01 Preliminary plat documents showing the proposed subdivision of the land into lots shall contain, as a minimum, the information listed below unless the City of New Albany makes the determination that less detailed information is adequate for review. No processing or review of a preliminary plat will proceed without the required information. 
    402.01-01 General requirements. 
    402.01-01-1 Title Block - Name of project, labeled: Preliminary Plat; submittal and revision dates; sheet size (36" x 48" maximum) with index map and match lines if multiple sheets are required; graphic scale (not smaller than one inch to 200 feet on a standard engineering scale); north point; property identification number; vicinity map clearly establishing the location of the proposed project, with readily recognizable landmarks, stream buffers, flood plain boundaries, property zoning districts and any overlay zones. 
    402.01-01-2 Name, address and telephone number of owner, applicant and agent; name, address and telephone number of surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or other designer, with seal. 
    402.01-01-3 In addition, State or Federal regulations may require that additional information be supplied to the Planning and Zoning Committee as a part of a submittal. 
    402.01-01-4 The preliminary plat shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Committee in both hard copy and digital form. The plat drawing shall be in a generally accepted engineering file format and shall be georeferenced to the Mississippi East State Plane Coordinate System. 
    402.01-02 Existing conditions. The preliminary plat shall show the following information on existing conditions: 
    402.01-02-1 Boundary of the property, using metes and bounds with angle of departure of adjacent properties; 
    402.01-02-2 Site total area and amount to be developed; 
    402.01-02-3 Lot lines; 
    402.01-02-4 Existing building footprints and square footage; 
    402.01-02-5 Improvements, such as loading areas, parking areas, driveways, alleys, streets, sidewalks, etc.; 
    402.01-02-6 Any septic tanks, drain fields and wells; 
    402.01-02-7 Culverts and other subsurface features; 
    402.01-02-8 All utilities and easements, above and below ground, including information on type, size, and elevation; 
    402.01-02-9 Railroads; 
    402.01-02-10 Cemeteries; 
    402.01-02-11 Setback requirements; 
    402.01-02-12 Zoning of the site and adjacent zoning, including any overlay zones; 
    402.01-02-13 Land use of the site and adjacent land uses including major improvements within 50 feet of the subject property; 
    402.01-02-14 Adjacent property owners; 
    402.01-02-15 Adjacent streets, including name and right-of-way width; 
    402.01-02-16 Topographic contours at two-foot intervals for all property within 100 feet of a proposed development area and topographic contours at five-foot contour intervals for the remainder of the property including a source reference; 
    402.01-02-17 Locations and names of water features including shorelines, water bodies, intermittent and perennial streams; 
    402.01-02-18 A specimen tree survey; 
    402.01-02-19 Locations of drainage ways, stream buffers, special flood hazard areas, wetlands and wetland buffers; 
    402.01-02-20 Locations of vegetation, rock outcrops, steep slope areas, natural inventory sites and historic inventory sites; 
    402.01-02-21 A list of any conditions applied to the property as part of any previous approvals. 
    402.01-02-22 Existing features shall be clearly distinguishable from proposed development. 
    402.01-03 Proposed conditions. 
    402.01-03-1 Street Improvements (Public and Private): Location of improvements or widenings, names, widths of rights-of-way and pavement, design criteria including sight triangles and a typical cross section; Traffic Impact Analysis, if required. 
    402.01-03-2 Pedestrian Circulation: Location of sidewalks and other pedestrian ways including dimensions and surfacing, along streets and other locations; provision of crosswalks. 
    402.01-03-3 Landscaping: Location of all plant materials and other landscaping features, including calculations of amount required and the amount provided; the number, size, and description of plant materials, fences, walls and berms; provisions for screening specialized features, such as storage areas; calculations of the amount of tree coverage required and the amount and percentage of tree coverage provided by tree preservation and tree replacement; calculation of the amount of street trees and the amount provided by tree preservation and tree installation; a land disturbance tree survey; and the location and a description of all proposed and required tree protection measures. 
    402.01-03-4 Grading: Location of vegetation to be retained including approximate sizes and protection measures to be used; a depiction of contours at two-foot intervals, supplemented with planned floor elevations on each lot that is wholly or partially within a Special Flood Hazard Area or that contains less than 6,000 square feet, and spot elevations when necessary, including location, description, and size of any retaining walls; dimensions of stream buffers. 
    402.01-03-5 Utilities: Location and width of all easements and rights-of-way for water, sewer, storm sewers, gas, electric, communication facilities, or any other utility facility. 
    402.01-03-6 Storm Drainage: Location and description of temporary and permanent storm drainage pipes and swales; amount of impervious surface; provisions for erosion and sedimentation controls, including retention and detention facilities; as well as professionally sealed engineering calculations used in the design. 
    402.01-03-7 Water and Sewer: Location and description of public and private water and sanitary sewer improvements including connections to existing facilities and maintenance provisions. 
    402.01-03-8 Property Dedications/Reservations: Location and description of dedicated or reserved properties under public or private ownership including the boundaries, size, purpose, future ownership and maintenance provisions for the property. This category includes but is not limited to thoroughfares, rail corridors, greenways, recreation facilities, open space and common areas. 
403. - Specific performance standards. 
    403.01 Within Special Flood Hazard Areas: demonstration that the subdivision will minimize flood damage through the location and construction of all public utilities and facilities, including water and sewer systems. Also, provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
404. - Preliminary plat approval. 
    404.01 Applicability: A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of this Code, defined as any development of more than three (3) lots or any subdivision of land that would include public dedication of land, streets, utility extensions, or required storm water management facilities. 
    404.02 Subdivision approval requires the submission of both preliminary and final plats and full interagency review for conformity with the requirements of this Code and other development-related Codes. 
    404.03 Where site plans, as required by this Code, serve as preliminary plats for subdivisions, they shall satisfy these submission requirements in addition to those required for zoning compliance. 
405. - Review by the City of New Albany. 
    405.01 If, after initial review, any required corrections are minor, the subdivision review shall be scheduled at the next Planning Committee meeting; if required corrections are extensive, the applicant shall correct the plat before it is scheduled for Planning Committee review. If the applicant fails to submit revised plats in response to the comments of the staff review agencies within 90 days of receiving such correction comments, the application may be considered to have been withdrawn by the applicant. 
406. - Action by the planning committee. 
    406.01 The preliminary plat documents, along with the review comments, will be considered by the Planning Committee at a public meeting at which a representative of the subdivider or any other interested person may attend. 
    406.02 After hearing any recommendations from the City Review Personnel or Designee, the Planning Committee shall approve the plat as is, approve it subject to additional corrections, defer action for additional information and corrections, or disapprove it. Approved or corrected preliminary plats shall be stamped and signed denoting approval. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or deferred, the Planning Committee shall notify the applicant of the reasons for such disapproval or deferral. 
407. - Issuance of required permits. 
    407.01 Upon preliminary plat approval, the applicant may apply for the required permits to begin site work and the installation of improvements. All site work shall be performed in compliance with the requirements of this section and other applicable regulations of the city, county, and state. No required permit may be issued until the required preliminary plat is approved. 
408. - Preliminary plat revisions. 
    408.01 Minor revisions to approved preliminary plats, which reflect the same basic street and lot configuration as used for the original approval, may be approved by the City Review Personnel or Designee. Significant changes to an approved preliminary plat, as determined by the City Review Personnel or Designee, shall be resubmitted for review and approval as if it is a new application. 
409. - Modification of design standards and improvement requirements. 
    409.01 In approving the preliminary plat, the City Board may modify any of the design standards or improvement requirements set forth in these documents, where necessary to make the approved preliminary plat conform to any master land use plan which the City has approved for a planned unit development on the property. 
    409.02 In all other cases, and only upon the request of the applicant, the City Board may modify any of the design standards or improvement requirements set forth in these documents, upon finding the following: 
    409.02-01 That the topography or other physical conditions of the subject property are such that compliance with these standards and requirements would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the applicant, above and beyond what other subdividers would face; 
    409.02-02 That the modifications will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of this Code. 
    409.02-03 Where any such modification is granted, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the minutes of the City Board meeting at which final action is taken on the preliminary plat. 
410. - Final plat approval. 
    410.01 Applicability: A final plat shall be required for all subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of this Code except as allowed under Mississippi General Statute. 
    410.02 Conformity with preliminary plat: The final plat shall be in close conformity to the approved preliminary plat, if any, and may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which is proposed for recordation. 
    410.03 Submittal requirements: 
    410.03-01 When the installation of required site improvements is nearing completion, the subdivider shall submit a final plat for review and approval. 
    410.03-02 The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with Mississippi Statute Section 17-1-23, Subdivision Regulations; standard land surveying and mapping practices; and city engineering standards. 
    410.03-03 Endorsements on Final Plats. The following certificates shall be placed upon all final plats: 
    410.03-03-1 Certificate of accuracy and mapping signed by a registered surveyor; 
    410.03-03-2 Certificate of ownership and dedication signed and notarized, including all individuals, partnerships, and corporations, and lenders with financial security interests; 
    410.03-03-3 Statement that the surveys are in conformity with "Minimum Standards," as promulgated by the Mississippi State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors; 
    410.03-03-4 Attorney's certification of ownership for any final plat involving a right-of-way dedication signed and notarized; and 
    410.03-03-5 Review Officer's Certification, if applicable. 
    410.04 Action by the city. 
    410.04-01 City Review Personnel or Designee shall approve the plat as is, defer action for additional information and corrections, or disapprove it. If the final plat is disapproved or deferred, the City Review Personnel or Designee shall notify the applicant of the reasons for such disapproval or deferral. 
    410.05 Issuance of certificate of compliance. 
    410.05-01 Necessary Infrastructure: If a final plat for a project has been approved prior to completion of storm water facilities, water and sewer utilities, streets, sidewalks, and recreation facilities, certificates of compliance shall not be issued and permanent water or sewer service shall not be provided for buildings within the platted area until completion of required improvements except as further provided below. 
    410.05-01-1 If the director or designee of the department responsible for acceptance or regulation of the required infrastructure determines in his/her reasonable discretion that delay will improve the quality of the infrastructure or will conserve resources, he/she may allow certificates of compliance to be issued. In such case, the responsible director or designee may require supplementation of the performance guarantee(s) that was provided prior to final plat approval, and shall, in addition, set a date by which the necessary infrastructure shall be completed. 
    410.05-01-2 Examples of improvement for which delays may be granted include completing storm water facilities after they are no longer needed as sedimentation basins; delaying final asphalt application on road surfaces for a period of time to detect problems; delaying construction of turn lanes until traffic thresholds are reached; delaying sidewalk segments as individual houses are built; and delaying construction of infrastructure that requires coordination with other planned infrastructure. 
    410.05-02 Other Improvements: For other required improvements, if the responsible department director or designee determines the completion of the improvement prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance is not practicable, and sufficient justification for the delay has been shown, certificates of compliance may be issued if an adequate performance guarantee is provided. In such event, the responsible department director or designee shall determine the time period within which the improvement must be completed. 
411. - Expiration of approval. 
    411.01 The subdivider shall have 90 days after approval to file and record the final plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk before the approval becomes void. 
412. - Waivers. 
    412.01 For purposes of financing or refinancing development, it is sometimes necessary to subdivide a previously approved development complex (including but not limited to a shopping center, an office or industrial park, or a housing complex) originally located on a single parcel into two or more lots. The Planning Committee may by affirmative majority vote, vary or modify the requirements of this Code and the dimensional, parking, landscaping, and buffering provisions of this Code to permit such subdivision to occur subject to making the following findings: 
    412.01-01 A valid, approved site plan exists for the overall complex; 
    412.01-02 The complex, in its entirety, satisfies all Code requirements; and 
    412.01-03 Each final plat created contains a note stating that the owners acknowledge that the individual parcel is a part of the named development complex, and that deeds of easement, restrictive covenants, and/or other legal documents necessary for the perpetual functioning of the development complex shall be executed and recorded with the final plat. 
413. - Final plat recording procedure. 
    413.01 Following the granting of final approval by the City of New Albany, the Developer shall submit an original copy of the approved Final Plat containing all of the necessary signature blocks, certificates, and seals as specified within this document, along with any agreements, covenants, and bonds and an attorney's certificate of title certifying title to the land subdivided valid as of the hour and day of recording. The original plat shall be drafted or reproduced on a stable base 4 ml. double matte drafting film. A digital copy shall be provided to the City in a format that is compatible with the City's software. 
    413.02 The Plat shall not be recorded until the Chancery Clerk has ascertained that all requirements above have been met, all fees pertaining to the application and filing process have been paid, and the Chancery Clerk attests approval together and records the date of the Final Plat approval by order of the City of New Albany. 
    413.03 The City of New Albany shall retain eight (8) prints. Six (6) of these prints shall be distributed to the appropriate Local and County offices for review/approval. Two (2) copies shall be retained by the Planning Department. 
414. - Site plan review. 
    414.01 The site plan review process assures that future development will occur in a planned and orderly manner. All proposed development that will affect the exterior of a structure shall be subject to the site plan review process. In some cases, proposed interior changes will also be subject to site plan review. For instance, an applicant may propose interior changes as part of a change in use (e.g., from overnight accommodations to retail sales). A change in use may result in different standards for parking, landscaping, or buffers which must then be included in the application. 
415. - Types of site plans. 
    There shall be three types of site plans with differing levels of approval required for each. A traffic impact study (TIS) will be required for minor and major site plans. The criteria for establishing which type of site plan and the corresponding level of approval for each are indicated below: 
    415.01 Basic Site Plans. 
    415.01-01 Criteria: Projects shall be considered basic site plans if they meet the following standards: 
    415.01-01-1 They involve the development of not more than one single-family detached dwelling or one duplex dwelling; or 
    415.01-01-2 They involve accessory structures less than 25% of the size of principal buildings; or 
    415.01-01-3 They involve additions to an existing single-family residential structure; or 
    415.01-01-4 They involve nonresidential additions less than 25% of the size of the principal building. 
    415.01-02 Approval: Basic site plans shall be approved by the City Review Personnel or designee. 
    415.02 Minor Site Plans. 
    415.02-01 Criteria: Projects that do not meet the criteria for basic site plans shall be considered minor site plans if they meet the following standards: 
    415.02-01-1 Minor site plans shall request no modifications of any of the standards established in this Code other than those which may be allowed through the compatible use review process; 
    415.02-01-2 They do not involve the development of any use that requires the issuance of a variance; 
    415.02-01-3 The Development Review Checklist must be completed and submitted with a minor site plan application. 
    415.02-02 Approval: Minor site plans shall be approved by the City review Personnel, or Designee with the concurrence of any departments who would be affected by the plan, such as building, fire, and public works. 
    415.03 Major Site Plans. 
    415.03-01 Criteria: Projects that meet one or more of the following standards shall be considered major site plans if: 
    415.03-01-1 They request modifications of a standard established in this Code; or 
    415-03-01-2 They involve the development of any use that requires a critical variance; or 
    415-03-01-3 They do not meet the criteria for basic or minor site plans. 
    415.03-02 Approval: Major site plans shall be reviewed by all relevant City departments and the Planning Committee. The Planning Committee shall make a recommendation to the City Board on the project. The City Board shall be the approving authority. 
416. - Pre-application conference. 
    416.01 Any applicant petitioning for a site plan may schedule a pre-application conference with the City Review Personnel, or Designee to discuss the procedures, standards, and regulations required for site plan approval in accordance to the provisions of this Code. 
417. - Site plan submittal requirements. 
    417.01 An application for site plan review shall be submitted in accordance with the, Application Requirements contained herein. Site Plan documents shall contain, at a minimum, the information listed below unless expressly exempted by another provision of this Code or the City Review Personnel or Designee makes the determination that an adequate review may be done with less detailed information. This specifically applies to a Basic site plan. No processing or review of a site plan shall proceed without the required information. 
    417.01-01 Title Block: Name of project; submittal and revision dates; index map and match lines if multiple sheets are required; graphic scale (not smaller than one inch to 200 feet on a standard engineering scale); north point; property identification number; vicinity map clearly establishing the location of the proposed project, with readily recognizable landmarks; and any overlay zones. 
    417.01-02 Name, address, and telephone number of owner, applicant and agent; name, address, and telephone number of surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, or other designer, with seal. 
    417.01-03 Existing Conditions, including: 
    417.01-03-1 Boundary of the property, using metes and bounds with angle of departure of adjacent properties; 
    417.01-03-2 Site size and amount to be developed; 
    417.01-03-3 Lot lines; 
    417.01-03-4 Building foot prints and square footage; 
    417.01-03-5 Improvements, such as loading areas, parking areas, driveways, alleys, streets, sidewalks, etc.; 
    417.01-03-6 Any septic tanks, drain fields and wells; culverts and other subsurface features; 
    417.01-03-7 All utility easements, above and below ground, including information on type, size, and elevation; 
    417.01-03-8 Railroads; 
    417.01-03-9 Setback requirements; 
    417.01-03-10 Zoning of the site and adjacent zoning, including any overlay zones; 
    417.01-03-11 Land use of the site and adjacent land uses including major improvements within 50 feet of the subject property; 
    417.01-03-12 Adjacent property owners; 
    417.01-03-13 Adjacent streets, including name and right-of-way width; 
    417.01-03-14 Topographic contours at two-foot intervals for all property within 100 feet of a proposed development area and topographic contours at five-foot contour intervals for the remainder of the property including a source reference; 
    417.01-03-15 Locations and names of water features including shorelines, water bodies, intermittent and perennial streams, drainage ways, stream buffers, floodways, floodway fringes, wetlands and wetland buffers; 
    417.01-03-16 A tree coverage and specimen tree survey; 
    417.01-03-17 Steep slope areas; 
    417.01-03-18 Natural Inventory sites; and 
    417.01-03-19 Historic Inventory Sites. 
    417.01-04 A list of any conditions applied to the property as part of any previous approvals. 
    417.01-05 Existing features shall be clearly distinguishable from proposed development. 
    417.01-06 Proposed Conditions, including: 
    417.01-06-1 Buildings: Location, footprint, entrances, area by floor (square feet), height, finished floor elevation, setback requirements defining building envelope. When building descriptions have been included in a zoning approval, the site plan shall include building elevations or renderings as well as any other information needed to support the requirements of the zoning map change approval. 
    417.01-06-2 Site Service Areas and Facilities: Location of loading, trash/recycling handling and other facilities including height, footprint and screening. 
    417.01-06-3 Internal Vehicular Circulation and Parking: Location of drives and driveway aisles (with radii); parking spaces, including number of spaces required and number provided shall meet the existing "Code of Ordinance" pertaining to parking; the number of disabled parking spaces required and number provided shall meet the most current ADA requirements; the number of spaces for bicycle parking if proposed; a description of the pavement structure; and a lighting plan if lighting is proposed. 
    417.01-06-4 Street Improvements (Public and Private): Location of improvements or widening, names, widths of rights-of-way and pavement, design criteria including sight triangles and a typical cross section, and Traffic Impact Analysis if applicable. 
    417.01-06-5 Pedestrian Circulation: Location of sidewalks, trails, crosswalks, and/or other pedestrian ways including dimensions and description of surface materials. 
    417.01-06-6 Landscaping: Location of all plant materials and other landscaping features, including calculations of amount required and the amount provided; the number, size, and description of plant materials, fences, walls, and berms as applicable; provisions for screening specialized features such as storage areas; calculations of the amount of tree coverage required and the amount and percentage of tree coverage provided by tree preservation and tree replacement; calculation of the amount of street trees and the amount provided by tree preservation and tree installation; a land disturbance tree survey if applicable; and the location and description of all proposed and required tree protection measures. 
    417.01-06-7 Grading: Location of vegetation to be retained including approximate sizes and protection measures to be used; a depiction of contours at two-foot intervals, supplemented with spot elevations when necessary, including location, description, and size of any retaining walls; and dimensions of stream buffers. Delineation of the proposed limits of disturbance shall be required. 
    417.01-06-8 Utilities: Location and width of all easements and rights-of-way for water, sewer, storm sewers, gas, electric, communication facilities, or any other utility facility. 
    417.01-06-9 Storm Drainage: Location and description of temporary and permanent storm drainage pipes, and swales; amount of impervious surface; and professionally sealed engineering calculations used in the design. 
    417.01-06-10 Water and Sewer: Location and description of public and private water and sanitary sewer improvements including connections to existing facilities and maintenance provisions. 
    417.01-06-11 Property Dedications/Reservations: Location and description of dedicated or reserved properties under public or private ownership including the boundaries, size, purpose, future ownership, and maintenance provisions for the property. This category includes but is not limited to streets, rail corridors, greenways, recreation facilities, open space, and common areas. 
    417.01-07 Specific performance standards as required by other parts of the Development Code. 
    417.01-08 A site plan shall conform to an approved development plan if applicable. 
    417.01-09 In addition, State or Federal regulations may require that additional information be supplied to the City Review Personnel or Designee as a part of a submittal. 
    417.01-10 The Site Plan Approval Checklist must be completed and submitted with each site plan application (Appendix 2). 
    417.01-11 The following evaluations shall be made during the site plan review process. Site plans that meet the following criteria may be approved by the approving authority: 
    417.01-11-1 The site plan complies with all applicable Code requirements, including all design standards; 
    417.01-11-2 The site plan complies with all previously approved applicable City plans, such as a comprehensive plan; 
    417.01-11-3 The site plan displays a site design and development intensity appropriate for and tailored to the unique natural characteristics of the site, which may include the location of significant wooded areas, specimen trees, wetlands, steep slopes, Natural Inventory sites, and floodplains; 
    417.01-11-4 For nonresidential and multifamily projects, the site plan displays the location of trash handling, recycling, grease bins, and other waste related facilities employed in the normal operation of the use, as applicable; 
    417.01-11-5 The site plan includes adequate and clearly marked parking areas and pedestrian and vehicular access points; 
    417.01-11-6 The site plan includes an adequate design of traffic patterns, traffic control measures and street pavement areas and has provisions for maintaining traffic flows and reducing negative impacts of traffic on nearby properties; 
    417.01-11-7 The site plan complies with site construction specifications; 
    417.01-11-8 The site plan includes adequate storm water facilities, including appropriate storm water detention, water supply, sanitary sewer service, fire protection, street signs, and street lighting, as applicable, as evidenced by compliance with department standards, specifications, and guidelines; 
    417.01-11-9 The site plan complies with requirements for easements or dedications; 
    417.01-11-10 Where a traffic impact study (TIS) is required, the site plan either accommodates the anticipated traffic generated by the development, or it proposes adequate traffic mitigation measures within the development project. 
418. - Modifications required for approval. 
    418.01 Site plans requiring modifications for approval shall be returned to the City Review Personnel, or Designee within 90 days or the site plan application shall be considered withdrawn. An extension period may be granted by the City Review Personnel or Designee at the written request of the applicant. 
419. - Corrected site plans. 
    419.01 Before final approval, the applicant shall submit the corrected site plan to the City Review Personnel or Designee, which addresses any comments made as part of the approval process. The City Review Personnel or Designee shall determine if the corrections adequately meet the stated concerns and either approves the corrected basic or minor site plan, or presents the corrected major site plan to the Planning Committee or City Board as required. 
420. - Effect and duration of site plan approval. 
    420.01 Approval of the site plan, final construction drawings, and development agreement shall authorize the applicant to proceed with any applications for building permits and other permits and approvals required in order to develop the property in conformity with the approved site plan. A permit, certificate, or other approval may be issued for any building or structure on the property, and a building or structure on the property may be occupied, only where the applicant has complied with the approved site plan, development agreement, and final construction drawings and made all dedications and improvements required by this Code, except where the noncompliance is the subject of a minor change to the site plan approved by the City Review Personnel or Designee. 
    420.01-01 An approved site plan shall become null and void under the following conditions: 
    420.01-01-1 If a building permit is not applied for within six (6) months following the date of Site Plan approval; or 
    420.01-01-2 If work on the project is not commenced within six (6) months following the date of issuance of the building permit; or 
    420.01-01-3 If work on the project is not completed within two (2) years following the date of issuance of the building permit. 
421. - Extensions. 
    421.01 Upon the written request of the applicant, and after good cause is shown, the City Review Personnel may grant one (1) extension of an additional thirty days within which a building permit may be issued. Any further extensions will require review and approval by the Planning Committee. 
422. - Continuing validity of site plans. 
    422.01 An approved site plan shall retain its validity for four years, if: 
    422.01-01 A permit to begin development pursuant to the site plan, such as a land disturbance permit, a building permit, or an improvement permit, has been issued and has remained continuously valid thereafter; and, 
    422.01-02 Building or land disturbing activity has begun on the property. 
    422.01-03 The issuance of a building permit or a certificate of compliance within a phase of a project shall not extend the validity of the site plan for the unbuilt portions of that phase or any future phases of the project for which building permits have not been issued. 
423. - Effect of expiration. 
    423.01 If the period of validity expires, no building permit shall be issued until a new application for a Site Plan is approved. 
424. - Changes to approved site plans. 
    424.01 Upon the written request of the applicant, the City Review Personnel or Designee may approve the following minor changes to an approved site plan without further review by the Planning Committee or City Board: 
    424.01-01 Expansion of an existing building or structure, or construction of an accessory building or structure, representing ten percent or less of the floor area of the existing or proposed buildings or structures on the lot or project of the approved site plan; 
    424.01-02 Alteration to any approved element of the building elevation, expansion of an approved building or structure, or addition of an accessory building or structure, representing no more than ten percent of the floor area of the buildings or structures approved on the site plan; 
    424.01-03 Expansion or changes in off-street parking representing twenty percent or less of the area of the existing or proposed parking; 
    424.01-04 Minor field alterations to accommodate physical site conditions involving interior features of the site design, including relocation of the buildings or uses shown on the approved site plan, which represents the same general building relationships, topography, landscaping, and minimum utility standards; or 
    424.01-05 Where the approved plant materials are unavailable, substitution of the approved plant materials for plant materials which will accomplish the intent of this Code and the approved site plan. 
    424.02 Standards of Review: Before approving any such change, the City Review Personnel or Designee shall make the following findings: 
    424.02-01 That all changes conform to the minimum required standards for the zoning district in which the property is located; 
    424.02-02 The off-street parking is not reduced below the minimum required; 
    424.02-03 That all additions, alterations, and expansions shall be compatible with the existing or approved buildings, structures, and parking area; 
    424.02-04 That any additional required landscaping shall be comparable to the approved site plan and shall follow City specifications and guidelines; 
    424.02-05 That the effect of the landscaping, buffers, or screening on the site, or on the approved site plan, is not diminished; 
    424.02-06 That the number of access points to public streets is neither increased nor substantially relocated; 
    424.02-07 That the circulation pattern provides for the safe, controlled, and orderly flow of pedestrians and vehicles; 
    424.02-08 That the change will result in better or equal performance of the overall objectives of the approved site plan and specific zoning district classification; 
    424.02-09 That the changes do not otherwise violate any provision of this Code or other applicable laws; 
    424.02-10 That the use and development of the property is otherwise in full compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
425. - Acceptance of roads/streets/utilities. 
    425.01 All construction of roads/streets and related infrastructure shall be guaranteed for a period of two (2) years after acceptance by the City of New Albany, subject to normal wear and tear. A maintenance bond (Security) shall be required in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements. The maintenance bond shall continue to be in effect for a minimum of two (2) years after the date of acceptance of the subdivision roads. The City of New Albany may require additional one (1) year maintenance bond if the City deems the additional year necessary. 
426. - Acceptance requirements. 
    426.01 Inspections: The installation of improvements shall in no case bind the City to accept any such improvements for public maintenance and operation thereof, until the proper departments have inspected and accepted the improvements as meeting all applicable requirements are met; provided, however, that the city shall not accept drainage easements for maintenance except as provided herein. 
    426.02 Street and storm sewers which are properly constructed, enclosed, and subterranean within the right-of-way of any dedicated street shall be accepted for public maintenance. "Drainage and Detention Access Easements" may be accepted for public maintenance at this time as well if they are deemed by the City to be beneficial for the maintenance of the City drainage system. 
    426.03 The City shall accept an irrevocable license to enter upon all other surface water drainage systems for emergency work to prevent or alleviate property damage or public damage, or to alleviate the failure of the subdivider or developer to maintain the drainage system which has or could result in property damage to the public, public danger or detrimentally affect public health. 
    426.04 The City will not accept such systems for maintenance, which shall remain the responsibility of the subdivider or property owner. The Developer shall specify which improvements may be accepted for City maintenance and which shall remain private responsibilities. 
    426.05 Security Requirements. 
    426.05-01 The applicant shall post approved security with the City of New Albany. The approved security shall be one or more of the types of security specified herein. Approved security shall be accompanied by a development agreement whereby the applicant agrees to make and install the improvements in accordance with the approved construction drawings and applicable specifications to ensure completion of the work. 
    426.05-02 Types of Security: Subject to the standards and requirements of this Article and of guaranteeing completion of improvements required by these regulations: 
    426.05-02-1 Cash that will be deposited in a liability account; 
    426.05-02-2 Assignment of Certificate of Deposit that is to be held by the City as collateral to assure completion of project; or 
    426.05-02-3 Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit: The letter of credit shall be obtained at a financial institution acceptable to the City Attorney and show the City of New Albany as beneficiary. The letter of credit shall be effective for two (2) years and automatically renewable for one-year periods with no effort on the part of the City. Should the financial institution decide not to renew the letter of credit, the institution shall notify the City in writing ninety (90) days prior to its expiration date by certified mail return receipt requested at which time the City can draw up to the full face value of the letter of credit. Any litigation concerning this letter of credit shall be held before a court of appropriate jurisdiction in Union County, Mississippi. 
    426.05-03 Amount of Security: If the construction cost for internal improvements (within the property boundary) is estimated to be greater than two hundred thousand ($200,000), the Developer shall provide a financial security instrument for two hundred thousand ($200,000). If the construction cost for internal improvements (within the property boundary) is estimated to be less than two hundred thousand ($200,000), the Developer shall be required to provide a financial security instrument for the estimated cost of the public and private improvements. A financial security instrument shall be provided for the full amount of the estimated cost of the external public improvements (outside the property boundary). A financial security instrument may be revised during the contract period if approved by the Mayor and Board of Alderman. 
427. - Warranty period following acceptance. 
    427.01 If the City Review Personnel, or Designee determines that the installed improvements meet all applicable city standards and all other conditions and requirements specified in the Development Agreement have been met and final construction plans are approved, then a Certificate of Initial Acceptance shall be issued, and the plat shall be recorded according to the procedures of this code. 
    427.02 A two (2) year warranty period begins with the first working day of the calendar year after the Certificate of initial acceptance is issued. During this warranty period any deficiencies in accepted improvements that are documented by the City Engineer or other city departments shall be the responsibility of the developer or subdivider to correct or repair. 
    427.03 The City shall not be obligated to maintain any improvements until two (2) years without defects has passed and a Letter of Final Acceptance shall be issued by the City Review Personnel. Failure to make required repairs within three (3) months of the date on which the developer or subdivider is notified of the deficiency shall result in the revocation of any building permits issued to the developer or subdivider, and in the suspension of further issuance of additional building permits for construction on lots within the subdivision owned by the developer or subdivider. 
    427.04 The City may perform the necessary repairs, drawing upon the security provided under the development agreement, and if necessary, may also make every effort to collect payment from the subdivider or developer by all legal means including the placement of liens on lots owned by the subdivider or developer. 
    427.05 For a phased subdivision where the Developer does not provide a construction entrance for subsequent phases, the City may require that the maintenance bond continue to be in effect for one year beyond completion of 75% of said lots in subsequent phases. The City may also require that the amount of the maintenance bond be increased based upon the recommendation of the City or its Representative. 
    427.06 When all of the required improvements have been constructed, including traffic safety and E911 signs, the Developer shall contact the City of New Albany for a final inspection and shall provide certification that the final improvements have been installed according to the specifications. The City or its' Representative shall inspect the subdivision roads and make a written report, a copy of which is to be provided to the Developer. 
    427.07 Upon the recommendation for acceptance of the road improvements, a request to accept the roads will be presented to the Board of Aldermen. Once the Board of Aldermen votes to accept the roads and the acceptance is recorded in the official minutes of the Board Aldermen, the City of New Albany will become responsible for maintenance. 
    427.08 The maintenance bond will be released when the subdivision receives an approved final inspection report, on the designated development inspection. The City reserves the right to reduce the bond to such amount sufficient to guarantee performance of the warranty. 
428. - Appeal procedure. 
    428.01 If the City of New Albany does not approve a preliminary or final plat, the Developer may appeal. The Developer shall submit a written request for appeal to the City no more than ten (10) working days after the adverse decision. The written request shall clearly explain how the deficiencies would be remedied and would provide a time table for the Developer to provide such documentation. 
ARTICLE V. - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 

500. - Purpose. 
    500.01 Proposed construction for commercial, industrial, governmental, residential, parks or recreational type developments that will result in an increase in runoff from the pre-developed or existing conditions shall be governed as specified herein. Existing and new developments that are constructed in phases and will increase runoff amounts from the pre-developed or existing conditions shall be governed as specified herein. 
    500.02 The intent of this section is to serve as a reference for the City staff and practicing professionals in designing storm drainage facilities within the City of New Albany. Criteria listed herein are the general policy of the City of New Albany and may not be applicable in every situation. Each project will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis with regard to site-specific characteristics, existing storm drain facilities, and how future development on and around the site might be affected. 
501. - General notes. 
    501.01 Before beginning construction on any project, plans and specifications must be submitted for approval to the City. The plans shall be accompanied by a storm water report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Mississippi. The report is to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
    501.01-01 A narrative describing how storm runoff entering, generating from and exiting the proposed site will be controlled and conveyed and to what extent the development will impact existing conditions both on and off site. 
    501.01-02 Pre and post development topographic map(s) showing all on site and off site contributing drainage areas. 
    501.01-03 Basis for determining runoff coefficients and times of concentration. 
    501.01-04 Inflow hydrographs with peak flows for the 10, 25 and 100-year storm frequencies. 
    501.01-05 Stage/storage/discharge tables for all proposed detention or retention facilities. 
    501.01-06 Details and calculations for all outlet control structures. 
    501.01-07 Hydraulic routing of the 10, 25 and 100-year storms through the proposed system(s). 
    501.01-08 Effects of the proposed runoff on the downstream properties. 
    501.01-09 Summary. 
    501.02 The storm water report must also include an analysis of the offsite properties that may require anticipating future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. Where storm drainage facilities, particularly pipe culverts, serve basins that include areas likely to develop in the future, runoff calculations must assume higher values of runoff coefficients based on estimated increased impervious areas. All maps and other exhibits shall be shown at a satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to any applicable watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures and other pertinent features. The site plan, submitted in conjunction with the storm water report, shall depict all streams, lakes, wetlands and other bodies of water as well as boundaries of the 100-year flood plain. The floodplain boundary information must be obtained using Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines. Proposed developments located in approximate A zones that will be greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, must provide 100-year base flood elevation data. This data should be obtained using appropriate methodologies accepted by FEMA. 
    501.03 Methods used for computing runoff and generating hydrographs must be by one of the following methods: 1) Rational Method for drainage areas up to 100 acres; or 2) Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Method (TR55) for small and medium size water sheds containing up to 10,000 acres. Other methods may be used upon prior approval of the City. All street and local drainage facilities shall be designed using the 25-year storm unless more stringent requirements apply. 
    501.04 Pipes used in the construction of drainage facilities shall have a minimum equivalent size of 12 inches in diameter. Inlet and outlet headwalls and/or flared end sections and toe walls are required for all pipe structures. Design velocities for pipes should be kept to a minimum and, if practical, should not exceed 8 feet per second when flowing full; however, if outlet velocities exceed 8 feet per second, then energy dissipation devices and/or channel protection must be provided. 
    501.05 Pipes and box culverts used for open cross drains shall be designed to convey at a minimum the 50-year storm discharge. Headwater and tailwater elevations resulting from the 100-year discharge should be checked to insure that water surface elevations do not encroach upon the traveling lanes of a roadway. If applicable, this requirement will be the controlling design criteria for open crossdrains. 
    501.06 Street catch basins may be designed for gutter spread using the 10-year storm provided a maximum four (4) minute time of concentration is used and the remainder of the system is designed for the 25-year storm. Inlet capacity at sags, where relief by curb overflow is not provided, shall allow for debris blockage by providing twice the computed opening for the 10-year storm. Curb inlets in the roadway shall be placed in such a way that the spread of water from the 10-year storm does not exceed one-half of a lane width on 2 or 3 lane streets and one lane width on wider streets. When the typical section includes a full shoulder or parking lane, encroachment onto the travel lane is not to be accommodated. 
    501.07 All drainage structures that are to convey discharge from streams designated as Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) as defined on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) must be designed using the 100-year (1% chance) flood event. Designs for structures lying within streams where a regulatory floodway exist shall be accompanied by a no-rise/impact analysis and certification by the designing professional engineer. All no-rise/impact studies shall be conducted in accordance with FEMA guidelines. 
502. - Detention. 
    502.01 Whenever the storm water report indicates that adverse storm water runoff related impact is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be required to provide a storm water detention facility or facilities so that peak flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with the pre-developed site. The detention facility shall be designed to accommodate a 25-year post development event with the discharge structure designed to release the 10-year pre development flow. Larger projects, in excess of 15 acres, may be designed to release the 25-year pre development flow. Detention facilities shall be designed with adequate freeboard to protect against overtopping of the dam, levee, or structures from the 100-year storm. A variety of methods of achieving storm water management goals are acceptable in providing detention facilities. However, the use of storm water conveyance piping systems as detention structures is highly discouraged. The designer should make every effort to avoid pressurizing the conveyance system during the design storm events. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: 
    502.01-01 The type of development for which the detention facility is intended to protect. 
    502.01-02 Volume of storm water to be stored. 
    502.01-03 Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed. 
    502.01-04 Topographic opportunities and limitations. 
    502.01-05 Safety considerations. 
    502.01-06 Maintenance requirements. 
    502.01-07 Aesthetic considerations. 
    502.01-08 Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities. 
    502.01-09 Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc. 
    502.01-10 Similar site-specific constraints as necessary. 
    502.02 When a detention structure is over 4 feet deep and in a location that constitutes a danger to human habitation, it shall be protected by a permanent fence or barrier and warning signs. Fences shall be at a minimum 6 feet high chain link or other approved material with a 10-foot wide gate. Fences shall be located on the outside edge of the perimeter easement. 
    502.03 Where a facility is to be dedicated to the City of New Albany, drainage easements suitable for the construction, maintenance and access of the drainage system shall be provided. The acceptance of any detention facility will be the sole discretion of the City of New Albany. A minimum of 15 feet in width will be required for any drainage easement along a drainage pipe, ditch, stream or other area that is designated for storm water to flow. No obstruction shall be built, constructed or planted that would inhibit proper function of the drainage system. Fences and/or shrubbery may be placed within a drainage easement, provided an indemnification agreement is provided to the City of New Albany. 
503. - Pipe culverts. 
    503.01 The following type pipe culverts are approved for use on drainage projects within the City of New Albany. Specific requirements, considerations and guidelines may pertain. 
    503.01-01 Sidedrains, Laterals (No traffic loads). 
    503.01-01-1 Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), reinforced concrete arch pipe (RCAP), reinforced concrete elliptical pipe (RCEP). 
    503.01-01-2 Corrugated metal pipe (CMP), polymer coated or aluminized only. 
    503.01-01-3 Corrugated high density polyethylene (HDPE), ADS N-12 or approved equivalent. 
    503.01-01-4 Corrugated poly vinyl chloride (PVC), Contech A-2000 or approved equivalent. 
    503.01-02 Crossdrains (Structures under traffic loads). 
    503.01-02-1 Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP), Reinforced Concrete Arch Pipe, (RCAP), Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Pipe (RCEP). 
    503.01-02-2 *Corrugated Steel Pipe (CMP), Polymer Coated or Aluminized only. 
    503.01-02-3 **Corrugated High Density Polyethylene (HDPE), ADS N-12 or approved equivalent. 
*For uses where a minimum of one (1) foot of cover is provided to the bottom of the pavement structure. 
**For uses on collectors and local streets with ADT of = 1,000 and a maximum size of 36" and when placed strictly within the Manufacture's installation recommendations. 
504. - Inlets and catch basins. 
    504.01 The following materials may be used for the construction or placement of inlets and catch basins: 
    504.01-01 Reinforced Concrete (Class "B" Mix Design, Cast-in-Place or Precast). 
    504.01-02 *&reg;Nyloplast PVC Inlets and Catch Basins, or equivalent. 
*&reg;Nyloplast PVC inlets and catch basins are not to be used where heavy traffic loads will be encountered unless special permission is granted by the City. 
    504.02 The specific requirements relating to laying of pipe and construction/placement of inlets is to be governed by Division 600 of the Mississippi Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Ed. 
505. - Erosion control. 
    505.01 Before beginning projects that will encompass a disturbed area greater than five (5) acres the developer/builder shall submit a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) for a Large Construction Storm Water General Permit. The permit certificate must be obtained and a copy provided to the City before work can begin. Projects that will have a total disturbed area of less than five (5) acres, but greater than one (1) acre shall be covered under a Small Construction Storm Water General Permit. Permits shall remain on site at all times for inspection by City or MDEQ personnel. Projects that disturb an area of less than one (1) acre shall not be required to obtain storm water permits, but shall be expected to follow best management practices regarding erosion and sediment control and will be required to submit a SWPPP to the city before beginning construction. Specific guidance and procedures for the preparation of a SWPPP can be obtained on the website of MDEQ. Minimum erosion control standards for projects within the City are contained hereafter. The above parameters are guides only. Designers and Developers are to obtain the current rules and regulations and implement the erosion control practices contained therein. It is the responsibility of the Owner/Developer to ensure full compliance with the rules and regulations and to prevent sediment from leaving a construction site. 
    505.02 Structural practices shall be implemented to divert flows from exposed soils, temporarily store flows, or otherwise control runoff in order to prevent pollutants from leaving the project rights-of-way. As a minimum, the Contractor shall provide straw bales or silt fences as a temporary structural practice to minimize erosion and sediment runoff. Straw Bales and silt fences shall be properly placed to effectively retain sediment in each independent runoff area; then, as work progresses, shall be removed/replaced/relocated as needed. Bale rows used to retain sediment shall be turned uphill at each end of each row. Silt fences or rows of straw bales shall be provided as follows: 
    505.02-01 Along the downhill perimeter edge of areas disturbed. 
    505.02-02 Along the top of the slope or top bank of drainage ditches, channels, swales, etc. that traverse disturbed areas. 
    505.02-03 Along the toe of cut slopes and fill slopes of the construction areas. 
    505.02-04 Perpendicular to the flow in the bottom of existing drainage ditches, channels, swales, etc., that traverse disturbed areas or carry runoff from disturbed areas. Rows shall be spaced a maximum of 100 feet apart in such existing drains that are within the limits of the work. 
    505.02-05 Perpendicular to the flow in the bottom of new drainage ditches, channels, and swales. Rows shall be spaced a maximum of 200 feet apart in drains with slopes equal to 5% or less and 100 feet apart in drains with slopes 5% or steeper. 
    505.02-06 At the entrance to culverts that receive runoff from disturbed areas. 
    505.03 The height of a silt fence shall be a minimum of 18 inches and a maximum of 34 inches above the ground surface. Filter fabric shall contain ultraviolet ray inhibitors and stabilizers to provide a minimum of 6 months of expected usable construction life at a temperature range of 0 degrees F to 120 degrees F. The filter fabric shall be purchased in a continuous roll cut to the length of the barrier to avoid the use of joints. When joints are unavoidable, filter fabric shall be spliced together only at a support post with a minimum 6-inch lap and securely sealed. 
    505.04 Wooden posts shall have a minimum length of 5 feet and a minimum diameter of 2 inches when oak is used and 4 inches when pine is used. Steel posts (standard "U" or "T" section) shall have a minimum weight of 1.33 pounds per linear foot and a minimum length of 5 feet. 
    505.05 Wire fence reinforcement for silt fences using standard strength filter fabric shall be a minimum of 14 gauge and shall have a maximum mesh spacing of 6 inches. When wire support is used, standard strength filter fabric may be used. Posts for this type of installation shall be placed a maximum of 10 feet apart. The wire mesh shall be fastened securely to the upslope side of the posts using heavy duty wire staples at least 1 inch long, tie wires or hog rings. The standard strength fabric shall be stapled or wired to the wire fence. When wire support is not used, extra strength filter fabric shall be used. Posts for this type of fabric shall be placed a maximum of 6 feet apart. A trench shall be excavated approximately 4 inches wide and 4 inches deep on the upslope side of the proposed location of the silt fence. The filter fabric shall be fastened securely to the upslope side of the posts using 1-inch long (minimum) heavy duty wire staples or tie wires. The fabric shall be extended into the trench a minimum of 8 inches; the trench backfilled and the soil compacted over the filter fabric. The fabric shall not be stapled to existing trees. 
    505.06 Bales shall be placed in a single row, lengthwise on the contour, with ends of adjacent bales tightly abutting one another. All bales shall be either wire bound or string tied. Straw bales shall be installed so that bindings are oriented around the sides rather than along the tops and bottoms of the bales in order to prevent deterioration of the bindings. The barrier shall be entrenched and backfilled. A trench shall be excavated the width of a bale and the length of the proposed barrier to a minimum depth of 4 inches. After the bales are staked the excavated soil shall be backfilled against the barrier. Backfill soil shall conform to the ground level on the downhill side and shall be built up to 4 inches against the uphill side of the barrier. Each bale shall be securely anchored by at least 2 stakes (minimum dimensions 2 inches x 2 inches x 36 inches) or standard "T" or "U" steel posts (minimum weight of 1.33 pounds per linear foot) driven through the bale. The first stake or steel post in each bale shall be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together. Stakes or steel pickets shall be driven a minimum of 18 inches deep into the ground to securely anchor the bales. The gaps between bales shall be chinked (filled by wedging) with straw to prevent water from escaping between the bales. Loose straw may be scattered over the area immediately uphill from a straw bale barrier to increase barrier efficiency. 
506. - Diversion dikes. 
    506.01 Diversion dikes shall have a maximum channel slope of 2% and shall be adequately compacted to prevent failure. The minimum height measured from the top of the dike to the bottom of the channel shall be 18 inches. The minimum base width shall be 6 feet and the minimum top width shall be 2 feet. Diversion dikes shall be located to minimize damages caused by construction operations and traffic. 
    506.02 The use of erosion control methods to contain all materials on each project site is mandatory. If a hazardous situation arises and control measures are not in place, the developer/builder will be given 24 hours to comply. If it is not of an urgent nature, the developer/builder will be allowed 7 calendar days to comply. If the clean-up of material involves the City Streets and the developer/builder refuses to provide the clean-up, the Public Works Department may perform the work and seek compensation from the developer/builder. It is the entire responsibility of the developer/builder to ensure that no silt leaves a construction site. Any requirements as set out above are minimum requirements and not a substitute for a SWPPP and submittal requirements per the MDEQ website. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

600. - Construction plans and specifications. 
    600.01 The Contractor shall provide the City with a set of Construction Plans and Specifications that have been reviewed and approved by the Mississippi State Department of Health. A copy of their approval letter shall be provided for the City's records. After construction is complete, the Contractor shall provide the City with a set of Record Drawings documenting changes to the original construction drawings, as well as locations of all pertinent information such as hydrants, valves, meters, etc. These items shall be dimensioned from a permanent structure for future reference. 
601. - Water distribution materials. 
    601.01 Water pipe: All water pipe furnished under these specifications shall be of the following types: 
    601.01-01 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) plastic water main pipe in sizes 4" to 12" shall conform to AWWA C900-89 and ASTM D2241, Type 1120 PVC Pressure Pipe, Class 200, DR 14, unless otherwise noted. The pipe joints shall conform to AWWA C900-89, and ASTM D3139 for elastomeric gasket joints. Pipe and fittings shall be N.S.F. approved, shall be Underwriters Laboratory and Factory Mutual accepted, and shall be provided in cast iron pipe equivalent (I.P.S.) outside diameters. Pipe shall be furnished in 20 foot lengths. 
    601.01-02 Ductile iron (D.I.) water main pipe, in sizes 3" to 24", conforming to AWWA C151-86 and ANSI A21.50 thickness class 51 for 3" and 4" pipe, and thickness class 50 for 6" through 24" pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA C110-87 and ANSI A21.10, and shall be designed for 350 psi working pressure for laying condition type 1, in conformance with AWWA C150-81 and C151-86. The pipe joints shall conform to AWWA C111-85, and ANSI A21.11, for rubber gasket joints. The pipe shall also have a cement lining meeting the requirements of AWWA C104-85 and ANSI 21.4 and have a minimum of 1 mil thick bituminous coating on the outside surface. Clearly marked on the pipe will be the manufacturer's name, "D.I." or "DUCTILE", weight, class or nominal thickness, and casting period. 
    601.02 Casing pipe. 
    601.02-01 Pipe furnished for casing purposes shall conform to ASTM A53 and/or A.P.I. 5-L, and shall be steel well casing or line pipe (unless otherwise designated on plans) of sufficient size to accommodate the water pipe. Casing pipe of HDPE, or PVC, may be allowed under certain conditions; however, if not specified, all casings shall be steel. The minimum size of the casing pipe shall be two standard pipe sizes larger in nominal diameter than the water main, for 2" and larger water lines. For service lines, the casing shall be no less than 2" diameter. 
    601.03 Fittings. 
    601.03-01 Fittings for use with AWWA C900 PVC pressure pipe or AWWA C151 ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA C110-82 and ANSI21.10, AWWA C111-85 or AWWA C153-84. Gasket materials shall conform to ASTM F477. 
    601.03-02 Fittings such as ells, tees, crosses, plugs, caps and cut-in tees shall be securely braced by thrust blocking, or secured by threaded tie rods. 
    601.04 Gate valves. 
    601.04-01 Gate valves shall be used for all water mains 3" or larger in diameter and shall be iron body, double disc, parallel seat, non-rising stem, conforming to AWWA C500-86. Gate valves shall have bronze or bronze mounted discs and wedges and shall be rated for 175 psi working pressure. Gate valves shall be furnished with two O-ring stem seals, a standard 2" square operating nut, and shall be opened by turning counterclockwise. Gate valves shall be Mueller, M&H, or approved equal. 
    601.04-02 Valves 2" and smaller, and those used for the blowoff assembly at the end of dead end lines, shall be gate valves with a brass body, screwed end connections, and shall have a non-rising stem. Valves shall be rated for 125 psi service, and shall be opened by turning counterclockwise. Valves shall be furnished with a 2" square operating nut, a handwheel of at least 31/2" diameter, or a solid tee hand. 
    601.05 Accessories. 
    601.05-01 Valve boxes shall be furnished and installed for each underground gate valve. Standard two-piece or three-piece valve boxes shall be screw type adjustable with a standard 51/4" shaft. The top of the valve box shall be set at finished grade and fitted with a deep seated cover marked "WATER". Extension pieces shall be furnished as required, and the lower section shall be installed so that it imposes no strain on the valve bonnet or pipe. Valve boxes shall be equal to Mueller H-10360 or approved equal. 
    601.06 Fire hydrants. 
    601.06-01 Fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502-85. Fire hydrants shall have hub and pipe connections for 6" lines, sufficient length for at least a 3' bury, two National Fire Underwriters standard 21/2" hose connections and one standard pumper connection. The diameter of the seat ring opening shall not be less than 51/4". All threads shall match the threads of the existing hydrants on the system. Hydrants shall open counterclockwise, shall have a standard pentagon operating nut, shall be of the compression type with the proper drip valve, and be constructed so that it will not flood if the barrel is broken. Valves shall be removable without digging. Fire hydrants shall be similar or equal to those manufactured by Mueller or M&H Valve & Fittings Co., or approved equal. 
    601.06-02 Flushing hydrants shall be 2?" post-type with one 21/2" hose nozzle. It shall meet all applicable parts of AWWA C502 Standard, and shall be of post type dry barrel design with dual bronze drain valves. Flush hydrants shall be equivalent to Mueller A-411, or approved equal. 
    601.06-03 Fire or flushing hydrants shall have a shop coat of bitumastic paint below grade and red enamel above grade. 
    601.06-04 Fire or flushing hydrants shall be set in a true plumb position to the established grade with lowest nozzles at least 12" above the ground. Hydrants shall be set upon a slab of concrete 4" thick and not less than 15" square and shall be backed by concrete to prevent the hydrant from blowing off, and with at least 1/4 cubic yard of broken stone or coarse washed gravel around the base at least 12" thick and 12" above the drip for drainage. 
    601.06-05 A gate valve, conforming to the above "VALVE" section shall be installed at each hydrant. 
    601.07 Service connections. 
    601.07-01 The Contractor shall supply water main taps, corporation stops, service line installation, and curb stops to provide service to each lot, business or residence. Service lines will be physically connected to each residence or business. Service connections to the water mains may be provided by tees installed in the main line and fitted with bronze corporation stops which shall conform to AWWA C800-84. Alternately, service connections may be provided by direct tapping of ductile iron mains or by tapping of PVC mains through a service clamp or tapping saddle. Service clamps or saddles shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, and shall be bronze or ductile iron, with threaded connections of correct size to accommodate the corporation stops. Wet or dry tapping machines for PVC taps may be used. The cutting tool shall be a shell type hole cutter which will retain the coupon and be designed to accommodate heavy wall PVC pipe. 
    601.07-02 Direct tapping of PVC pressure pipe without a service saddle clamp shall not be allowed. Lead pipe or lead fittings shall not be allowed. 
    601.07-03 Pipe furnished for service lines shall conform to AWWA C901-88 for polyethylene tubing or AWWA C902-88 for polybutylene tubing, or shall be Type K hard drawn copper tubing conforming to ASTM B88-83. Service lines shall be no less than 3/4" nominal diameter for single services and no less than 11/2" nominal diameter for double services. Plastic tubing or PVC pipe shall be N.S.F. approved and rated for 200 psi. 
    601.07-04 The contractor shall supply a curb stop for each meter location as indicated on the plans. Curb stops shall be solid bronze with a tee head, 3/4" size outlet, equal to Mueller H-15174 Mark II or as approved by the City. The contractor shall furnish meter box and lid assemblies. Meter boxes and lids shall be cast iron, high density polyethylene or a combination of these materials. 
    601.07-05 Water meters shall conform to AWWA C708-91 and shall be cold water mutating disc type, and the totalizer shall read in cubic feet. The meter shall be frost-proof and the type and brand of meter must be approved by the City prior to installation. 
    601.08 Miscellaneous materials. 
    601.08-01 Concrete used for blocking, pads and other purposes shall be a ready mix type, meeting Mississippi Highway Department standards for Class C concrete and shall develop a compressive strength of 3000 psi at 28 days. 
    601.08-02 Hot mix asphalt cement used for road repairs and patching shall be as specified in Article III - Street/Highways. 
    601.08-03 Lubricants for inserting pipe assemblies into casings shall be a flax soap or drilling mud. No petroleum based lubricants shall be allowed. 
    601.08-04 Lubricant for elastomeric gasket joints shall be only that type of lubricant supplied by the pipe manufacturer. No other lubricants shall be allowed. 
    601.08-05 Disinfecting chemicals shall conform to AWWA C601-81 and shall be safely stored and handled. Dry chlorine compounds such as calcium hypochlorite (HTH) shall have at least 60% available chlorine by weight when dissolved in water. 
602. - Installation. 
    602.01 Trenching. 
    602.01-01 The specified depth for water main installation shall be 36 inches, with adjustments as required to maintain as constant a grade as possible. If conflicts in grade occur with obstructions or other utilities, the water line grade shall be changed to avoid the conflict. A minimum cover of 30 inches over the pipe shall be provided. 
    602.02 Excavation. 
    602.02-01 Trenches shall be excavated in whatever material is encountered. The width shall be sufficient to properly join the pipe and provide thorough compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe. The sides of the trench shall be as nearly vertical as feasible. 
    602.02-02 The bottom of the completed trench shall be firm for its full length and width and shall be carefully graded, formed, and aligned before pipe is laid. The bottom of the trench shall be rounded under each joint of the pipe to confirm to the shape of the pipe, and the bell holes shall be cut so as to allow the body of the pipe uniform contact and support throughout its entire length. 
    602.02-03 The contractor is solely responsible for designing and constructing stable, temporary excavations and should shore, slope, or bench the sides of the excavations as required to maintain stability of both the excavation sides and bottom. In no case should slope height, slope inclination, or excavation depth, including utility trench excavation depth, exceed those specified in local, state, and federal safety regulations. 
    602.03 Sheeting, bracing and shoring. 
    602.03-01 The Contractor shall do all the bracing, sheeting and shoring necessary to perform and protect all excavations as required for safety. Materials used for this purpose shall be carefully withdrawn during backfill operations in such a manner as not to damage the pipe or move it from its correct line and grade. 
    602.04 Dewatering. 
    602.04-01 The Contractor shall perform all pumping and well pointing necessary to maintain the excavation in a dry state until the backfill operation is complete. 
    602.05 Pipe laying. 
    602.05-01 All pipe shall be inspected by the Contractor prior to installation, and no damaged pipe shall be used. The Contractor shall take every precaution to prevent damage to the pipe during installation. 
    602.05-02 All pipe installed shall be clean and free from obstructions and foreign matter. The inside of the bells, the outside of the spigots and the inside of the pipe shall be swabbed or cleaned before each length is installed. The Contractor shall take care to prevent entrance of any foreign matter into the pipe during the pipe laying operation. 
    602.05-03 Where pipe laying ceases at the end of the day or for any cause, the end of the pipe shall be closed securely to prevent entrance of mud, water, or any other objectionable material. Water will not be permitted in the trench while pipe is being laid. 
    602.05-04 All joints shall be constructed in accordance with the pipe or fitting manufacturer's recommendations. Pipe laying procedures shall generally conform to those standards set forth in AWWA C600-87. 
    602.05-05 Thrust blocks shall be installed at all fittings requiring thrust support, such as bends, tees, crosses, plugs, caps and cut-in tees. In some cases, tie rod anchors using threaded tie rods may be used if necessary. 
    602.05-06 All pipes shall be laid as nearly as possible in a reasonably straight line with a minimum of deflection on each joint and with no sharp breaks in grade. 
    602.05-07 The water mains must be laid at least 10' horizontally from any sewer lines and at least 18" above the top of any sewer line. 
    602.05-08 Insofar as possible, valves shall be placed 3'-0" from center of valve to center of tee or cross at intersections. Before setting each valve, the Contractor shall make sure the interior is clean and shall test the opening and closing of the valve. The valves shall be set with stems plumb and shall be braced with two #3 steel rods bent over the valve body and driven solidly into the earth. Concrete blocking shall then be placed around the bottom of the valve to hold it in place and to prevent any movement due to vibration. The valve box shall be properly installed to fit plumb over the valve wrench nut. The top of the valve box shall be set flush with the finish grade. Backfill material placed around the box shall be thoroughly tamped to prevent settlement. The Contractor shall pour a concrete pad, 24 inches square and 6 inches thick, around the valve box. 
    602.05-09 Service line installation shall generally follow the same procedures as above specified for water mains. The standard depth for service lines shall be 24". Under roads and creeks, a minimum depth of 30" shall be maintained. At the curb stop, the service line shall be brought up to a depth of 18 inches. Under no circumstances shall service lines be installed shallower than 18 inches. 
    602.05-10 Service taps will be made at the 10 o'clock or 2 o'clock position. Air release taps will be made at the 12 o'clock position. 
    602.05-11 12-gauge locator wire is required with all PVC water main pipe installations. In addition, locator wire shall be provided with all PVC or HDPE service line between the water main and the meter box. The locator wire shall be terminated inside the meter box. The supply shall be 3M Brand DBR Direct Bury Splice Kit or approved equal. When no risers are available the wire shall be brought to surface at a maximum of 2,000 feet. The wire shall be wrapped around the "T" post encased in PVC to 3 foot above ground then water line below sign placed on top of the post. In valve boxes wire shall extend to 2 foot above ground. 
    602.06 Backfilling. 
    602.06-01 Backfilling of the pipe trench where paving is not required, shall be accomplished by the placing of loose material free from large lumps, clods, rock or other objectionable material, which could cause large voids, in 12" lifts. The final grade of the backfill material shall be of sufficient height above the pipe to allow for settlement. As settlement occurs, additional blading shall be required to fill in settled areas as needed. 
    602.06-02 In graveled areas, the top 6 inches of backfill shall be crushed stone placed the full width of the trench. As settlement occurs, additional blading and placement of crushed stone shall be required to fill in settled areas as needed. 
    602.06-03 In areas to be paved, the backfill material shall be select granular material specified as Select Borrow Material meeting a B4 Classification as specified in Section 703 of the Mississippi Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition. Backfill shall be accomplished by placing and spreading material in lifts not to exceed 12" and compacted to 95% Standard Proctor Density. Backfill shall be performed to 15" below the paved surface. The remaining trench depth shall be filled with Crushed Limestone (Crusher Run), and compacted to 95% Standard Proctor Density. This material shall be maintained by blading as required for a smooth temporary riding surface. For final trench repair in asphalt areas, the crushed stone shall be excavated for a depth of 3 inches, or to a depth matching the surrounding asphalt (whichever is greatest) and filled with bituminous pavement and compacted. The finished surface shall be smooth and continuous with the existing asphalt. For final trench repair in concrete areas, the crushed stone shall be excavated for a depth of 6 inches and filled with concrete with a compressive strength of not less than 3000 psi at 28 days. The finished surface shall be smooth and continuous with the existing asphalt. 
603. - Road, railroad and highway crossings. 
    603.01 Where water lines are to be installed on the right-of-way along or across any state or federal highways or railroads, the Contractor shall comply with Mississippi Highway Department or railroad company regulations which pertain to that part of the project. Permission for the construction work shall be obtained by the Contractor from the Mississippi Highway Department or railroad company before any construction work has begun. Copies of any necessary permits shall be provided to the City prior to the commencing work. The Contractor shall coordinate the work with these agencies, and shall notify them in sufficient time for the appropriate agency engineers to be at the site to inspect the construction work. Contractor shall be solely responsible for ensuring that the casings are installed at the alignment and grade indicated on the highway permits (where applicable) and assume responsibility for any damage to the existing roadway. 
    603.02 All casing and boring methods and associated work shall be done in strict accordance with the regulations of the Mississippi Highway Department or railway company and to their satisfaction. 
    603.03 Installation of water lines through casing pipes shall be accomplished using jacking methods or pulling with a winch drawn cable. Wooden or plastic skid assemblies shall be used to prevent damage to PVC pipe and provide support. The thickness of the wooden position braces shall be sufficient to permit clearance between the bell joint and casing wall. Position braces shall be strapped securely in place and only flax soap or drilling mud used for lubrication. The spacing interval between wooden position braces shall not exceed 6 feet for 4" pipe, 5 feet for 3" pipe and 4.5 feet for 2" pipe. Skid assemblies shall not be required for service lines installed in casing pipe. 
    603.04 End Seals shall be installed on the ends of all encasement pipes installed. 
604. - Filling and flushing. 
    604.01 After all piping installation is completed, the contractor shall notify the City and obtain their approval before beginning any filling or flushing procedures. The new line shall be filled with water slowly and carefully to avoid excess velocities, water hammer, or excessive pressure drops in the City's water supply lines. All air which may be entrapped in the new lines shall be carefully and thoroughly expelled through service connections, blow-off valves, fire hydrants and other connections at high points on the line. 
    604.02 Flushing at velocities exceeding 3 ft/sec should be accomplished using fire hydrants, and by flushing only one line segment at a time. Flushing shall proceed until all dirt and foreign material is removed from the piping system. All new piping shall be filled and flushed and shall remain filled with water at least 24 hours prior to pressure testing. 
605. - Testing and disinfection. 
    605.01 Pressure and leak testing. 
    605.01-01 During the test period all pipe, joints, fittings and valves shall be carefully examined for defects and leaks. Any observed leaks or defects shall be repaired or corrected in a proper and workmanlike manner, and the test repeated until satisfactory results are obtained. 
    605.01-02 The Contractor may perform pressure and leak testing as often as necessary, on the entire new piping system, or on any sections he shall select, in order to locate any leaks or defects which may be evident, or to verify his correction or repair results. Testing should be done in accordance with AWWA C600-87. A final 2-hour leakage test shall be performed, and witnessed by City personnel, and shall indicate a leakage of no more than 10 gallons per inch diameter of pipe per mile per day, and no visible leaks, before final approval of the installation will be granted. The Contractor shall provide and connect pumping equipment capable of maintaining the required pressure, and metering the amount of water required to sustain a pressure of 100 psi during the leakage test. 
    605.01-03 Care should be exercised during all testing procedures to avoid introducing any contaminants into the supplying City's water system. Valves at tie-in locations should be independently pressure tested for sealing before any tests are conducted on the newly installed system. Valves at tie-ins should be manually checked for seating and leakage immediately before and during pressure test. 
    605.01-04 The Contractor shall furnish a standard tested water meter for measuring the amount of leakage, and all other test devices and materials necessary and shall make all connections and do all work required by these tests. 
    605.01-05 The Contractor shall furnish the necessary pump, piping, and other apparatus to satisfactorily test the water line for leakage. The test shall be conducted under the supervision of City Personnel and in his presence. The system may be tested in sections, or in its entirety, but all service connections must be installed prior to testing. All defects and leaks that appear shall be corrected and repaired, and the system again subjected to pressure until all visible leaks have been eliminated from the part of the system under test. The testing shall be in accordance with AWWA Specification C-600, latest revision. 
    605.02 Disinfection. 
    605.02-01 Disinfection of the new water lines shall be accomplished in conformance with AWWA C601-81, using chlorine compounds as specified in Section 601.08-05. All new piping shall be flushed out and filled completely with a solution containing no less than 50 ppm chlorine for disinfection. The chlorine solution shall remain in the system for no less than 24 hours. The piping shall then be flushed out thoroughly, with all valves, hydrants, sample bibs, and service valves in the test section being opened or operated before and during flushing. The piping shall be flushed until the chlorine residual level reaches less than 1.0 ppm, or the level normally being carried in the water being used for flushing. Bacteriological samples shall be taken and analyses made by the Mississippi State Department of Health, according to their general procedures. Two consecutive samples shall be collected by the City's water system operator, or a representative of the Mississippi State Department of Health. The samples shall show no coliform organisms before the work shall be accepted or placed into operation. The Contractor shall repeat the disinfection procedures as often as required to obtain the passing samples. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

700. - Construction plans and specifications. 
    700.01 The Contractor shall provide the City with a set of Construction Plans and Specifications that have been reviewed and approved by the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality. A copy of their approval letter shall be provided for the City's records. After construction is complete, the Contractor shall provide the City with a set of Record Drawings documenting changes to the original construction drawings, as well as locations of all pertinent information such as services, clean outs, etc. These items shall be dimensioned from a permanent structure for future reference. 
701. - Sanitary sewer materials. 
    701.01 Materials and workmanship. 
    701.01-01 All materials and workmanship shall be of the highest quality possible. Any defects in materials will cause such materials to be rejected by the City. Contractor shall notify supplier and City of any defective materials at the time of discovery. 
    701.02 Sewer pipe. 
    701.02-01 Gravity sewer lines and fittings shall be PVC sewer pipe for sewer lines up to 27" diameter, except where ductile iron pipe is used. Ductile iron pipe may be substituted for PVC pipe materials. 
    701.02-02 PVC Sewer Pipe and fittings shall be rigid poly vinyl chloride pipe in accordance with ASTM Specification D-1784, cell classification 1245-B, and ASTM D-3034. All PVC pipe used shall be the size and type as indicated on the plans. No PVC pipe will be installed at a depth greater than 20 feet. All PVC pipe used shall be formed with a bell for elastomeric gasket joints per ASTM 3212. The seals shall be per ASTM F-477. All fittings and accessories shall have bell and spigot configurations identical to that of the pipe. Wye and tee saddles will not be permitted. 
    701.02-03 All Ductile Iron Pipe shall be centrifugally case, manufactured in accordance with the American National Standards Institute/American Water Works Association Standards C151/C150 of Ductile Case Iron and shall be Class 50 minimum in accordance with ASTM A746. All pipes shall have cement lining in accordance with AWWA C-104. Except as otherwise specified or indicated, all ductile iron pipe shall have gasketed joints. Where specified, all ductile iron mechanical joint pipe shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C111/A24.11 and C110-A21.10. 
    701.02-04 All ductile iron fittings shall conform to the AWWA Standards, be of the same manufacturer as the ductile iron pipe and shall have a minimum 250 psi pressure rating plus a 100 psi surge allowance. AWWA C-153 fittings are not allowed. 
    701.02-05 All pipe and fittings used shall be certified by the manufacturer to be in accordance with the above referenced specifications. Each piece of pipe and/or fitting shall bear the test stamp of acceptance. 
    701.02-06 Gate valves for low pressure applications (i.e., lagoon discharge structures) shall be American-Darling AFC 00 double disc gate valves or approved equal. Shear gates shall be M&H Type 44 or approved equal. 
    701.02-07 Fittings for ductile iron pipe shall be ANSI/AWWA C110-21.10 Standards ductile iron short body pattern, either coal-tar epoxy lining in accordance with AWWA C-210 or cement lining in accordance with AWWA C-104 and bituminous coating outside, with mechanical joint ends in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C111/A24.11. 
    701.03 Manholes. 
    701.03-01 Manholes shall be poured-in-place concrete or precast concrete manholes as indicated on the construction drawings. Either type material may be selected and shall be used throughout the project. 
    701.03-02 Precast manhole sections shall conform to ASTM Specification C-478. If required, the Contractor shall furnish laboratory test reports for precast sections used, showing that they conform to all requirements of these specifications. 
    701.03-03 Mortar for masonry in sewer structures shall be a 1:3 cement-lime mix, provided that hydrated lime may be substituted for not to exceed 10 percent, by weight of the cement. 
    701.03-04 Manholes in non-traffic areas shall have a cast iron rim and cover assembly which meets the requirements of AWWA A-48. The cover shall have two non-penetrating pick holes and shall not be sealed. The casting shall be gray iron casting, free from defects affecting their strength and appearance. The clear opening shall be a minimum of twenty-one inches (21") in diameter and the cover and ring shall be machined to fit snug and not rattle. 
    701.03-05 Street manholes (i.e., manholes in roadways subject to vehicular traffic) shall be Neenah Pattern R-1765 or equal, weighing approximately 365 pounds. The casting shall be gray iron casting, free from defects affecting their strength and appearance. The clear opening shall be a minimum of twenty-one inches (21") in diameter and the cover and ring shall be machined to fit snug and not rattle. 
    701.03-06 The manhole steps shall be made of injection molded copolymer polypropylene encapsulating a 1/2" diameter grade 60 steel reinforcing rod. The steps shall be of such cross-sectional area and configuration that they will withstand a single concentrated live load of 300 pounds. They shall be in conformance with ASTM Standard C-478. Manhole steps shall be as manufactured by M.A. Industries, Inc., Peachtree City, GA, Press Seal Gasket Corp., or equal. 
    701.03-07 Rubber gaskets shall be "O"-Ring or flat ring as manufactured by Press Seal Gasket Corp., Fort Wayne, IN; Hamilton-Kent Manufacturing Co., or equal, and shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition of ASTM Designation C-443. Lubricants shall be as recommended by the gasket manufacturer. 
    701.03-08 Manhole pipe seal gaskets for precast manhole units shall be "Kor-N-Seal" as manufactured by Kor-N-Seal Co., Milford, NH; "PSX" by Press Seal Gasket Corp., or equal. 
    701.03-09 Preformed joint compound shall be "EZ Stik" as manufactured by Concrete Products Supply Co., Fort Wayne, IN; "Kent Seal No. 2"; or equal. Primer, when required for use with the preformed joint compound, shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the preformed joint compound. Install joint compound according to the manufacturer's instruction. 
    701.03-10 Sealer compound shall be "Drycon" as manufactured by IPA Systems, Inc., Philadelphia, PA; Tamm's "Tamoseal"; or equal. Sealer shall be field applied after construction. 
    701.03-11 Cold joint bonding agent shall be "Octoblen" as manufactured by IPA Systems, Inc., Philadelphia, PA; "Tamm's Tammsbond"; or equal. 
    701.03-12 Patching material shall be "Octocrete" as manufactured by IPA Systems, Inc., Philadelphia, PA; "Tamm's Speed Crete Blue Line"; or equal. 
    701.04 Sanitary sewer service lines. 
    701.04-01 Sanitary sewer service pipe shall have a wall thickness equal to SDR 26 PVC, as a minimum. 
    701.05 Tee or Wye branches. 
    701.05-01 Tee or Wye branches shall be same type material, joint size and type as the main sewer line. Branch openings shall be designated as 6 inch or 4 inch. Clay tees may not be used in place of tee or wye branches. 
    701.06 Guaranty. 
    701.06-01 The Contractor shall guarantee all material and work for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance of his work by the City. The Contractor shall remove, replace, and repair all defective work during this period of time at no cost to the City. 
702. - Gravity sewer pipe lines and construction. 
    702.01 Existing facilities. 
    702.01-01 Existing power lines, telephone lines, trees, shrubbery, fences, water mains, gas mains, sewers, cables, conduits, ditches, embankments, buildings, outdoor signs, and other structures in the vicinity of the work, not authorized to be removed, shall be supported and protected from injury by the Contractor during the construction and until completion of the work affecting them. The Contractor shall be liable for all damages done to such existing facilities and structures and he shall save the City harmless from any liability or expense for injuries, damages, or repairs to such facilities. 
    702.01-02 The Contractor shall use maximum care to avoid damage to any facility, which is to remain in service in its existing location. Any work required to maintain in service shall be done at the Contractor's expense. 
    702.01-03 The City reserves the right to change locations of pipelines as shown on the construction plans and to add or delete items of work. 
    702.02 Permits and codes. 
    702.02-01 All work shall comply with local codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
    702.02-02 All lines placed within the right-of-way of County, State-Aid, State Highway, or Railroads, shall be laid according to the instructions issued with the permit granted for this work by the governing authority. Copies of any necessary permits shall be provided to the City. 
    702.03 Safety requirements. 
    702.03-01 The Contractor shall provide and maintain all barricades, signs, and safety devices necessary to warn the public of the dangers of construction in progress. 
    702.04 Installation. 
    702.04-01 PVC sewer pipe shall be installed in accordance with ASTM Standard D-2321 unless otherwise directed. PVC pipe shall be installed within one year of the date of manufacture indicated on the pipe. 
    702.04-02 Ductile iron pipe shall be installed in accordance with ASTM Standard D-2321. 
    702.04-03 Contractor shall provide safety fencing or other barricades as required to prevent public access to open trenches. 
    702.05 Alignment. 
    702.05-01 The Contractor shall use a commercial grade laser specifically manufactured for setting a line and grade for the sewer by using the laser beam coaxially through the center of the sewer being laid. The laser beam projector is to be rigidly mounted to its support platforms, with a two-point suspension, or equivalent, assuring that all ground and equipment vibrations are kept to an absolute minimum. The Contractor shall furnish all equipment, including equipment necessary to control atmospheric conditions in the pipe to keep line and grade to acceptable standards of accuracy. Competent experienced people who have been properly trained to operate the equipment used must operate the laser beam system. 
    702.06 Excavation. 
    702.06-01 The Contractor shall excavate all trenches to the required depth for proper installation of the sewers at the locations and grades indicated on the drawings. Trenches should be only of sufficient width to provide a free working space on each side of the pipe. 
    702.06-02 Trenches shall be sheeted and braced as necessary to protect workmen and adjacent structures. Water shall be prevented from entering the trench while construction is in progress. Under no circumstances shall the pipes be laid in water. The Contractor shall pump or bail water from bell holes to permit proper jointing of pipes. 
    702.06-03 The pipe shall have uniform grade and support. Final grading of trench bottoms shall be by hand tools to insure proper soil bearing for the pipe. When in place, the pipe shall be checked for alignment and any section of the pipe found to have settled will be removed and re-laid at no cost to the Owner. 
    702.06-04 Lay all sewer pipe, under all conditions in a dry trench, on an even, firm bed throughout the full length of the pipe, so that no uneven stress is placed on the pipe. See Section 2.3.5 for bedding material requirements. 
    702.06-05 Begin laying the pipe at the lowest point in the system and lay the pipe with bell end upstream. Test each pipe for soundness, then clean the interior and joint surfaces before lowering the pipe into the ground. Lay the pipe in straight lines and on uniform grades between points where changes in alignment or grade are shown. All types of pipe shall be joined in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. If flexible pipe is chosen, it shall be laid according to ASTM D-2321-74. 
    702.06-06 Where pipe is installed in encasements, suitable casing skids shall be attached to ensure proper line and grade. Skids shall be fastened securely to the pipe with steel strappings, cables, or clamps, and shall be a minimum of 4-18" long and located at intervals necessary to prevent deflection of the carrier pipe. A minimum of 4 skid assemblies shall be used per encasement. End Seals shall be installed on the ends of all encasement pipes installed. 
    702.07 Connections. 
    702.07-01 The Contractor shall make all required connections to existing sewers, including manholes and service lines. He shall carefully check the invert elevations of existing sewers to which connections are to be made to be sure they are free of debris and mud. Connections shall be watertight and shall be tightly plugged at the ends of open lines. 
    702.08 Bedding/backfilling of sewers. 
    702.08-01 Bedding/haunching. 
    702.08-01-1 After excavation of the trench, if the trench bottom is dry, dense and unyielding, the Contractor can use granular materials, such as sand or gravel, for bedding/haunching material. The granular material shall have a Plasticity Index of zero (PI = 0). 
    702.08-01-2 After excavation of the trench, if the trench bottom is wet, soft and yielding, the Contractor can shall use #57 crushed limestone for bedding/haunching material. 
    702.08-01-3 For all sewer pipe, bedding material shall be placed and compacted to a depth, as indicated in the "Sewer Line Trench Detail" below. Compaction shall be at least 90% of Standard Proctor Density. 
    702.08-01-4 For the haunching of plastic pipe, particular care must be taken in the installation of bedding material under the pipe haunch to provide adequate side support to the pipe, while avoiding both vertical and lateral displacement of the pipe from proper alignment. The material in the haunching zone must be installed by hand and compacted in lifts to ensure uniform support. Bedding and haunching material shall be placed to the top of the plastic pipe. 

    702.08-02 Backfilling. 
    702.08-02-1 Trenching and excavation backfilling shall begin promptly after the pipe is laid. After the sewer pipe has been bedded/haunched, the remainder of the backfill shall be as follows: 
    702.08-02-2 Backfilling of the pipe trench where paving is not required, shall be accomplished by the placing of loose material free from large lumps, clods, rock or other objectionable material, which could cause large voids, in 12" lifts. The final grade of the backfill material shall be of sufficient height above the pipe to allow for settlement. As settlement occurs, additional blading shall be required to fill in settled areas as needed. 
    702.08-02-3 In graveled areas, the top 6 inches of backfill shall be crushed stone placed the full width of the trench. As settlement occurs, additional blading and placement of crushed stone shall be required to fill in settled areas as needed. 
    702.08-02-4 In areas to be paved, the backfill material (above bedding and haunching) shall be select granular material specified as Select Borrow Material meeting a B4 Classification as specified in Section 703 of the Mississippi Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, 2004 Edition. Backfill shall be accomplished by placing and spreading material in lifts not to exceed 12" and compacted to 95% Standard Proctor Density. Backfill shall be performed to 15" below the paved surface. The remaining trench depth shall be filled with Crushed Limestone (Crusher Run), and compacted to 95% Standard Proctor Density. This material shall be maintained by blading as required for a smooth temporary riding surface. For final trench repair in asphalt areas, the crushed stone shall be excavated for a depth of 3 inches, or to a depth matching the surrounding asphalt (whichever is greatest) and filled with bituminous pavement and compacted. The finished surface shall be smooth and continuous with the existing asphalt. For final trench repair in concrete areas, the crushed stone shall be excavated for a depth of 6 inches and filled with concrete with a compressive strength of not less than 3000 psi at 28 days. The finished surface shall be smooth and continuous with the existing asphalt. 
    702.09 Trench stabilization. 
    702.09-01 In areas where pipe trench subgrade is determined unstable, Contractor shall undercut to a depth, as necessary, and backfill with crushed stone to the trench grade. 
    702.10 Maintenance of streets and trenches. 
    702.10-01 The Contractor shall be required to maintain for one year all trenches that cross or run under rigid type paving, after the project is completed and accepted by the City. Driveways, regardless of the type, shall be maintained for traffic at all times. 
    702.11 Clean up. 
    702.11-01 The Contractor shall remove all silt, trash and debris from manholes and sewer lines as soon as pipe lying between manholes is completed. 
    702.12 Inspection. 
    702.12-01 When the sewer system is completed the City and the Contractor, or their representatives, shall inspect it. All defective materials and workmanship shall be replaced at no cost to the City. 
    702.12-02 The interior of the pipes shall be free from silt, trash, debris and other foreign material. The pipe shall be checked for uniform alignment and grade by flashing a light from manhole to manhole or from manhole to cleanout. If the view through the line does not show a vertical axis in full pipe diameter and the horizontal axis in at least 3/4-pipe diameter, the pipe shall be removed and re-laid as necessary to make these requirements. 
    702.12-03 If the flexible pipe is used, a deflection test will be performed. The test shall be conducted after backfill and trench settlement (but not less than 30 days after installation) with an approved go/no-go 5% deflection testing mandrel. The mandrel shall be pulled by hand without mechanical pulling devices. 
    702.12-04 Test pipelines for infiltration/exfiltration using the air test method described in ASTM F1417, "Standard Testing Method for Installation Acceptance of Plastic Gravity Sewer Lines using Low-Pressure Air." The air test procedure shall be as follows: 
    702.12-04-1 Clean the section of pipe to be tested using an approved method. 
    702.12-04-2 Plug all pipe outlets with suitable test plugs. Brace each one securely. 
    702.12-04-3 The seal at one end of the pipe section being tested shall have an orifice through which air can be injected into the pipe. The air supply line shall contain an on-off air valve and a pressure gauge. The pressure gauge shall have minimum division of 0.10 psi and shall have an accuracy of +5%. 
    702.12-04-4 If the pipe section being tested is submerged in water, insert a pipe probe, by boring or jetting, into the backfill material adjacent to the center of the pipe and determine the pressure in the probe when air passes slowly through it, which is the back pressure due to ground water submergence. Increase all gauge pressures in the test by this amount. Alternately, if the depth of pipe submergence below the ground water is known, gauge pressures may be adjusted by adding 0.433 psi for each foot of submergence. 
    702.12-04-5 Add air slowly to the portion of the pipe installation under test until the internal air pressure is relaxed to 4.0 psi. 
    702.12-04-6 Check exposed pipe and plugs for abnormal leakage by coating with a soap solution. If any failures are observed, bleed off air and make necessary repairs. 
    702.12-04-7 After an internal pressure of 4.0 psi is obtained, allow at least two minutes for air temperature to stabilize, adding only the amount of air required to maintain pressure. 
    702.12-04-8 After the two-minute period, disconnect air supply. 
    702.12-04-9 When pressure decreases to 3.5 psi, start stopwatch. Determine the time in seconds that is required for the internal air pressure to reach 2.5 psi. These time intervals should then be compared with the time required by specification in the Low Pressure Air Sewer Test table in these specifications. 
    702.12-04-10 If the time lapse is greater than that specified, the section undergoing test shall have passed, and the test may be discontinued at that time. If the time is less than that specified, the line has not passed the test and the Contractor will be required to repair and prepare the line for retest. 
    702.12-04-11 **See following chart** 
GRAVITY SEWER PIPE LEAKAGE TEST 
Pipe Diameter 
(in.) Minimum Time 
(min:sec) Length for Minimum Time 
(ft) Time for Longer Length 
(sec) Specified Minimum for Length (L) Shown (min:sec) 100 ft 150 ft 200 ft 250 ft 300 ft 350 ft 400 ft 450 ft 4 3:46 597 .380 L 3:46 3:46 3:46 3:46 3:46 3:46 3:46 3:46 6 5:40 398 .854 L 5:40 5:40 5:40 5:40 5:40 5:40 5:42 6:24 8 7:34 298 1.520 L 7:34 7:34 7:34 7:34 7:36 8:52 10:08 11:24 10 9:26 239 2.374 L 9:26 9:26 9:26 9:53 11:52 13:51 15:49 17:48 12 11:20 199 3.418 L 11:20 11:20 11:24 14:15 17:05 19:56 22:47 25:38 15 14:10 159 5.342 L 14:10 14:10 17:48 22:15 26:42 31:09 35:36 40:04 18 17:00 133 7.692 L 17:00 19:13 25:38 32:03 38:27 44:52 51:16 57:41 21 19:50 114 10.470 L 19:50 26:10 34:54 43:37 52:21 61:00 69:48 78:31 24 22:40 99 13.674 L 22:47 34:11 45:34 56:58 68:22 79:46 91:10 102:33 27 25:30 88 17.306 L 28:51 43:16 57:41 72:07 86:32 100:57 115:22 129:48 30 28:20 80 21.366 L 35:37 53:25 71:13 89:02 106:50 124:38 142:26 160:15 33 31:10 72 25.852 L 43:05 64:38 86:10 107:43 129:16 150:43 172:21 193:53 36 34:00 66 30.768 L 51:17 76:55 102:34 128:12 153:50 179:29 205:07 230:46 42 39:48 57 41.883 L 69:48 104:42 139:37 174:30 209:24 244:19 279:13 314:07 48 45:34 50 54.705 L 91:10 136:45 182:21 227:55 273:31 319:06 364:42 410:17  
Specification time required for a 1.0 psig pressure drop for size and length of pipe indicated for Q = 0.0015, where Q is the allowable leakage rate in cu. ft./min/ft 2 of inside surface area of pipe. 
    702.13 Flushing. 
    702.13-01 The completed gravity sewer lines shall be free of all mud, siltation, and other foreign matter deposited or collected during construction. If determined necessary by the City, the lines shall be flushed prior to testing. Flushing shall be started at the upstream end of the completed system and shall not be permitted to enter into the system but shall be collected and disposed of in an approved manner. Also mud and other solids shall be similarly collected and disposed of. 
703. - Manhole construction. 
    703.01 Precast concrete sections shall be laid so that the axis of the manhole is vertical, and shall be constructed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
    703.02 The standard sizes for manhole bottoms are based on a soil bearing pressure of 2000 psf; should a more yielding soil be encountered, the base shall be stabilized with sufficient bedding of coarse crushed stone to obtain the required bearing. 
    703.03 Excavate hole and set bottom unit, leveling carefully. Make joints between sections using preformed joint compound. Joints shall be watertight. Fit manhole cover frames in place on an adequate grout or grout beds and bricks riser. Joints in brick risers shall not exceed ?" in thickness. Plaster the brick exterior surface with a coat of plaster not less than 1/2" thick. For pipe 30" in diameter and less make connection to manholes using manhole pipe seal gaskets. 
    703.04 Install the manhole steps at 16" o.c. vertically. The deepest step shall be located not more than 24" above the manhole invert. 
    703.05 Install the cast iron frames and covers to the grade shown on the plans, set in a grout bed. Lap grout up on ring vertical to one inch (1") from the top. In streets, set the manhole covers to one inch (maximum) above the street grade parallel to the plane of the street. 
    703.06 Wherever concrete is applied to an existing concrete or masonry surface, apply a cold joint bonding agent between the surfaces according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
    703.07 Where necessary to fill voids, repair breaks, make patches, etc., clean and moisten the surfaces and use a suitable combination of patching agent and cold joint bonding agent with grout or concrete. The use of brick or chunks of concrete will not be permitted. 
    703.08 All visible leaks in manhole bottoms, barrels, and connections shall be stopped. 
    703.09 Manhole walls shall be sealed against leaking by the application, on the complete interior and exterior surfaces, of a waterproofing coat. Precast manholes shall also be sealed at ring joints. Pipe connections shall have a flexible connector for waterproofing; after pipe connections are made the flexible connector shall be grouted with non-shrink grout. 
    703.10 The cast iron rings and covers shall be set at the exact finish grade indicated on the drawings. Manholes in open fields shall extend to a minimum of 2 feet above the finished ground surface unless otherwise indicated on the plans. Steps shall be set inside the manholes at sixteen inches (16") on center. 
    703.11 The Contractor shall construct the manhole flow channels of concrete, of semi-circular section conforming to the inside diameter of the connection sewers. The Contractor shall provide such channels for all connection sewers to each manhole. Drop inlets shall be constructed as an integral part of the manhole as construction progresses. 
    703.12 No backfilling of manhole excavation, above the top of the interior concrete fill, shall be performed until the waterproof coating has been cured for at least twenty-four hours. All defective coverage and leaks shall be corrected prior to backfilling. 
    703.13 As the backfill material is placed around the manhole it shall be carefully tamped to prevent excessive settlement. 
704. - Sanitary sewer service line installation. 
    704.01 Sanitary sewer service lines shall be furnished, installed, and connected as indicated on the construction plans. The service lines shall extend from the point of connection to the wye and shall terminate at a point 5 feet inside the lot or street line at a depth of thirty-six inches (36"), if possible. 
    704.02 Generally, service lines shall be laid to the same requirements as defined in Section 702.04 of these specifications. The pipe shall be laid to a grade sufficient to allow good service and flow, with minimum maintenance. A minimum grade of 1.00% will be required to insure adequate service. 
    704.03 Wyes will be encased in concrete sufficient to hold the wye in place and prevent movement or leakage. Where necessary, 45° elbows shall be installed for proper alignment. Before the service line connection to the wye is covered it shall be inspected and exact location measured from the center of the nearest sanitary sewer manhole. 
    704.04 The location of each service line shall be marked with a sewer stub tape, ASTM Specification D-882, three inches (3") wide, attached to the bell end of the service line and extended above the surface of the ground a minimum of twelve inches (12") in the horizontal direction. Alternatively, other acceptable methods of marking the end of the service line may be employed, utilizing 4" x 4" treated post or steel fence post. All connections of service lines, whether to existing sewer mains or existing service line, shall be constructed watertight. 
    704.05 When the proposed service line is to be connected to an existing service line, a clean-out shall be installed, flush with the existing surface, at the connection point. 
705. - Tee or wye branch installation. 
    705.01 Tees and Wye branches will be constructed, in a tilted 45° position. 
706. - Drop connection construction. 
    706.01 The Contractor shall provide drop inlets into manholes or sanitary sewers for incoming lines having inverts 2 feet or more above the invert of manhole outlet lines. The Contractor shall encase the drop pipe and fittings in concrete adjacent to the manhole and extending from the manhole base to the top of the incoming sewer. Backfill material shall be carefully tamped around the drop inlets in 6-inch layers to prevent excessive settlement. 
707. - Pump stations. 
    707.01 All sewer pump stations will be reviewed on a case by case basis. When necessary, pump stations shall be above ground, self-priming station, if feasible. If a pump station is necessary, the Contractor shall provide the City with a Pump Station Submittal, including all the design information, for review and approval. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

800. - Variances. 
    800.01 Where the Mayor and Board of Alderman find that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, they may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
    800.02 In granting variances the Mayor and Board of Alderman may require such conditions that are necessary, in their judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
801. - Penalties. 
    801.01 Any person, firm, entity, or corporation using an unapproved and unrecorded plat in the sale of subdivided land or violating any of the terms or provisions of these subdivision regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500). Each violation and each day of failure to comply with the provisions of these regulations shall constitute a separate violation. 
802. - Amendments. 
    802.01 The Mayor and Board of Alderman may from time to time adopt amendments that will tend to increase the effectiveness of these regulations. These regulations may be revised or amended by the Mayor and Board of Alderman as required by law. 
803. - Validity. 
    803.01 If for any reason any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provisions of this, or any ordinance of the City, to which these rules and regulations relate. 
804. - Repealer. 
    804.01 All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of the ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 




  
APPENDIX 4 
REQUIRED SHEETS FOR CONSTRUCTION PLANS
SUBMITTED WITH PRELIMINARY PLAT 
Construction plans submitted with the Preliminary Plat approval process must include the following sheets unless otherwise authorized in writing from the City of New Albany: 
a.  Cover Sheet shall include development name, Developer's name, utility owners, vicinity map, and name of Developer's Engineer 
b.  Proposed Lot Layout Sheet (can be preliminary plat sheet) 
c.  Topographic Survey Sheet (encompassing entire development) 
d.  Grading and Drainage Plan 
e.  Erosion Control Plan (including details) 
f.  Typical Section Sheet (including dimension and application details) 
g.  Intersection Detail Sheet 
h.  Signage and Striping Plan 
i.  Water System Improvements Plan 
j.  Water System Detail Sheet(s) 
k.  Sanitary Sewer System Improvements Plan 
l.  Sanitary Sewer System Detail Sheet(s) 
m.  Plan and Profile Sheet(s) 

  
APPENDIX 6 
SCHEDULE OF FEES 
Application for Site Plan Approval Base Fee $150 Additional fee per unit $5  
Application for Subdivision Approval Base Fee $200 Additional fee per lot $10  

APPENDIX 8 
Figures 1.A, 1.B, 1.D and 1.E 




APPENDIX C - ZONING[1] 
An ordinance establishing comprehensive zoning regulations for the City of New Albany, Mississippi, and providing for the administration, enforcement, and amendment thereof, and for the repeal of all ordinances in confict herewith: 
    WHEREAS the Statutes of the State of Mississippi, Title 17, of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, empower the city to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment, and 
    WHEREAS the mayor and board of alderman have divided the city into districts and have prepared regulates pertaining to such districts designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, and 
    WHEREAS the mayor and board of alderman have given reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city, and 
    WHEREAS the mayor and board of alderman have given due public notice of hearings relating to zoning districts, regulations, and restrictions, and have held such public hearings in accordance with the requirements of Title 17 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended: 
Be it ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix C contains the city's comprehensive zoning regulations, as enacted by May 27, 1980, as set out herein. Parenthetical history notes follow amended provisions. Absence of a history note indicates the provisions remain unchanged from the original ordinance. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets [ ]. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; planning and development, Ch. 16; streets and other public places, Ch. 18; design/construction regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference- City empowered to enact, administer, enforce and amend a zoning ordinance, Miss. Code of 1972, Stats. of Miss. Title 17. 

SECTION 101. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An Ordinance adopted Jan. 5, 1982, provided for the adoption of a new official zoning map which supersedes the prior official zoning map. Such map bearing as part of its legend "Official Zoning Map as Amended and Adopted on January 5, 1982," and retained in the office of the zoning administrator. 

101.01. - Districts. 
    In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the use and location of buildings designed for specified uses; to regulate and limit the heights and bulk of buildings; to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts, and other open spaces surrounding buildings; and to regulate and limit the density of population, the City of New Albany, Mississippi, is divided into ten (10) zoning districts. The use and area regulations are uniform in each district and said districts shall be known as: 
A-1 Agricultural District 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential District 
R-3 General Residential District 
R-4 Manufactured Housing Residential District 
C-1 Central Commercial District 
C-2 General Commercial District 
C-3 Neighborhood Convenience District 
C-4 Neighborhood Professional District 
I-1 Industrial District 
(Ord of 12-23-85; Ord. of 12-1-87) 
101.02. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of New Albany, Mississippi. Said zoning map and all notations and references and other matters shown thereon shall be and are hereby made a part of this ordinance. Said zoning map shall be on file in the zoning administrator's office. 
101.03. - District boundaries. 
    Except where referenced and noted on the zoning map by a designated line and/or dimensions, the district boundary lines are intended to follow property lines; lot lines; or center lines of streets, alleys, streams, or railroads as they existed at the time of the passage of this ordinance; or the extension of such lines. 
101.04. - District boundaries, interpretations. 
    The zoning administrator shall interpret the boundary lines which are on the zoning map. When the zoning administrator's interpretation is disputed, the boundary lines shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
101.05. - Annexation. 
    Any territory hereafter annexed to the City of New Albany [will] be in the A-1 District unless the mayor and board of aldermen rezone it to another district at the time of annexation. 
101.06. - Municipal exemption. 
    This ordinance shall have no effect and shall not limit the use in any manner of any property, title to which is in the City of New Albany or any of its departments and organizations and which property is being used for public purposes, to include, but not [be] limited to, the furnishing to the general populace of any city service including water, sewer service, electric utilities, natural gas, street maintenance, garbage pick-up, public parks and recreation facilities, public office buildings and any other activity maintained and carried on by the City of New Albany for the use and benefit of the general public. Property held by the city primarily for redevelopment and resale under any federally funded projects shall be subject to this ordinance and the city shall, as to such property, have the right and obligation to comply in all respects with the provisions of this ordinance, including specifically the right to apply for rezoning under the provisions of Section 114 of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-2-85) 
SECTION 102. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

102.01. - Required conformance. 
    Except as hereinafter specifically provided: 
(a)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(b)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered, or used for a use not permitted in the district in which such building is located; 
(c)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located; 
(d)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located; 
(e)  No building shall be erected, enlarged, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of this ordinance; 
(f)  The minimum yards, frontage, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this ordinance for each building existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance or for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or be considered as part of the yards, frontage, parking spaces, or open spaces required for any other buildings; 
(g)  No building shall be constructed, enlarged, reconstructed, or materially altered without first obtaining a building permit; and no building permit shall be issued unless within strict conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
102.02. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, Nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
    102.02-1. Intent. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there exist: 
(a)  Lots, 
(b)  Structures, 
(c)  Uses of land and structures, and 
(d)  Characteristics of use 
which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
    102.02-2. [ Extension or enlargement of nonconforming use prohibited. ] Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
    102.02-3. [ Change in prior actual construction not required. ] To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
    102.02-4. Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only). Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, except that the board of aldermen, on application by the owner of a structure used for residential purposes in a district not zoned for residential use, may permit an enlargement, extension, construction, reconstruction, moving or structural alteration of such residential structure if the board of aldermen shall determine that to deny such right would work a financial hardship or other hardship on the owner and that such enlargement, extension, construction, reconstruction, moving or structural alteration will not interfere with or impede the use of the surrounding property according to its proper zoning classification; 
(b)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(c)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the planning and zoning commission, by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this ordinance; 
(d)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(e)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
(f)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) per cent (or other figure) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(g)  Not withstanding any of the foregoing provisions, if the nonconforming use of property consists solely of signage, billboards and similar advertising devices covered under section 112.03 of this ordinance, the property owner or those operating under the owner's authority shall be permitted to remove and renovate, repair or totally replace any such devices with reworked or replacement structures of a substantially equivalent size and construction. For purposes of this section "substantially equivalent" shall be deemed to permit replacement with a device having sign dimensions and height equal to the previous sign, or if variations of construction and design are found to be reasonably necessary by the building inspector due to modified construction techniques or other good cause, such variations may be permitted that do not result in a variation in sign dimensions or height of more than five (5) percent of the previously existing structure. Any such removal and repair or replacement must be accomplished within a ninety-day period and a permit therefor must be applied for under section 112.03-4 and received at or within ten (10) days after the contemplated removal begins. 
    102.02-7. Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten (10) per cent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. of 9-6-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-94, § 1) 
102.03. - Accessory building. 
    Accessory buildings shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard, other than a rear yard, and no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
102.04. - Pending applications for building permits. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approvals and required building permits have been legally granted before the enactment of this ordinance, the construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started within six (6) months of the effective date of this ordinance and completed in a normal manner within a subsequent two-year period and not discontinued until completion except for reasons beyond the builder's control. All permits for which construction has not begun within six (6) months of the effective date or amendment of this ordinance are hereby revoked and void. 
102.05. - Street frontage required. 
    Except as permitted by other provisions of this ordinance, all lots created after the adoption of this ordinance shall have frontage on a dedicated public street. 
102.06. - Corner lots. 
    Lots formed at the intersection of two (2) streets shall not be required to provide two (2) front yard setbacks. Only on one side abutting either street shall the front setback be required; on the remaining side, a setback of one-half (1/2) the otherwise required front setback shall be provided. 
102.07. - Off-street parking and loading. 
    102.07-1. It is the intent of these ordinances that all buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are in fact readily usable for such purpose. Because of the pedestrian orientation of the core of the central business district it is intended that parking be provided at the periphery of the core. 
    102.07-2. Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established, and each addition to a structure in excess of three hundred (300) square feet, except as herein provided, shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When an addition is made to a building nonconforming as to parking or loading, a conforming amount of parking shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. 
    102.07-3. No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition, conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. Contractual agreements may be made between uses which generate parking demand at different times in such a manner that the requirements of more than one use may be met by the same space provided the parking demand for each such use involved is in fact met. 
    102.07-4. Uses listed below shall provide parking and loading in the amounts specified and at locations specified for the group in which such use falls. For any use not listed, the planning and zoning commission shall determine the proper requirement by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment. In making any such determination, the board shall follow the principles set forth in the statement of purpose for the parking and loading provisions. 
    102.07-5. For the purpose of these ordinances a parking space shall be at least two hundred (200) square feet in size and shall be of easily usable and convenient shape, orientation and grade. Each such space shall be readily accessible and aisles required for access to ninety-degree parking shall not be less than twenty-two (22) feet in width, and shall not be counted in meeting the requirements for spaces. Loading spaces shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide and sixty (60) feet long for industrial and warehouse type uses but may be twelve (12) feet wide and thirty (30) feet long for retail, service and institutional establishments. Aisles adequate to accommodate the maneuvering into position of such vehicles shall be provided accessory to such space or spaces. Specified distances from the principal use for which a parking space is provided shall be measured from the edge of the usable parking space to a normal entrance to the building or use along a convenient and unobstructed pedestrian route. Required parking space shall not be provided within a required front yard, or a side yard at a corner. 
Use Parking Required Loading Space
Required Dwellings Two for each (not more than one may be located in the front yard) None Apartment buildings Two for each dwelling unit in a building containing 4 or more dwelling units One for each building containing 16 dwelling units plus additional space for each additional 20 units Doctors offices & clinics 5 spaces for each practitioner None Banks, professional offices and general offices One for each 300 square feet of floor area None Restaurants One for each 2.5 seats One Retail stores & shops One for each 200 square feet of gross sales space One for first 5,000 square feet plus one for each additional 30,000 square feet Hotel & motels One for each unit plus one for each 2 employees on the largest shift One for first 40,000 square feet plus one for each additional 150,000 square feet Club or organization One for each 100 square feet of assembly space plus one for each 2 employees None Hospital & rest home One for each 4 beds plus one for each 3 employees, plus one for each 2 staff physicians One for first 40,000 square feet plus one for each additional 150,000 square feet Churches One for each 4 seats in main assembly area None Libraries One for each 400 square feet of public access area One space for first 5,000 square feet plus one for each additional 10,000 square feet Schools One for each teacher plus one for each 100 square feet of seating space in auditorium None Theaters One for each 4 seats Manufacturing and warehousing Four for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one for each employee on largest shift Sufficient to allow for off-street loading but in no case less than 2 spaces for first 5,000 square feet of gross floor space plus one for each additional 10,000 square feet  
    102.07-6. In case of any building, structure, or premises the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar shall apply as determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
    102.07-7. In case of any lot in a residential subdivision the use of which is restricted to commercial purpose, through restrictive covenants in effect prior to the adoption of this zoning ordinance, said commercial use shall be permitted under provision of C-3 Neighborhood Convenience District. 
SECTION 103. - A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

103.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The A-1 Agricultural District is hereby created in order that certain undeveloped areas within the city continue in use primarily for agricultural purposes until such time that municipal water and sewer become available and the areas may be developed for more intensive urban uses. 
103.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings and farm buildings and structures; 
(b)  All forms of agriculture and forestry; 
(c)  Sale of products which are raised, produced, and processed on the premises; 
(d)  Nurseries and greenhouses; 
(e)  Golf courses and country clubs; 
(f)  Churches and cemeteries; 
(g)  Other similar and/or related uses. 
103.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Mobile home parks subject to section 112.01; 
(b)  Airports; 
(c)  Rest homes and nursing homes; 
(d)  Buildings of nonprofit community organizations and social welfare establishments other than those providing living space. 
[(e)]  Lifecare Community which is defined as a building or group of buildings which contain dwelling units where the occupancy is restricted to persons who are at least 62 years of age, or married couples in which one of the persons is at least 62 years of age, and which provides nursing and/or medical care as well as support services, such as common dining facilities, retail stores and personal service establishments serving the Lifecare Community only, which are operated by the owner of the Lifecare Community or lessees of the owner. Lifecare Communities are those designed to meet the residents' basic needs for shelter, food and healthcare, regardless of the level of independence of the individual residents and regardless of how these needs may change over time. Restrictions on a Lifecare Community are as follows: minimum lot frontage at building set-back line 300 feet, minimum lot area 3 acres, minimum from yard set-back - 50 feet; minimum side yard width - 15 feet; minimum ear yard depth - 25 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2005) 
103.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or building common to farm and ranch activities, living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises, but not labor camps or dwellings for transient labor. General home occupations. 
103.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as prescribed in section 102. 
103.06. - Area, yard and height requirements. 
    Area, yard and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
SECTION 104. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

104.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is hereby created in order that certain areas within the city be reserved exclusively for single-family residential and related uses. It is the intent of this ordinance that existing residential developments be protected form encroachment of undesirable and incompatible uses and new developments be constructed according to sound, reasonable, and desirable regulations as stated within this ordinance. 
104.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [The principal permitted uses in an R-1 single-family residential district are as follows:] 
(a)  Single-family dwellings; 
(b)  Churches and other places of worship provided that buildings shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any other lot in any residential district and shall maintain a front yard setback of at least forty (40) feet from the street right-of-way. 
(c)  Public parks, playgrounds, recreational and community center buildings and grounds of a noncommercial nature, golf courses and country clubs provided that any building so used shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from any lot in any residential district and maintain a front yard setback of at least forty (40) feet from the street right-of-way. 
(d)  Schools and institutions for academic instruction provided that any building used therefor shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from any lot in any residential district, and shall maintain a front yard setback of at least forty (40) feet from the street right-of-way. 
104.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Home occupations; 
(b)  Nursery schools and kindergartens. 
104.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
104.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be prescribed in section 102. 
104.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
SECTION 105. - R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

105.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residential District is hereby created in order that certain areas within the city be reserved for single- and two-family residential uses or that older, existing structures be converted to two-family uses. 
105.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [In an R-3 One- and Two-Family Residential District, the following are principal permitted uses:] 
(a)  Any use or structure permitted in the R-1 District. 
105.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Any conditionally permitted use allowed in the R-1 District. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Bed and breakfast facilities. 
(1)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, and in accord with the Antiquities Law of Mississippi, Miss. Code Ann. Section 39-7-1, et seq., the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  "Historical significance" means that quality or qualities associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of state, local or national history, or that quality or qualities associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state or national history, or that exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the nation, region, state, county, or city, or identifies the building with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history. 
b.  "Architectural significance" means an owner-operated residence of some historical and/or architectural significance, approved by the planning and zoning commission and designated by the mayor and board of aldermen by resolution pursuant to the procedures outline in Section 105.03(c)(2), containing a limited number of rooms, or series of rooms, intended to be occupied for a short-term duration by persons not residing within such building, and where breakfast is customarily furnished by the owner. The term "bed and breakfast" shall not include any hotel or motel. 
c.  "Cultural significance" means the qualities which have made a significant contribution to the culture of the nation, region, state, county or city. 
d.  "Bed and breakfast" means an owner-operated residence of some historical and/or cultural, and/or architectural significance, approved by the planning and zoning commission and designated by the mayor and board of aldermen by resolution pursuant the procedures outlined in Section 105.03(c)(2), containing a limited number of rooms, or series of rooms, intended to be occupied for a short-term duration by persons not residing within such building, and where breakfast is customarily furnished by the owner. The term "bed and breakfast" shall not include any hotel or motel. 
e.  "Private parties and special events" means a luncheon, dinner, wedding, wedding reception, rehearsal dinner, employee party, Christmas party, retirement party, or any other occasion signifying or commemorating a special event, person or group, during which time a meal is served to the guests, pursuant an agreement or contract between the owner/operator of the bed and breakfast and an individual(s) or business. 
(2)  Procedure. Any person or persons desiring to operate a bed and breakfast facility shall follow the following procedure, to-wit: 
a.  Make written application to the planning and zoning commission to operate as a bed and breakfast facility, which shall contain a detailed narrative outlining the historical and/or architectural and/or cultural significance of the proposed building or dwelling. 
b.  The planning and zoning commission shall use the following criteria in consideration and review of the applicant's submission including, but not limited to: 
1.  Architectural design and/or significance of the existing structure or building, and any proposed alterations and/or; 
2.  Historical significance of the structure or building and/or; 
3.  Cultural significance of the structure or building. (A structure may qualify in any one (1) or a combination of two (2) or more of the above 3 categories.) 
4.  General appearance of the structure or building. 
5.  General condition of the structure or building. 
6.  Conformity of the structure or building with the New Albany Building Code. 
7.  Adequate parking for guests (see Section (3)(f) and parties/special events (see Section (4)(c)). 
c.  Upon review of the application, if the planning and zoning commission determines the structure or building meets the definitions and criteria herein stated, it shall make recommendation to the mayor and board of aldermen, who shall take the recommendation under consideration at the next regularly schedule meeting. If the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission is approved, the mayor and board of aldermen shall adopt a resolution designating the structure or building as appropriate for the operation of a bed and breakfast facility. 
d.  Upon review of the application, if the planning and zoning commission determines the structure or building fails to meet the definitions and criteria herein stated, the applicant may appeal the decision directly to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(2)[3]  Restrictions. All bed and breakfast facilities shall be subject to the following restrictions, to-wit: 
a.  The structure housing a bed and breakfast shall be in compliance with all other requirements of the R-2 zone. 
b.  The bed and breakfast shall be managed and occupied by the owner of the property, who shall reside either within the same structure, or on the same property as the structure or on the adjoining property. 
c.  Meals provided to overnight guests are limited to breakfast. 
d.  The bed and breakfast shall contain not more than six (6) bedrooms for guests at any one (1) location or premises. 
e.  No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms. 
f.  Paved or gravel off-street parking shall be provided with one (1) space required for each bedroom, to be located in a side or real yard on the premises. No guest parking space shall be in the front yard and parking for the owner or permanent residents of the structure shall be as otherwise required by this ordinance. 
g.  One (1) sign shall be allowed, not more than four (4) square feet in area, mounted wither flush upon the wall of the building or in the front yard. Signs placed in the front yard shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height and must be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the edge of the street pavement or curb. 
h.  The length of stay of any one (1) guest in a bed and breakfast shall no exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
i.  Only one (1) bed and breakfast shall be allowed on the face of each city block. 
(3)[4]  Private parties and special events. In addition to the services provided to overnight guests, subject to the restrictions herein stated, the owner/operator of a bed and breakfast shall have the privilege to hold private parties and special events, as defined in Section (1)(d), under the following restrictions, to-wit: 
a.  The number of guests for any private party or special event shall be limited to one hundred (100). 
b.  Any private party or special event must be concluded by 11:00 p.m. 
c.  Available parking must be sufficient so as not to disrupt or disturb the normal flow of traffic, including access to neighboring houses and/or businesses. 
d.  Any deviation from the restrictions set forth in subsection (a) or (b) must be first approved by the mayor and board of aldermen at the regular monthly meeting prior to the private party or special event. 
(4)[5]  Violations of restrictions. Any owner/operator in violation of the restrictions set forth herein, as determined by and subject to the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen, are subject to the following civil penalties, to-wit: 
a.  A fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
b.  Suspension of the privilege to hold private parties and special events for a period of up to three (3) months. 
c.  Repeated violations (in excess of three (3) violations) of the restrictions set forth herein may result in revocation of the privilege to hold private parties and special events. Upon revocation, the owner/operator may apply for reinstatement of the privilege in twelve (12) months. 
(5)[6]  Condition of the structure and its operation as a "bed and breakfast" shall conform to all applicable nation, state and local laws, codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-23-96; Ord. of 10-7-2004) 
(d)  A single-family dwelling may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of the adoption of this section, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the Code of Ordinances. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable for single-family dwellings. These single-family dwellings must be visually attractive and compatible with similar residences in the neighborhood. The single-family dwelling may be built upon the "footprint" or foundation outline of the former structure if the same can be ascertained. In the event the "footprint" or foundation outline of the former structure cannot be ascertained, the single-family dwelling may be constructed so long as the side yards and overall area are compatible with the other single family dwellings situated on non-conforming lots within the neighborhood. No one may "split" or "divide" an otherwise conforming lot in order to make two (2) or more non-conforming lots. Whenever anyone plans to construct a single-family dwelling on a lot which fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, they shall present plans for the same to the city building inspector and these plans must include, at a minimum, the following: floor plan and amenities of the proposed structure; a drawing showing the outline of the structure on the lot giving information as to all set-backs; such plan shall provide for off street parking which will not violate the setback requirements (a concrete pad but no structure); a simple line drawing or a photograph of a similar existing structure so that the building inspector will be able to ascertain how the dwelling will appear from the front, back and sides. All such construction must meet the requirements of the building codes for the City of New Albany in effect at the time of such construction. This section shall become effective thirty (30) days after its passage and a summary of the same shall be published according to law. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
105.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
105.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as provided in section 102. 
105.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
SECTION 106. - R-3 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

106.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The R-3 General Residential District is hereby created in order that certain areas within the city be developed for multifamily residential purposes, and that older, existing structures be converted to multifamily residential uses. 
106.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [In an R-3 General Residential District, the following uses are principal permitted uses:] 
(a)  Any use or structure permitted in the R-2 District; 
(b)  Multifamily dwellings; 
(c)  Rooming houses and group dwellings; 
(d)  Home occupations. 
106.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and are subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Any conditionally permitted use allowed in the R-2 District; 
(b)  Mobile home parks subject to section 112.01; 
(c)  Nursing homes, convalescent homes, private clubs or lodges and hospitals; 
(d)  Professional offices including offices of doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, accountants, and similar professions which generate a minimum amount of traffic. 
106.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary or incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
106.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided as prescribed in section 102. 
106.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
SECTION 106A. - R-4 MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

106A.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The R-4 Manufactured Housing Residential District is hereby created in order that certain areas within the city may be developed through the use of manufactured housing that meets certain appearance, design and construction standards that would tend to distinguish this housing from an ordinary mobile home as that term is generally understood and applied in this community and as said term is applied in this city's present ordinance entitled "Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks". 
    Manufactured housing is hereby defined to be housing designed to generally conform in appearance and quality of construction to site-built housing, but which is manufactured off-site in two (2) or more components in such a manner that it can be transported to the site and installed on a permanent foundation. The quality of construction must be such that it will meet or exceed the applicable building codes of the city for site-built housing. Criteria to be considered in distinguishing manufactured housing from the traditional mobile home shall include: 
(a)  Manufactured housing generally has a more traditionally pitched roof and uses conventional roofing materials. 
(b)  Manufactured housing generally uses siding material more traditionally associated with site-built housing, such as wood siding or masonite, vinyl or aluminum siding designed to resemble wood siding. 
(c)  Manufactured housing generally has certain exterior design features such as off-sets, bay windows, or related features to make the external appearance of the home more aesthetically pleasing and closer in appearance to site-built housing than the traditional mobile home. 
(d)  Manufactured housing is designed solely to be transported to one location and thereafter permanently affixed to a foundation and the necessary utility services whereas mobile homes, even if manufactured in two (2) units commonly known as "double-wides", are commonly built upon a chassis designed to make them readily moveable, even though they are capable of being affixed to a permanent foundation. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    The principal permitted uses in an R-4 manufactured housing residential district are as follows: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R-2 District, except that the erection of a single-family dwelling that would otherwise meet all of the requirements for construction in an R-2 Zone may be accomplished through the use of manufactured housing as hereinabove defined. The provision regarding use of manufactured housing is purely discretionary and not mandatory and more conventional methods of housing construction may continue to be used in the R-4 Zone so long as the construction complies to R-2 zoning requirements and the applicable building codes. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Any conditionally permitted use allowed in the R-2 District. The use of manufactured structures may not be used to accomplish any of the conditionally permitted uses contemplated under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as provided in section 102. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111 for the R-2 District. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.07. - Application process. 
    Any party desiring to install a manufactured housing unit in an R-4 District shall make application therefor to the city building inspector, and shall furnish such information regarding design, construction, appearance and related matters as the inspector shall reasonably require. The inspector shall thereupon issue a permit if, in his opinion, the proposed unit meets the definition of manufactured housing and meets all of the criteria for an R-2 housing unit and meets or exceeds the applicable city building codes. If, in his opinion, the proposed unit does not meet the above criteria, including a finding that the proposed unit is, in fact a mobile home as that term is traditionally understood and applied in this community, then he shall deny the application in writing stating his reasons therefor. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the inspector shall have the right to file an appeal directly to the mayor and board of aldermen by serving a notice of the appeal in writing within ten (10) days of the date of the inspector's decision. The mayor and board of aldermen shall proceed to conduct a hearing on the matter at the next regular monthly meeting of the board and shall render such decision, after hearing and consideration of the matter, as the board shall find appropriate. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
106A.08. - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
    To the extent that this section of this ordinance shall appear to be in conflict with this city's ordinance entitled "Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks", then the provisions of this ordinance [section] shall take precedence and control; however, in the event of a determination that any proposed housing unit does not meet the criteria to be considered "manufactured housing", then the terms and provisions of the said mobile home ordinance shall be applied. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87) 
SECTION 107. - C-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

107.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The C-1 Central Commercial District is hereby created in order that there be one (1) central area of retail and office use which shall constitute the central business district of the city. It is the intent of this ordinance that the C-1 District not be encroached upon by other commercial, industrial, or residential uses which are not compatible with the existing and future retail businesses and offices located within the central business district. 
107.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [In the C-1 Central Commercial District, the principal permitted uses are:] 
(a)  Retail and service establishments; 
(b)  General and professional offices; 
(c)  Financial institutions; 
(d)  Newspaper offices; 
(e)  Parking lots; 
(f)  Clinics for people; 
(g)  Hotels and motels; 
(h)  Eating and drinking places; 
(i)  Private clubs and lodges; 
(j)  Public buildings and grounds. 
107.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission, and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Gasoline service stations. 
(b)  Automobile and implement dealers. 
(c)  Single-family and multi-family residential uses. Prior to the hearing before the planning and zoning commission to consider a request for such conditionally permitted use, the applicant shall file with the zoning coordinator a preliminary set of plans and specifications for the proposed conversion project, or a detailed written narrative of the proposed project. The zoning coordinator is charged with undertaking an investigation of the proposed project to ensure that all applicable fire codes and building codes will be complied with, to investigate the impact of the proposed project on available parking in the area, and to generally assess the impact of the proposed project on the commercial area affected thereby and to report the results of his investigation along with his recommendations to the planning and zoning commission. Any grant of such permitted use shall require, as a specific restriction to approval, that the project be completed in substantial compliance with the proposed plans, along with such other limitations and restrictions as the commission shall find appropriate in the circumstances. No new construction of residential buildings shall be permitted in a commercial zone, this conditionally permitted use being specifically limited to modified use of existing buildings in a commercial zone. 
(d)  As used in subsection 107.03(a)-(c) above, such residential uses allowed in the commercial district shall be restricted to the upper floors only of such commercial buildings and the ground floors of such building shall be used for commercial purposes only and not residential purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, § 1; Ord. of 10-12-98; Ord. of 6-5-18(1)) 
107.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
107.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking is not required in the C-1 District. 
107.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
107.07. - Nonconforming commercial lots. 
    The owner of a commercial lot which is nonconforming in that it fails to meet the requirements for area, width, setback, parking or a combination of these, and the commercial building thereon is destroyed by fire, decay or otherwise, the owner may construct a commercial building on said lot which is built upon the footprint or foundation outline of the former structure so long as such construction is visibly pleasing and is otherwise in compliance with the city's building code requirements applicable at the time of construction. 
(Ord. of 11-4-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 11-4-08, adopted Nov. 4, 2008, added § 107.06 to the Code. Inasmuch as said section already existed, at the editor's discretion the new material was redesignated as § 107.07. 
SECTION 108. - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

108.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The C-2 General Commercial District is hereby created to provide for a wide range of retail and service establishments. 
108.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [The following are principal permitted uses in the C-2 General Commercial District:] 
(a)  Any principal permitted uses in the C-1 District; 
(b)  Automotive and truck repairs; 
(c)  Truck lines and other shipping facilities; 
(d)  Radio and TV stations; 
(e)  Drive-in theaters and restaurants; 
(f)  Entertainment and recreational facilities; 
(g)  Motels, tourist cabins, and tourist courts; 
(h)  Clinics for animals; 
(i)  Funeral homes and mortuaries; 
(j)  Dry cleaning and laundries; 
(k)  Wholesale stores, but not operated primarily as warehouses; 
(l)  Combination display stores, offices, warehouse and fabrication shops; 
(m)  Gasoline service stations; 
(n)  Hospitals. 
(Ord. of 7-6-89, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-18(1)) 
108.03. - Conditionally permitted use. 
(a)  Facilities operated primarily for warehousing and distribution purposes. 
(b)  Single-family and multi-family residential uses accomplished through the remodeling and renovation of existing buildings. Prior to the hearing before the planning and zoning commission to consider a request for such conditionally permitted use, the applicant shall file with the zoning coordinator a complete set of plans and specifications for the proposed conversion project, or a detailed written narrative of the proposed project. The zoning coordinator is charged with undertaking an investigation of the proposed project to insure that all applicable fire codes and building codes will be complied with, to investigate the impact of the proposed project on available parking in the area, and to generally assess the impact of the proposed project on the commercial area affected thereby and to report the results of his investigation along with his recommendations to the planning and zoning commission. Any grant of such permitted use shall require, as a specific restriction to approval, that the project be completed in substantial compliance with the proposed plans, along with such other limitations and restrictions as the commission shall find appropriate in the circumstances. No new construction of residential buildings shall be permitted in a commercial zone, this conditionally permitted use being specifically limited to modified use of existing buildings in a commercial zone. 
(c)  Sexually oriented businesses as a conditionally permitted use within the C-2 District. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, § 1; Ord. of 1-28-2002) 
108.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
108.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as prescribed in section 102. 
108.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
108.07. - Nonconforming commercial lots. 
    The owner of a commercial lot which is nonconforming in that it fails to meet the requirements for area, width, setback, parking or a combination of these, and the commercial building thereon is destroyed by fire, decay or otherwise, the owner may construct a commercial building on said lot which is built upon the footprint or foundation outline of the former structure so long as such construction is visibly pleasing and is otherwise in compliance with the city's building code requirements applicable at the time of construction. 
(Ord. of 11-4-08) 
SECTION 109. - C-3 NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE DISTRICT 

109.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The C-3 Neighborhood Convenience District is hereby created in order that small, limited areas within certain neighborhoods may be used for commercial uses which serve only the surrounding area and do not generate excessive traffic. It is the intent of this ordinance that these convenience centers be strictly limited to commercial uses which serve the day-to-day household needs of the surrounding area. 
109.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    [The following uses are principal permitted uses in the C-3 Neighborhood Convenience District:] 
(a)  Grocery stores of limited size such as "quick stop" or the "one stop" variety, and not including supermarkets; 
(b)  Drugstores, barbershops, beauty shops; 
(c)  Medical and dental clinics (outpatient nature); 
(d)  Self-service laundries and laundry pick-up stations; 
(e)  Hardware stores; 
(f)  Shoe repair shops; 
(g)  Bakeries; 
(h)  Branch banks; 
(i)  Professional offices. 
109.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Other light retail and service uses which the planning and zoning commission determine will serve only the surrounding neighborhood and will not be detrimental to any adjacent properties. 
109.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
109.05. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as prescribed in section 102. 
109.06. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
109.07. - Screening, fencing, and lighting. 
    A fence, wall, screen, or other enclosure of at least eight (8) feet in height is required along the rear and side property lines for any property zoned C-3 which abuts any residential district, lighted signs or other bright exterior lighting shall also be screened from abutting residential districts by the same type fence, wall or enclosure. 
SECTION 109A. - C-4 NEIGHBORHOOD PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT 

109A.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The C-4 Neighborhood Professional District is hereby created in order that small, limited areas within certain neighborhoods may be used for professional and business offices employing ten (10) employees or less. It is the intent of this ordinance that these professional districts will not be of such nature to generate excessive traffic and will not be detrimental to any adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
109A.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    In the C-4 Neighborhood Professional District, the principal permitted uses are: 
(a)  Professional offices employing ten (10) persons or less; 
(b)  Business offices employing ten (10) persons or less; 
(c)  General offices employing ten (10) persons or less; 
(d)  Doctors', dental or other health care clinics employing ten (10) persons or less. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
109A.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted only if expressly authorized by the planning and zoning commission and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the commission: 
(a)  Other service uses which the planning and zoning commission determine will serve only the surrounding neighborhood and will not be detrimental to any adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
109A.04. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
109A.05. - Off-street parking. 
    [Off-street parking shall be] as same shall be [is] prescribed in section 102.07-5. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
SECTION 110. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

110.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The I-1 Light Industrial District is hereby created in order that there be areas within the city used primarily for manufacturing, fabrication, and assembly operations that do not unduly interfere with the utilization of adjoining properties through the generation of excessive noise, vibrations, noxious odors and related discharges, heavy traffic or similar issues. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
110.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    The following are principal permitted uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-2 District; 
(b)  Light manufacturing industries, defined generally as industries committed to the fabrication and assembly of smaller unit products such as clothing, small electric appliances, electronic devices and/or electronic subcomponents, packaged food products, pharmaceutical products, and other similar processes typically requiring skilled hand assembly or the use of robotics, and involving assembly or manufacturing processes that do not generate noxious odors, smoke, fumes, or excessive noise. 
(c)  Agricultural activities, plant nurseries, and greenhouses that can meet the standards of 110.02(b) regarding odors, smoke, fumes, and noise. 
(d)  Trade schools. 
(e)  Research and laboratory facilities. 
(f)  Smaller scale warehousing for raw materials and finished products whose principal purpose is to support any light manufacturing industry operating in the area, but such warehousing space shall be appropriately enclosed or screened from the general view. 
(g)  Aluminum can processing and recycling operations. 
(h)  Research and laboratory facilities. 
(i)  Towing or wrecker storage facilities, but upon specific board approval only. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
110.03. - Accessory building and uses. 
    Any accessory use or structure customary and incidental to the principal use is permitted. 
110.04. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking shall be as prescribed in section 102. 
110.05. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
    Area, yard, and height requirements shall be as prescribed in section 111. 
110.06. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Appearance. All junk, salvage, auto wrecking and similar operations shall be shielded from view from streets and from adjacent properties in another zone by means of a sturdy, sight-obscuring fence in good repair. 
(b)  Fire hazard. All flammable substances involved in any activity established in this zone shall be handled in conformance with the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and any additional regulations of the City of New Albany. 
(c)  Noise. All noises and noise causing activities shall be muffled so that they will not create a disturbance greater than normal peak hour traffic noise on a major street when observed from any area zoned residential. Major street noise for comparison purposes shall be measured on the primary state highway nearest the industry. 
(d)  Air contaminant. Since all the possibilities of air contaminants cannot be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any source wheresoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such considerable number of persons or the general public or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation or property. 
(e)  Sewage and liquid wastes. No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, watercourse or the ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid waste of a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installation or injurious to plant, animal or human life as determined by the State Health Department or State Water Pollution Control Agency. 
(f)  Odor. Odor-causing operations shall be controlled so as to reduce escape of odors to the minimum practical within the limits of technology and economics. 
(g)  Gasses. All noxious gasses shall be controlled to the extent that they will not be injurious to life and property. The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed one part per million, carbon monoxide shall not exceed twenty-five (25) parts per million, and nitrous fumes shall not exceed five (5) parts per million. All measurements shall be made at the zoning lot line. 
(h)  Vibration. All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be mounted so as to minimize vibration. Vibration shall not be so excessive that it interferes with industrial operations on nearby zoning lots. 
SECTION 110A. - I-2 SPECIAL USE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

110A.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The I-2 Special Use Industrial District is hereby created in order that there be areas within the city used exclusively for industrial, manufacturing, fabrication, and related operations which, due to such issues as noise, vibrations, smoke and noxious fumes, or heavy traffic are incompatible with other land uses of nearby properties. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2011) 
110A.02. - Principal permitted uses. 
    All uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District are principal permitted uses in the I-2 Special Use Industrial District. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2011) 
110A.03. - Conditionally permitted uses. 
(1)  All other manufacturing uses in the I-2 Special Use Industrial District are permitted only if expressly authorized by the board of aldermen and subject to any limitations and restrictions deemed necessary by the board of aldermen. 
(2)  In consideration of conditional permission, the board of aldermen shall consider the following factors: 
(a)  Whether the proposed use shall involve the generation of excessive noise, vibrations, noxious odors and related discharges, and the degree of such involvement; 
(b)  Whether the use shall be hazardous to other land uses nearby and in the city; 
(c)  Whether the use shall involve an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, school or other public facilities; 
(d)  Whether the proposed use shall have an adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties; and 
(e)  All other relevant factors. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2011) 
SECTION 111. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

111.01. - A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts. 
    The following yard, height, frontage, setback, lot area, side yard, rear yard requirements shall apply: 
District Maximum 
Height 
Limit Minimum 
Lot Frontage 
at Building 
Setback Line Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Front 
Yard 
Setback Minimum 
Side Yard 
Width Minimum 
Rear Yard 
Depth A-1 None 300 ft. 3 acres 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. R-1 3 stories 100 ft. 12,000 sq. ft. 35 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. R-2 3 stories 75 ft. For single-family dwellings; 90 ft. for two-family dwellings 8,500 sq. ft. For single-family dwellings; 12,000 sq. ft. for two-family dwellings 30 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft. R-3 3 stories 60 ft. 6,000 sq. ft. One-dwelling unit or 3,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit for more than one dwelling unit 25 ft. 5 ft. 20 ft.  
Note: The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to barns, silos, or other farm structures or buildings; church spires, belfries, domes, or monuments; or cupolas, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, radio towers, aerials, water towers, monitors, grain elevators, and other structures which require excessive height in order to function properly. 
111.02. - C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and I-1 districts. 
    The following setback, side yard, rear yard, and height requirements shall apply: 
District Maximum Height Limit Minimum Lot Area Minimum Front Yard Setback Minimum Side Yard Each Side Minimum Rear Yard Depth C-1 Central Commercial 75 ft. None None None 1 10 1 C-2 General Commercial 75 ft. None 40 None 1 15 C-3 Neighborhood Convenience 1 story 7,500 sq. ft. 40 None 1 15 C-4 [Neighborhood Professional] 2 story 7,500 sq. ft. 3 40 15 15 I-1 Industrial None 10,000 sq. ft. 40 None 2 None 2  
1 When abutting any residential district, a side or rear yard, or both, of fifteen (15) feet is required. 
2 When abutting any residential district, a side or rear yard, or both, of fifty (50) feet is required. 
Note: The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to barns, silos, or other farm structures or buildings; church spires, belfries, domes, or monuments; or cupolas, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, radio towers, aerials, water towers, monitors, grain elevators, and other structures which require excessive height in order to function properly. 
3 In addition, a C-4 lot shall require a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet frontage at building setback line. 
(Ord. of 12-23-85) 
SECTION 112. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

112.01. - Mobile home parks. 
    Mobile homes shall be allowed only in mobile home parks and regulations and requirements pertaining to mobile homes and mobile home parks shall be subject to provisions set forth in the Mobile Home Ordinance for New Albany, Mississippi. 
112.02. - Planned center. 
    A planned commercial or shopping center may be appended to any business district. The use characteristics of the district to which it is appended will control, but the procedure set forth herein will allow for new and modern design that is not possible under regulations designed for control of individual or independent development of adjacent business properties. 
    112.02-1. The principal uses shall be the same as the district upon which the planned center is appended. 
    112.02-2. The permitted conditional uses shall be the same as the district upon which the planned center is appended. 
    112.02-3. Space limits are as follows: 
(A)  Minimum zoning lot: Three (3) acres; 
(B)  No building shall be closer than sixty (60) feet to any boundary lot line except if abutting a commercial or industrial district, then no building shall be closer to such boundary lot line than thirty-five (35) feet. 
(C)  The entire parcel of land in a planned center shall be considered as one zoning lot in arranging buildings and other facilities. 
    112.02-4. The planning and zoning commission shall take into consideration the ability of nearby streets to handle traffic generated by a planned center in granting approval of proposed new developments. 
    112.02-5. Procedures for securing approval of a planned center development are as follows: 
(a)  Proponents shall submit a site plan of the proposed development to include location and size of buildings, parking and traffic circulation arrangements, ingress and egress, location and size of signs and plans for storm drainage; 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission may request, at its discretion, a market analysis to substantiate the necessity, size and location of the proposed development; 
(c)  Proponents of a planned center shall begin construction of the development as proposed within two (2) years from the date of approval by the planning and zoning commission. If such construction is not commenced within this time period, the planning and zoning commission may abolish its approval of the development; 
(d)  Application for a planned center shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting. 
112.03. - Signs and outdoor advertising-Regulations applicable to both C-1 and C-2. 
    Signs and outdoor advertising shall be classified as a commercial use and permitted in zones established for agricultural, commercial, industrial and as limited herein, certain residential uses. Placing, lacking, painting, repainting, hanging, or otherwise affixing of any kind of sign, outdoor advertising, or poster of miscellaneous character on the walls of buildings, barns, sheds, trees, fences or any other structure, except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance, is prohibited. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the following sign regulations are hereby established to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land usage; to enhance the economy of the city; to protect the public investment in streets and highways; to promote the safety and recreation value of public travel; to preserve natural beauty and to protect property values by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of business and related signs. It is the express intent of these regulations to promote the aesthetic values of the City of New Albany by elimination of visual blight and to preserve the quality of urban life in the community. It is also the express intent of these regulations to improve the safety of the citizens of and visitors to the City of New Albany by restrictions upon the size and location of certain types of signs or by the elimination of certain types of signs. It is not the intent of these regulations to restrict or infringe upon any constitutionally guaranteed right of freedom of speech or expression. 
112.03.1 Except as hereinafter provided, no sign of any character may be erected, hung, rehung, placed, replaced, or painted upon any building or structure located in a commercial or industrial district unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted on the premises where the sign is located: Therefore, signs commonly know as "billboards" are prohibited. 
112.03-2 In any residential district, signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area are permitted to identify professional offices. 
112.03-3 All signs or outdoor advertising devices shall be constructed and maintained in strict accordance with the Southern Standard Building Code as adopted by the city and as it may be amended and updated in the future. 
112.03-4 Before any person or firm shall erect, place, paint, hang, or otherwise construct any sign or outdoor advertising device, he shall apply for a permit from the zoning administrator. Such application to the zoning administrator shall specify the location, size, character, and setback from the street right-of-way for each and every sign to be so constructed. 
112.03-5. Definitions as used in this ordinance. 
a.  Outdoor advertising sign. A sign which directs the attention of the general public to a business, product, service or activity not conducted upon the premises where such sign is located, and commonly known as "billboards." 
b.  Business sign. A sign which directs the attention of the general public to a business, product, service or activity conducted upon the premises where such sign is located. 
c.  Sign area. The entire width within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the outer dimensions of the actual message or copy area. It does not include decorative trim, customary extension or embellishments or any structural elements outside the limits of such display surface and not forming an integral part of the display. For double face or V-type sign structures, only one (1) display face shall be counted in computing the actual sign area. 
d.  Sign. Any outdoor display, devise, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, banner, billboard or other thing which is designed, intended to be used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or information contents of which is designed to be primarily viewed from any place on the traveled way of a street or highway. 
e.  Ground sign. Any sign not attached to a building and permanently attached to or implanted in the ground. 
f.  Attached sign. Any sign (as defined herein) directly attached to an exterior wall of a building and dependent upon a building for support with its exposed face parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure upon which the sign is affixed, including, but not limited to, signs painted on walls. This shall include banners and the same must be affixed to a permanent structure. 
g.  Erect. Means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, install, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish a sign. The term "erect" shall not mean a change in the advertising message or customary maintenance and repair. 
h.  Portable signs. Any business sign or outdoor advertising sign not permanently attached to a building, post, or other type of foundation and which is capable of being moved by means of lifting or rolling on wheels with a minimum of difficulty by disconnection of wiring, obits, or other anchors, including, but not limited to, free standing changeable copy signs, i.e., "flashing arrow signs" upon which letters/numbers may be periodically changed to indicate a different message. This does not include those illuminated signs which indicate time, date, temperature or other public service information. 
i.  Temporary signs. Any business sign or outdoor advertising sign not intended to be permanently located or permanently affixed and which can be erected or removed easily located on the premises or property, such as standing signs (i.e., any sign supported by supports which are placed on or anchored in the ground and which is independent from any building or other structure), and sandwich boards, and are used for the purpose of temporary advertising, promotion of sales or clearances. This provision shall not include or be applicable to banners. 
j.  Political signs. Any sign or temporary sign (both as defined herein), erected for the purpose of promoting a candidate for political office or promoting a political cause or referendum. 
k.  Monument signs. This is A type of ground sign which will usually fall into one (1) of two (2) categories, to wit: business/commercial or subdivision. These signs are usually constructed of brick, blocks, stone or wood and should be visually attractive. 
l.  Church directional signs. Any sign erected by an organized religion, denomination or congregation which gives directions to the church where services are regularly held. 
m.  Other directional signs. Various types of signs such an "in" and "out", "customer parking", "open" and "closed" normally used by businesses to direct traffic on the premises of such commercial business. 
n.  Zoning administrator. Same as building inspector. 
112.03-6 Grandfathered status shall be given to all existing signs but for those temporary or portable in nature. These signs shall retain grandfathered status until such time as they, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, have become so faded, streaked, tattered, torn, broken or otherwise dilapidated so as to no longer serve their intended purpose. At such time as any signage reaches this condition, the same must be removed upon order of the zoning administrator. All signage replacement or upgrading shall conform to these guidelines. 
112.03-7 Size. The total surface area of a sign shall not exceed, in square feet, one and one-half (11/2) times the linear feet that is the horizontal length of the wall to which the sign is to be attached. The surface area of the sign shall be measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle which fully encloses all words, copy, or messages on the sign. In the case of signs formed by individual, separate letters, the surface area shall be measured by finding the area of the minimum rectangle or square, whichever is less in size, which fully encloses each letter and then by totaling the area of each letter in the sign. For multitenant buildings, the total area as specified above, shall be distributed among each business therein according to the linear feet frontage occupied by each business. Signs for multitenant buildings shall be located on the facade of the building adjacent to the entrance for a particular tenant. Multitenant buildings shall have like signs. 
Example: If the building is fifty (50) feet wide, the sign affixed thereon shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
112.03-8 Permanent signs. The following types of permanent signs are allowed: 
A.  Menu signs. Signs at drive-through windows of restaurants or other food service establishments, provided that such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in total size or be of a size which is comparable to existing signs for similar businesses in the area. In all events, such signs shall not be located between the business and the street upon which it fronts. 
B.  Name and address signs. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size. 
C.  Window signs. Window signs, whether painted on or attached to windows of a structure, provided the total area of any such signs does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the surface in any single window. 
D.  Reverse channel letter. Individual or group of letters are securely attached to the structure and can project no more than six (6) inches from the building. The lighting is behind the letters. Light cannot change in intensity or color. 
E.  Monument signs. These signs may have signage on one (1) or both signs and shall not be more than eight (8) feet wide and six (6) feet tall. They shall be permanently attached to the ground and shall in no case obstruct the view of traffic. They may not be internally illuminated, but spotlights may be used. Monument signs are not allowed in C-1. 
F.  Church directional signs. The maximum size for any church directional sign shall be two (2) feet by three (3) feet and shall contain only the name, distance to the church and a directional arrow. Each church shall be allowed one (1) directional sign within the city limits. These must be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet off the right of way and shall be mounted on pylons made of either metal or wood. Where applicable, two (2) or more church signs shall be hung from the same pylons and, in all events, no pylons shall be in excess of ten (10) feet from the surface of the ground. When existing church signs are replaced, the above requirements shall be adhered to. Permission in advance from the landowner must be secured for the placement of church signs on private property. 
G.  Professional signs within residential areas. In any residential district, signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area are permitted to identify professional offices. 
H.  Other directional signs as defined herein. 
112.03-9 Temporary signs. The following types of temporary signs are allowed: 
A.  Banners for community oriented events. These banners may be used for events such as the Union County Fair, Riverfest, Summer Blast, and Vacation Bible School. These banners, while they may advertise the same events as street banners, are not to be hung across streets or sidewalks. They must advertise only the event and may not contain any commercial advertising. These banners may be hung seven (7) days before the event and must be removed within two (2) days following the close of the event. These banners must be off the road right-of-way and may be placed on private property only with the permission of the owner of said property. 
B.  Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size and shall be professionally prepared. All real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the closing of the sale, lease, or rental of premises. Real estate signs giving more information than the generic statement, House for Sale, are allowed only on the premises of the property being offered for sale. Generic House for Sale signs, no larger than eight (8) inches by eighteen (18) inches with an arrow indicating directions to the property offered for sale may be placed off the premises of the property offered for sale in order to direct the public to the property. These directional signs shall contain only the words "House for Sale" and only one such off premises sign shall be used for each property offered for sale and all others will be removed. 
C.  Construction and development signs. Construction and development signs, temporary in nature, shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of total signage area per construction project or development and shall be professionally prepared. Such signs shall be removed within one (1) week of the substantial completion of the project or the installation of any permanent sign. 
D.  Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs such as sandwich board signs with a chalk or marker board which can be erased are allowed on a temporary basis at the discretion of the building inspector. These signs may contain no more than eight (8) square feet per side and must be placed on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the building. If there is no sidewalk immediately adjacent to the building, they may be placed up to five (5) feet from the front of the building. 
E.  Community related signs. These signs may include those of sponsors for city or county sanctioned groups and events. These signs may be hung seven (7) days before the event and must be removed within two (2) days following the close of the event. These signs may be placed only upon the premises used for a city or county sanctioned event. Such signs shall not constitute off premises advertising, but they shall be conservative and tasteful in nature and their sole purpose is to allow the public to know which individuals, businesses, firms, corporations or organizations sponsored a particular community related event. An example of such signage would be that hung on the premises of the Union County Museum in recognition of a corporate sponsorship of a community related event. The provisions of this paragraph shall be liberally construed so as to allow maximum use of the exemption offered by this category of signage. 
112.03-10 Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited: 
A.  Flashing. No sign shall consist of, or display, in whole or in part, any flashing lights or other illuminating devices which change in intensity, brightness or color, except electronic reader board signs, provided the message on such sign does not flash on and off. 
B.  Rooftop signs. 
C.  Off-premises signs including those signs commonly known as "billboards". 
D.  Temporary signs. Temporary signs, as defined herein, are not permitted within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany, but for those listed in 112.03-9. 
E.  Portable signs. Portable signs, as defined herein, are not permitted within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany, but for those listed in 112.03-9. 
F.  Political signs. Political signs, as defined herein, are not permitted on public property within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany. 
G.  Carport and yard sale signs. Carport and yard sale signs are not permitted on public property within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany. These signs may be placed on private property, but only in the yard where the sale is being conducted. These signs may be placed on private property only with the permission of the landowner. These signs may not be placed away from the property where the sale is being held in order to give directions to the site of the sale. The building inspector shall have discretion to either charge the person placing these types signs with a violation of the signage ordinance or simply to tear down and destroy signs in violation. 
H.  Removal of political signs, carport and yard sale signs. Every employee of the City of New Albany is hereby authorized to remove and destroy political signs, carport and yard sale signs whenever they find them on public property within the corporate limits of the City of New Albany. 
112.03-11. Bringing temporary signs and portable signs into compliance is not allowed. No temporary sign, as defined herein, or portable sign, as defined herein, which would otherwise be prohibited under the provisions of this ordinance, may be attached to an exterior wall of a building or be permanently attached to or implanted in the ground in order to bring said temporary and/or portable sign into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Under no circumstances may temporary and/or portable signs, as defined in this ordinance, be changed, modified, transformed, altered, reconstructed, or converted so as to qualify, for purposes of compliance with this ordinance, as an attached sign, as defined herein or as a ground sign, as defined herein. 
112.03-12. Application to the zoning administrator required. Before any person, firm or business shall erect, place, paint, hang, or otherwise construct any sign or outdoor advertising device, not otherwise prohibited by this ordinance, an application for a signage permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator specifying the location, size, character, and setback from the street right-of-way for each and every sign to be so constructed. Please see Section 112.03-15 Signage Application Form. A sign may be erected only after it is clear the proposed sign meets with guidelines contained herein and a permit has been issued by the city. Permits are issued by the zoning inspector of the city in accordance with the procedures of the city. However, the process used for approval of signage differs between C-1 and C-2 in that the Main Street Program is involved in the approval process for C-1. 
112.03-13. Abandoned signs. If it shall appear to the zoning administrator of the City of New Albany that a sign has been abandoned or is in non-use for a period in excess of one hundred and eighty (180) days, he shall notify, in writing, the owner of the land together with the owner of the sign, if known, to remove the sign within thirty (30) days of said notice. If same is not removed, the city may demolish said sign and bill the sign owner and land owner jointly and severally for the cost of said demolition or removal and the same may be added to the ad valorem taxes for the property. 
112.03-14. Penalty. All persons failing to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be in violation of the same and shall be subject to the following penalties. 
a.  Violation of the provisions of this ordinance of failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
b.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
c.  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City of New Albany from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
d.  The planning and zoning commission shall make the initial determination of whether a signage permit should be issued. In the event the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission appeal may be made to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of New Albany, MS. In the event the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen, appeal may be taken as from other decisions of said board. 
112.03-15 Signage application form. 
Date: ____________ 
Applicant: ____________ 
Location of Property: ____________ 
Owner: ____________ 
Tenant: ____________ 
Description of Signage: ____________ 
Size: ____________ 
Materials: ____________ 
Text or Graphics Used: ____________ 
Sign Company (must be licensed and bonded with the City of New Albany, MS) ____________ 
Name: ____________ 
Address: ____________ 
Reason for Variance (if applicable, variances may be granted in C-2 only): ____________ 
Attach a rendering of the signage to show location of sign on building, proportion to building and text or graphics used. 
Regulations applicable to C-1 only 
112.03-16 Purpose and objective: The purpose of these regulations is to set forth guidelines for the signage in the C-1 downtown area which do not apply to the C-2 area. The objective of these guidelines is to provide signage that enhances the architectural design of buildings within this area, is compatible from building to building, and is harmonious with adjacent business and the public ways. The citizens of New Albany and business/property owners in downtown are committed to the preservation of the historical integrity of the area. Because they have made investments in enterprises and property improvement, all are concerned that the areas of historical atmosphere be perpetuated. Because you have elected to locate in C-1, these guidelines can assist you in planning your new or revised signs. These guidelines are designed to safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investments in building, open spaces and property. 
    These guidelines are designed to safeguard and enhance property values, to protect public and private investments in buildings, open spaces and property, to preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work, to preserve and enhance the attractiveness of the city to nonresidents who come to the city to work or to trade to reduce public safety hazards caused by signs which are improperly constructed and maintained, or which impair visibility or otherwise distract motorists, and in general, to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
112.03.17 While recognizing the need for adequate business and noncommercial identification, advertising, and communication, these guidelines were formed to encourage aesthetic values, creativity, effectiveness, and flexibility in the design and use of signs. 
112.03-18 Signage shall be limited to the business name, logo/graphics, address, directional identification and telephone number. Signs shall be mounted flush to the building and shall not extend more than six (6) inches from the same. Special consideration shall be given to the existing architectural elements of the building facade and the sign shall enhance rather than detract from these features and shall not obscure them. All signs shall be oriented to a pedestrian scale. Grandfathered status shall be given to all existing signs, but for those temporary or portable in nature. However, all sign replacement and/or upgrading shall conform to these guidelines. 
112.03.19 Materials. The materials, style, color, lighting and front used in any sign shall be compatible with the buildings and environment to which it is related and shall be designed to compliment the historic character of the building on which they are placed. 
112.03.20. Banners. 
A.  Banners-Commercial advertising. Banners shall be permitted as a type of attached sign. Banners are allowed for a total of two (2) periods of two (2) weeks in duration per calendar quarter for each business or location, and these periods may not be consecutive. Banners shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in size, must be professionally prepared and only one (1) banner per business is allowed. 
B.  Street banners. Street banners extending above and across streets are allowable for official, civic, or philanthropic parades, festivals, or events, and shall not be erected more than two (2) weeks in advance of such event, and shall be removed within one (1) week after such event. Street banners shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet in size and shall be professionally prepared. 
112.03.21 Location. A sign shall be no higher than the highest point of the building's roof line. Signs which hang from and under awnings, canopies, marques or other structures shall extend no closer than eight (8) feet to the ground and the attachment apparatus shall be made of galvanized, brass or other corrosive resistant material. 
112.03.22 Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited. 
A.  Internally illuminated. This sign has a source of illumination entirely within the sign which makes the sign content visible at night by means of the light being transmitted through translucent material, but where the source of the illumination is not visible. Internally illuminated signs are not characteristic of the C-1 downtown area of the City of New Albany and, therefore, they are not allowed therein. 
B.  Resemblance to traffic signs. No sign shall resemble or conflict with any traffic control devise or sign or contain the words "stop", "caution", "go slow", "danger", "warning", or any similar words of phrases that may be construed to misdirect or confuse the traffic flow. 
C.  Signs painted directly on building. Exceptions may be made for murals. 
D.  Free standing signs: Signs located on poles, independent structures or those portable in nature are not characteristic of the downtown area with the exception of public traffic and safety signs. 
E.  The use of paper window signs to advertise sales, for example, is discouraged. Those which are professionally prepared are preferred. 
F.  Neon may be appropriate on a case-by-case basis. 
G.  Inflatable signs and characters other than balloons of normal size. 
H.  Pennants and flags other than U.S.A. and State. 
112.03.23 Application process. You must first submit an application for sign review to the Design Committee of the New Albany Main Street Association and furnish a copy of the same to the City of New Albany Zoning Administrator. Applications are available at the Main Street office at 120 B West Bankhead Street or by calling (662) 534-3438. Applications are also available at the Zoning Administrator's Office in City Hall at 101 West Bankhead Street or by calling (662) 534-1032. The Main Street design committee meets on the second Tuesday of each month. Applications must be submitted at lease fifteen (15) calendar days prior to each meeting in order to be acted upon at that meeting. Following said meeting, the design committee shall make its recommendations to the planning and zoning commission on the day following said meeting. Thereafter, the planning and zoning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to review the matter and issue their decision as to whether the proposed signage meets the guidelines for the C-1 downtown area. 
Regulations applicable to C-2 only: 
112.03-24 Purpose and objective: The purpose of these regulations is to set forth guidelines for signage in the C-2 area which do not apply to the C-1 Downtown Area. The objective of these regulations is to assist businesses and enhance the economy of the city. 
112.03-25 The following types of signs are allowed: 
    Inflatables and balloons: Inflatable signs, characters and balloons with a commercial message, logo or symbol printed thereon shall be allowed in the C-2 district. These types of signs may be used for short term promotions of thirty (30) days or less. Inflatables shall not be more than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet in size and must be anchored or attached with a tether of sufficient size and breaking strength to prevent the inflatable from escaping. Further, no inflatable shall reach a height of more than one hundred (100) feet above the roof of the business upon which it is located. The insurance requirements regarding pole signs along US Highway 78 shall be applicable here as well. There shall be no insurance requirement for balloons or inflatables less than twenty (20) cubic feet in size. There will be a fee of twenty-six dollars ($26.00) charged for the use of an inflatable sign for each promotion of thirty (30) days or a portion of a thirty-day period. 
    Banners: Banners shall be permitted as a type of attached sign. Banners must be professionally prepared, i.e. homemade banners are prohibited. Each business may have a banner for each one hundred (100) linear feet of the exterior walls of said business. All banners must be taken down when they begin to "age" by reason of fading, tearing, discoloration, or otherwise. The zoning administrator is hereby given discretion to decide when a banner is no longer attractive and should be removed. Banners are allowed for thirty (30) days per calendar quarter and the permit fee for such banners shall be twenty-six dollars ($26.00) per banner per quarter or a portion of a quarter. In addition, business may use banners four (4) times during the calendar year for a duration of seven (7) days per time and the fee for such banners shall be eleven dollars ($11.00) per banner for each period of one (1) week or a portion of one (1) week. An exception to the above is that a business may display a flag of moderate size giving the name of the business or corporate logo on a standard size flagpole for as long as the flag remains in good repair. A permit will be needed for the business or corporate flag, but there will be no charge for the permit. Pennants of moderate size may be used no more than four (4) times for up to seven (7) days at a time during the calendar year. 
    Pole signs: No outdoor advertising or sign shall be erected, placed, painted, repainted, or hung nearer to the street right-of-way line than the building setback lines provided for in the zoning district where the sign is to be located, except that one (1) sign advertising the primary nature of the business or industry conducted on the premises may be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way lien and shall in no case obstruct the view of traffic. The maximum size for any pole sign is one hundred fifty (150) square feet. The maximum height is thirty-five (35) feet and the minimum height is fifteen (15) feet. The thirty-five (35) feet shall be measured from the top of the sign to the ground and the fifteen (15) feet will be measured from the ground to the bottom of the sign. 
    Ground signs: Each ground sign shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any other ground sign located on the same side of the street or highway. The maximum size for any ground sign is one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
112.03-26 Attached signs. No attached sign (as defined herein), shall be erected, placed, painted, repainted, or hung nearer to the street right-of-way line than the building setback lines provided for in the zoning district where the sign is to be located, except that one sign advertising the primary nature of the business or industry conducted on the premises may be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and shall in on case obstruct the view of traffic. 
112.03.27 Interstate corridor signage zone: The purpose of this section is to allow greater visibility for the signage of businesses located along the U.S. Highway 78 bypass. There is hereby created an exception to this signage ordinance so as to allow those business located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the centerline of US Highway No. 78 (soon to be I-22) to increase pole signage height up to one hundred (100) feet, as needed, vertically from the surface upon which the sign is located. The ground upon which the sign is located may not be built up in an effort to increase the effective height of the sign. The face square footage may be no more than two hundred (200) square feet. Each owner of a pole sign with a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet must give evidence to the zoning administrator that the owner carries liability insurance in amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) which will cover personal injury and/or property loss occasioned by the fall or collapse of such sign. 
112.03-28 Variances and special exceptions. 
(a)  Applications for variances shall be made on forms provided by the zoning administrator and must be accompanied by the required fee. The zoning administrator may make a recommendation to and such applications will be heard by the planning and zoning board who will then vote to allow or disallow such variance. If either the zoning administrator or applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board, appeal may be taken to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of New Albany, MS. In the event the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen, appeal may be taken as from other decisions of said board. 
112.03-29 Standards for variances. Variances from the terms of this article with regard to such requirements including, but not limited to, number, separation, size, height, density and set-backs shall be granted only upon a showing by the applicant that such variance shall not be contrary to the public interest and that a literal enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary hardship on the applicant. In order for the planning and zoning commission or the mayor and board of aldermen to grant a variance from the requirements of this article there must be a finding that: 
(1)  Special condition(s) and circumstance(s) must clearly exist which are peculiar to the location on which the sign is proposed. 
(2)  The special conditions or circumstances clearly must not result from the actions of the applicant. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege denied to others in the same vicinity. 
(4)  Except for the provision for which a variance is requested, the sign or signs shall be in compliance with all other provisions and sections of this article and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(5)  The granting of the variance will not cause the proposed sign to conflict with utility and street fixtures or with traffic safety and required visibility at any time. 
112.03-30 Application process. You must first submit an application to the City of New Albany Zoning Administrator, who will then present the same to the planning and zoning commission. Applications are available at the Zoning Administrator's Office in City Hall at 101 West Bankhead Street or by calling (662) 534-1032. Thereafter the planning and zoning commission shall have thirty (30) days, within which to review the matter and issue their decision as to whether the proposed signage meets the guidelines for the C-2 area. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2000; Ord. of 1-28-2002; Res. of 8-26-2003; Ord. of 10-7-2004; Ord. of 6-6-2006) 
Cross reference- See sections 112.03 et seq. 
112.03A. - Signs and outdoor advertising-Making regulations of 112.03 applicable to both I-1 and I-2 zones. 
    All regulations in Section 112.03 applicable to the C-2 zone, under the ordinance in its current form or as subsequently amended, excepting any regulations applicable only to the C-1 zone, are hereby made applicable to I-1 and I-2 (Industrial) zones and to liquor stores wherever they may be permitted by the Mississippi Department of Revenue-Alcohol Beverage Control division. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2013) 
112.04. - Planned unit development. 
    When a property owner wishes to develop a parcel of property of at least three (3) acres and of proper shape, but siting buildings in a manner other than normal lot arrangement, he may apply for a planned unit development. Such planned developments may be constructed only in the A-1, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts. 
112.04-1 Permitted use and conditional use include all uses common to all residential zones. 
112.04-2 The entire planned unit development may be considered as one (1) zoning lot. 
112.04-3 Space limitations are as follows: 
(A)  Minimum zoning lot: Three (3) acres; 
(B)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet; 
(C)  Maximum height of building: Seventy-five (75) feet; 
(D)  No building shall be closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any boundary line of the zoning lot. 
112.04-4 Procedures for securing approval of a planned unit development are as follows: 
(a)  Submission of an application and all supporting documentation to the zoning administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  As an exhibit accompanying the application for a planned unit development, the owner shall provide a detailed site plan and such other sketches, diagrams and calculations necessary to determine whether the proposed development conforms with the provisions of this zone. 
All such site plans, sketches, diagrams and calculations shall form the basis for issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith. Plan changes which increase the number of dwelling units, building height or bulk or change the location of structures, shall require a resubmission for approval. Minor adjustments in the orientation of buildings or decrease in the number of dwelling units, building units, building height or bulk, may be approved by the building inspector. 
112.04-5 Before approving a planned unit development, the planning and zoning commission shall find the following: 
(a)  That the proposed space limits of the plan and the siting of buildings will be in the public interest; in harmony with the purposes of this ordinance and will not adversely affect nearby properties. 
(b)  That the overall density of development and the proportion of units allowed will not adversely affect nearby properties. 
(c)  That an amount of open space will be provided in harmony with nearby properties. 
SECTION 112.05. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(2)  Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community in reports made available to the board of aldermen, the board of aldermen finds that: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. 
(7)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(8)  According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(9)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(10)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(11)  Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. 
(12)  Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. 
(13)  The findings noted in paragraphs numbered (1) through (12) raise substantial governmental concerns and requires immediate attention to protect the public health and safety. 
(14)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(15)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licenses is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(16)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments. 
(17)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the [day-to-day] operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity. 
(18)  It is desirable, in the prevention of crime and the spread of communicable diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct this chapter is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(19)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this chapter. 
(20)  The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of five (5) years for a previous felony conviction serves as a deterrent to further criminal conduct, and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(21)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of this city will be promoted by enactment of this chapter. 
Definitions. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed, are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, cafe, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, photographic reproductions, or other image producing devices that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(4)  Persons who engage in "exotic" or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or limitation of an audience or customers. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub rent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or 
(5)  A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located. 
    Day-care facility means a facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than five (5) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Live theatrical performance means a play, skit, opera, ballet, concert, comedy, or musical drama. 
    Misdemeanor means that upon conviction a fine not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5000.00) and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days shall be imposed at the discretion of the municipal court. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or anal cleavage, public area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license in this ordinance. 
    Semi-nude or semi-nudity means the appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or 
(2)  Activities between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered; 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other countries. 
(2)  For which: 
a.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period; 
(3)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor areas existed on the day of initial application for a license to operate a sexually oriented business. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Regulation of obscenity subject to state law. 
    Not withstanding any definition or use permitted herein, this ordinance does not permit the distribution of obscene materials or the performance of obscene acts as defined in MCA 1972 § 97-29-103; all such prohibited materials and prohibited acts are expressly prohibited hereby. 
Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license ("operator's license") issued by the building inspector (hereafter referred to as director) pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license ("employee license") issued to such employee by the building inspector pursuant to this ordinance; or 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person by the building inspector pursuant to this ordinance. 
(4)  It shall be a defense to subsections (2) and (3) of this section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises. 
Violation of any provision within this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  An application for a sexually oriented business operator's license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram shall and must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Prior to issuance of an operator's license, the premises must be inspected by the fire department, office of the building inspector and the office of planning and zoning. 
(c)  An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(d)  All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the provisions of this ordinance. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this ordinance. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented businesses is an individual, he must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers and directors must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. 
(f)  Applications for an operator's license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the building inspector by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted to the office of the building inspector or his designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the building inspector. The following information shall be provided on the application form: 
(1)  The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant(s); 
(2)  A recent photograph of the applicant(s); 
(3)  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security Number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number; 
(4)  The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state: 
a.  The sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and 
b.  Submit the required registration documents; 
(5)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined previously, and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each; 
(6)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(7)  Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
(8)  The single classification of licensees found above, for which the applicant is filing; 
(9)  The telephone number of the establishment; 
(10)  The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located, and proof of ownership of said tract with a copy of said deed; 
(11)  If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought; 
(12)  If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same; 
(g)  Each application for an operator's license shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment of the application fee in full; 
(2)  If the establishment is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(3)  If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)  If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the State of Mississippi, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)  If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto; 
(6)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, park, playground or recreation area within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; 
(7)  Any of items (2) through (6) above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished to the director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(h)  Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the building inspector by the person to whom the employee license shall be Issued. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the building inspector. Applications must be submitted to the office of the building inspector or his designee during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
(1)  The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases; 
(2)  Age, and date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair color, and eye color; 
(4)  Present residence and business address and telephone number; 
(5)  Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state issued identification card information; Social Security Number; and; 
(6)  Proof that the individual is at least twenty-one (21) years old. 
The personal information provided in this subsection shall be confidential, and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent required by state or federal law. 
(i)  Attached to the application form for any license under this chapter shall be the following: 
(1)  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  A statement detailing whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  A statement whether the applicant has, within the past five (5) years, been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined previously and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(j)  Every application for a license under this chapter shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and, 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(k)  A separate application and operator's license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as set forth previously. 
(1)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business operator or employee license. 
Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the building inspector shall issue an employees license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one (1) or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined previously in this ordinance; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current application. 
Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (1) of this section. Any applicant who is denied a license due to reasons set forth in this section will not be eligible for reapplication for a term of one (1) year (three hundred sixty-five (365) days). 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. While engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises, an employee shall, at all times, possess the license in such manner as to be available for immediate inspection upon lawful request. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the building inspector that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in this ordinance. Non renewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(d)  If application is made for a sexually oriented business operator's license, the building inspector shall approve or deny issuance of the license within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application. The building inspector shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  An applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
(3)  An applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(4)  An applicant is overdue in payment to the city for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to the sexually oriented business for which license is sought, or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located or will be located; 
(5)  An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined previously in this ordinance; 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, building department, and zoning department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, if such approval is required under other sections of this chapter; 
(7)  The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid; 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the sexually oriented business classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(f)  The fire department, department of the building inspector, and planning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the completed application by the building inspector. The certification shall be promptly presented to the building inspector. Failure of an appropriate department to timely certify its inspection shall not be grounds for refusing to issue a license within the mandatory time period prescribed in subsection (d). 
(g)  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one (1) classification. 
(h)  In the event that the building inspector determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented operator's license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the completed application by the building inspector, provided that the applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(i)  An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding a denial to the board of alderman by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after service of notice upon the applicant of the building inspector's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The building inspector may, within fifteen (15) days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a responsive memorandum to the board of aldermen. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the building inspectors written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the building inspector, the board of aldermen shall vote either to uphold or overrule the building inspector's decision. Such vote shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the city clerk receives the notice of appeal. The status quo immediately prior to denial of the license shall be maintained during the pendency of the appeal. 
Judicial review of a denial by the building inspector and board of aldermen may be made pursuant to this ordinance. The status quo shall continue to be maintained during the pendency of judicial review. 
(j)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the building inspector that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth hereunder. 
Fees. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business operator's license, whether new or renewal, is five hundred dollars ($500.00). The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is fifty dollars ($50.00). These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Inspection. 
(a)  The city shall regularly inspect the premises of the sexually oriented business in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the office of building inspector, police department, and/or fire department to inspect the premises at any time the establishment is open for business. Such inspection shall be limited to visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas to which patrons have access or are allowed access, to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this chapter, and to requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably appear to be under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to promptly permit such lawful inspection of the premises. 
Expiration of license; denial of renewal. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making an application as provided above. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. When application is made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the building inspector denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the non-renewal of a license, the status quo immediately prior to non-renewal shall be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits. 
Suspension. 
    The building inspector shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that licensee or an employee of licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 
(2)  Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances; 
(3)  Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(4)  With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the suspension of a license, the status quo immediately prior to suspension shall be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits. 
Revocation. 
(a)  The building inspector shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension above occurs and the license has been suspended within the proceeding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The building inspector shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave materially false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license; 
(3)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(7)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties relating to the sexually oriented business or the premises thereon; 
(9)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or remain in the establishment; 
(10)  A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a non-licensee of the establishment; or 
(11)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When the building inspector revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in the event the licensee appeals the revocation of a license, the status quo immediately prior to revocation shall be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits. 
Judicial review. 
    Within ten (10) days of a denial of an initial or renewal application by the building inspector and city board of alderman, or suspension or revocation of a license by the building inspector, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon notification by summons of the filing of a complaint seeking judicial review of the city's administrative action, the city shall transmit the record of the administrative action to the court no later than ten (10) business days after receipt of said summons, and shall answer the complaint no later than ten (10) days after receipt of the summons. In addition, the city shall submit its response brief within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the petitioner's brief. The administrative action shall then be promptly reviewed by the court. 
No transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application and set forth in the operator's license. 
(b)  An operator's license shall not be transferable from one location to another 
Location restrictions. 
    Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in I-1 zoning district provided that: 
(1)  The sexually oriented business may not be operated within: 
a.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
b.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior, high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education school, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school ground, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
c.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a park or recreational area which is used for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, skating rink, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar land. 
d.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property line of a lot zoned for residential use and devoted to a residential use as defined in the zoning code; 
e.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property line of a lot used for a private or public medical facility; 
(2)  For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected park, residential district, or residential lot, or day care facility. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2004) 
Additional regulatory provisions. 
    Each sexually oriented business and its employees, agents, or other representatives shall observe the following general requirements, regulations, and standards of conduct: 
(1)  Conform to all applicable building codes, statues, ordinances, and regulations whether federal, state, or local unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Conform to all applicable fire and health statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations whether federal, state, or local. 
Nonconforming uses; amortization. 
(a)  Any-business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one (1) year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, day-care facility, park, or residential district within one thousand five [hundred] (1,500) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid business license, and does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after an operator's license has expired or has been revoked. 
Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(d)  Violation of subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as on escort for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of twenty-one (21) years commits a misdemeanor if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under twenty-one (21) years was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A made model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business, or depicts specified sexual activities in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a semi-nude condition on the sexually oriented business premises, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer, and on a stage raised at least two (2) feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi nude, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer on the sexually oriented business premises, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(d)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a semi-nude employee or the clothing of a semi-nude employee, while the employee is on the sexually oriented business premises. 
Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall be required; each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since said diagram was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the director or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed at all times. No doors, walls, partitions, curtains, merchandise, display racks, or other object(s) shall obstruct from view of the manager's station any portion of the premises to which patrons have access. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(9)  No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time. 
(10)  No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also he the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no more than one (1) person at a time occupies a viewing booths or rooms, and to ensure that no person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered, by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that duty. 
Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, [photographs], silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign, as provided herein. 
(b)  Signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing light; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area; 
(4)  Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and 
(5)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise. 
(c)  Signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
(d)  Each letter forming a word on a sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Persons younger than twenty-one from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of twenty-one (21) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state reflecting that such person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Massages or baths administered by person of opposite/same sex. 
    It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite or same sex. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays. No sexually oriented business shall open, for business or remain open for business on Sunday or any legal holiday recognized by the state. 
Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, movies rated G, PG, PG-13, or R, by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) are expressly exempted from regulation. 
Notices. 
(a)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the building inspector or any other city office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the building inspector or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to the building inspector by any person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the building inspector. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the building inspector in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid operator's license, or in violation of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. of 1-28-2002) 
SECTION 113. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

113.01. - Interpretation and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying this ordinance, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties unless they violate this ordinance. When two (2) specific provisions of this ordinance conflict or a provision of this ordinance conflicts with any other code, statute, law, ordinance or regulation, the most restrictive section shall apply. 
113.02. - Enforcement by zoning administrator. 
    There is hereby established the office of zoning administrator. It shall by the duty of the zoning administrator to enforce this ordinance in accordance with the provisions hereof. The zoning administrator shall issue all building permits. All departments, officials, and public employees of the City of New Albany vested with the duty or authority to issue other permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance and shall not issue a permit for any use, building or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance, Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
    For the purpose of the city's ordinances, including zoning ordinances, any references within the city's ordinances enabling the zoning administrator to enforce the city ordinances shall equally extend to any duly appointed. code enforcement officer(s) shall in effect be considered to be officers of the zoning administrator's office. However, code enforcement officers are not empowered to issue building permits except to the limited extend expressly set forth within the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2012) 
113.03. - Filing plans for building permits. 
    Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a scale drawing in duplicate showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or to be changed in its use, in whole or in part; the location, size, and height of any building or structure or part thereof; the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and, when no buildings are involved, the location of the present use and proposed use to be made of the lot; and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
113.04. - Duty of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall act upon all applications on which he is authorized to act by the provisions of this ordinance within seven (7) days after these are filed in full compliance with all the applicable requirements as specified. He shall either issue a building permit within said seven (7) days or shall notify the applicant in writing of his refusal of such permit and the reasons therefor. Failure to so notify the applicant in case of such refusal within said seven (7) days shall entitle the applicant to submit his request to the planning and zoning commission. If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
113.05. - Expiration of building permit. 
    If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the zoning administrator, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
113.06. - Required conformance. 
    Building permits are issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the zoning administrator and authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and any other use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance. 
113.07. - Planning and zoning commission. 
    A planning and zoning commission is hereby established, which shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. Of those first appointed to the commission, three (3) shall be appointed for three (3) years, two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for one (1) year. Subsequent terms shall be for three (3) years for all members. The membership of the commission shall designate one (1) member to serve as its chairman. The planning and zoning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-2-18(1)) 
113.08. - Rules. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and such other times as the commission may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the vice chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The planning and zoning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or his absence or failure to vote and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the zoning administrator. 
113.09. - Powers, interpretation. 
    Upon appeal from a decision by the zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission shall have the power to decide any question involving the interpretation of the zoning text or map, as follows: 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may interpret the meaning of any provision of the zoning text as it applies to a particular property. Before reaching a decision in response to any request, the planning and zoning commission may obtain the opinion of the city attorney thereon; 
(b)  Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground or as recorded differs from the street and lot lines as shown on the zoning map, the planning and zoning commission shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance for the particular section or district in question. 
113.10. - Powers, conditional uses. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and original jurisdiction to hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, applications, filed as hereinbefore provided, for conditional uses. In considering an application for a conditional use, the commission shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures and the consistency herewith of the proposed use and development. Before authorizing a use as a conditional use, the planning and zoning commission shall determine whether the proposed use would be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive, or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire and safety hazards, sewage wastes and pollution, transportation and traffic, and aesthetic and psychological effects. Before authorizing a conditional use, the planning and zoning commission may require that the developer meet all conditions which it may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and public interest. A conditional use shall not be granted by the planning and zoning commission unless and until: 
(a)  A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the section of this ordinance under which the conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this ordinance described in the application to grant the conditional use and that such action will not adversely affect the public interest; 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
113.11. - Powers, variances. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to authorize such variances from the provisions or requirements of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, but only in the case of peculiar conditions involving irregular, abnormally narrow, shallow or steep lots or other unusual physical conditions, whereby strict application of such provisions or requirements would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or buildings involved, but in not other case. No variance from the strict application of any provision of this ordinance shall be granted by the planning and zoning commission unless they find that all of the following facts and conditions exist: 
(a)  That written application for a variance has been submitted; 
(b)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, buildings or structures within the same district; 
(c)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance; 
(d)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(e)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege which is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; and 
(f)  That granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
    In no case shall the planning and zoning commission approve a variance for a use which is not a permitted use in the district in which the property, building or structure is located. 
113.11.1. - Variance for substandard size lot; terms and conditions. 
    Substandard size lot definition, a lot not having sufficient square footage to meet with minimum lot area for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    The minimum requirements for a variance given to a substandard size lot, in addition to those stated in section 113.11. Powers, variances; are as follows: 
(a)  The minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family dwelling unit; 
(b)  The lot must be sixty (60) feet wide at the building setback line; 
(c)  Front yard setback shall meet the requirement of the district wherein the substandard size lot is located or be in line with existing buildings on either side of the substandard size lot; 
(d)  The minimum side yard setback is five (5) feet; 
(e)  The minimum rear yard setback is twenty (20) feet; 
(f)  The substandard size lot was designated as a single lot prior to the adoption of the city zoning ordinances and was not thereafter created by a division of one (1) lot into two (2) or more lots; 
(g)  No lot, whether of standard size or substandard size, may be divided so as to create one (1) or more substandard size lots. 
(Res. of 11-4-97) 
113.12. - Expiration of variances and conditional permits. 
    Every conditional permit or variation of the application of the literal provisions of this ordinance, allowed or granted, as provided in this chapter, shall expire and be of no force or effect six (6) months from the date thereof, unless the beneficiary of such violation or conditional permit shall have actually, within said period, secured any necessary building permit and actually put the subject property to the purpose for which such variation or conditional permit shall have been granted or allowed. 
113.13. - Powers, general. 
    In exercising their powers, the planning and zoning commission, in conformity with the provisions of statute and this ordinance, may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in their judgment ought to be made, and to that end shall have all powers of the office from which the appeal is taken. 
113.14. - Appeal. 
    It is the express intent of this ordinance that all questions concerning enforcement be first presented to the zoning administrator and all questions concerning interpretation be first presented to the planning and zoning commission. All matters concerning appeal from the decision of the planning and zoning commission shall first be to the mayor and board of aldermen, and if a party is still aggrieved, appeal can be to the courts as provided by law. 
113.15. - Appeal and fines. 
    Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall have the authority to assess fines not to exceed the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for as long as a violation of this ordinance remains uncorrected by the violator. That the maximum fine hereunder shall not exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Any person, individual, partnership, association, or corporation accused of violating this ordinance shall have the right to demand a full hearing concerning said violation before the planning and zoning board of the City of New Albany, Union County, Mississippi, should he, she or it be aggrieved by the fine or decision to fine as levied by the zoning administrator. Should the said planning and zoning commission affirm the decision of the zoning administrator, the accused violator shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi. Thereafter, any further appeal shall be taken to the appropriate courts of the State of Mississippi according to law. 
(c)  The provisions of this section, regarding the fine and appeal process, shall not preclude or supercede the rights of the board of aldermen of the City of New Albany, at the request of the planning and zoning commission or the zoning administrator, to file suit for injunctive relief in the courts of the State of Mississippi, according to law, to require the accused violator to either remove the object or structure causing such violation, to perform in accordance with this zoning ordinance, to cease from further violations of this zoning ordinance. That this provision shall be construed to be cumulative and in addition to the rights of said City of New Albany and the planning and zoning commission to sue for injunctive relief or performance as contemplated hereunder. 
(d)  In the event that an accused violator on a first offense corrects the violation of this ordinance within ten (10) days after receiving notice from the zoning administrator of such violation, then in the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen, no fine may be imposed or collected as set out herein. However, in this event, no additional building or construction shall be allowed until said violation is corrected. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall have the full authority to stop building or construction on a site or premises found to be in violation of this zoning ordinance until said violation is corrected. The right of work stoppage is cumulative and in addition to the fine provisions as set out herein. Appeals from the decision of the zoning administrator stopping work on a construction site or premises found to be in violation of this ordinance, shall be taken contemporaneously, and in the same manner as appeals for fines levied by the zoning administrator. In the event that work stoppage is ordered by the zoning administrator for a violation of this ordinance, all utilities provided by the City of New Albany, i.e., electricity, water, sewage, etc., shall be immediately terminated by said City of New Albany until the violation is corrected, or until such time as the accused violator is found to be innocent of any violation of this zoning ordinance. 
113.16. - Notice of agenda. 
    Not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to a meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the zoning administrator shall cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city an agenda generally in the following form: 
PUBLIC NOTICE 
    "The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of New Albany will meet on: 
(day) ____________ , (date) _____ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .M. in the City Hall Board Room, 2 nd Floor, located at 101 West Bankhead Street. 
    "The following matters are on the agenda: 
1.  Application of (name) _____ to rezone: 
(abbreviated description) _____ from zone ____________ to zone ____________ . 
2.  Application for variance in setback requirement filed by: (name) _____ for property described as: 
(abbreviated description): _____ 
3.  Application for conditionally permitted use of duplex in R-2 filed by: (name) _____ for property described as (abbreviated description): _____ . 
    All interested persons are invited to attend. 
_____
Zoning Administrator" 
    This requirement of publication shall be dispensed with for any meeting of the commission for which no applications for rezoning, conditionally permitted uses, or variances will be considered. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85) 
Editor's note- The city has advised that the public notice in section 113.16 notice of agenda had been changed to be included in Supp, 17 as set out herein. 
113.17. - Application deadline and filing fees (variances and conditional uses). 
    Applications under section 113.10 and 113.11 for conditional uses and variances shall be on file fifteen (15) days or more prior to consideration by the planning and zoning commission, and each such application shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by the zoning board to defray the cost of publication of the notice required by section 113.16 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-3-85; Ord. of 11-1-16) 
SECTION 114. - AMENDMENTS 

114.01. - Declaration of policy. 
    For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the municipality, this ordinance, and as here used the term ordinance shall be deemed to include the official zoning map, shall not be amended except to correct a manifest error in the ordinance, or, because of changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the municipality generally. Amendments shall be limited strictly to those necessary to the promotion of public health, safety, or general welfare. Subject to the above limitations, an amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by the mayor and board of aldermen, the planning and zoning commission, or by any person, firm, or corporation filing application therefor. 
114.02. - Procedure. 
    All proposed amendments to this ordinance shall be subject to the following procedures: 
(A)  No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted until the amendment has been examined by the planning and zoning commission and the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission received by the mayor and board of aldermen; 
(B)  No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted whereby the regulations and restrictions so established are not uniform for each district having the same zoning classification and bearing the same symbol or designation on the official zoning map. 
(C)  No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted which establishes a new zone, regardless of size, which permits uses not compatible with the uses of surrounding zones or which violates the purposes of this ordinance; 
(D)  No amendment to this ordinance shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto has been held by the mayor and board of alderman. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. Said notice shall read generally as follows: 
PUBLIC NOTICE 
Pursuant to the order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Albany, Mississippi, notice is hereby given to all persons interested in or in any way affected thereby that ____________ (name of applicant) ____________ has filed an application with the undersigned to have rezoned the following described property from ____________ (zone) ____________ to ____________ (zone) ____________ 
Map of Property 
and surrounding 
area 
Said application will be heard by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, at the City Hall at ____________ p.m., ____________ , 19 ____________ , at which time all parties interested in or affected thereby will be heard, after which a decision will be rendered by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. Any objection thereto may be made by any person and if made in writing must be filed with the undersigned before said time of hearing. 
This day of ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ 
(name) 
_____
Zoning Administrator 
(E)  Any area for which an application for a change in zoning classification is being considered shall be posted for at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such posting shall be by means of a sign or signs erected in a conspicuous location on the property, using at least one sign for every two hundred (200) feet of frontage on each street upon which the property abuts. The sign shall be at least two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size, with the lower edge of the sign at least three (3) feet above ground level, in letters legible from the nearest street as follows: 
PUBLIC NOTICE 
This property is being considered for REZONING. For further information contact the Zoning Administrator, City Hall, New Albany, Mississippi (telephone number); and 
(F)  In the event of written protest against such amendment signed by twenty (20) percent or more of the owners of property either within the area to be rezoned or within one hundred sixty (160) feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of the members of the board of aldermen who are not required by law or ethical considerations to recuse themselves. 
(Ord. of 7-19-94; Ord. of 7-5-2005) 
114.03. - Applications. 
    All applications for amendments to this ordinance shall be filed with the zoning administrator fifteen (15) days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
(b)  A description of the proposed amendment and including, if the amendment involves the official zoning map; a map showing the land area to be included in the rezoning, the present zoning of the area, and the location of all streets, alleys, easements, and rights-of-way bounding and/or intersecting the area and abutting properties; and 
(c)  The error in the ordinance, if any, that would be corrected by the proposed amendment or the changing conditions in the area or in the municipality which would make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
114.04. - Examination of applications. 
    Upon receipt of an application for an amendment, properly made as herein set forth, the zoning administrator shall transmit copies of the application to the planning and zoning commission for consideration. Upon receipt of the application, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the proposed amendment and forward written notice of its findings and recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen. The planning and zoning commission shall make such findings and recommendations within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application unless prevented from doing so by extenuating circumstances. Provided, however, that any party aggrieved with the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission shall be entitled to a public hearing before the mayor and board of aldermen with due notice thereof after publication for the time and in foregoing paragraph 114.02 (d) above. 
114.05. - Application fees. 
    At the time of filing either an application for rezoning or an application for amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance, there shall be paid to the city clerk an application fee to be set by the zoning board to cover the cost of posting the property and other expenses incidental to the determination of such matters. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for payment of all publication costs for any notices required herein in connection with the application, and the applicant shall present proof satisfactory of payment of such publication costs on or before the date set for public hearing, and such proof of payment shall be a prerequisite to consideration of the application by the mayor and board of aldermen. All such filing fees and other expenses advanced by the applicant are not refundable to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-1-16) 
114.06. - Effective date. 
    If such amendments are made either to the text of this ordinance or the official zoning map, the text of this ordinance shall promptly reflect such amendment or the official zoning map shall be promptly amended. Amendments to the official zoning map shall contain an entry on the map stating the date of the amendment, the nature of the amendment, and the signature of the mayor and the city clerk. Such amendments shall not become effective until they have been entered in the text of the ordinance or upon the official zoning map. 
114.07. - Official map. 
    Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the zoning administrator's office shall be the final authority to the current zoning of land within the city. In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret, the mayor and board of aldermen may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede prior official zoning maps. 
SECTION 115. - DEFINITIONS 
    115.01 Certain words and phrases used in this ordinance or defined for the purpose thereof as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; person includes a corporation as well as an individual; lot includes plot; building includes structure; occupied includes designed or intended to be occupied; used includes arranged, designed, or intended to be used; shall is mandatory and not directory. 
    115.02 Wherever the term ordinance appears or shall appear, it shall be interpreted to mean and to refer to the zoning ordinance of the city of New Albany, Mississippi, inclusive of all amendments and supplemental sections which have been or may be added thereto. 
    115.03 Accessory use of structure. A use of a structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or use on the same lot and serving a purpose customary and incidental to the use of the principal building or use. 
    115.04 Alterations, structural. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as walls, floors, columns, beams or girders. 
    115.05 Apartment. Two (2) or more rooms, designed for, arranged for, intended for, or occupied as a residence by one family. 
    115.06 Apartment house. Any building housing three (3) or more apartment units providing said units are the principal use of the building. 
    115.07 Boardinghouse, rooming house, lodging house, or dormitory. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel or restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation, for three (3) or more persons and where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms. 
    115.08 Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. 
    115.09 Building permit. A permit issued by the zoning administrator for the construction or alteration of any building or structure. 
    115.10 Building, height of. The vertical distance from the average ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. 
    115.11 Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the residence of one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer or trailer coach, mobile home, tree house, or a room in a hotel or motel. 
    115.12 Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for or used for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping unit. 
    115.13 Dwelling, two-family. A building designed for or used for two (2) families or housekeeping units. 
    115.14 Dwelling, multifamily. A building or portion thereof designed for or used by three (3) or more families or housekeeping units. 
    115.15 Dwelling, rear. A building designed for or used as the residence or sleeping place for one or more persons, located in the rear portion of a lot occupied by an existing structure. 
    115.16 Dwelling unit. One room or a suite of two (2) or more rooms designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette. 
    115.17 Family. One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, dormitory, motel, or hotel. 
    115.18 Filling station. Any building used for the supply of gasoline, oil, or other fuel for motor vehicle propulsion which may also include space and facilities for washing, polishing, greasing, and servicing motor vehicles. 
    115.19 Garage, private. A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal building used only for the storage of vehicles and incidental personal property. 
    115.20 Garage, public. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage or filling station, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing vehicles, or similar equipment. 
    115.21 Home occupation. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; the use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) per cent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of home occupation; there shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; no home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building; no traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; no equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable off the lot to the normal senses. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
    115.22 Hotel. A building occupied primarily as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms or apartments. 
    115.23 Junk yard. A place where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations. 
    115.24 Lot. A piece, parcel, or tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as required by this ordinance and having frontage on a public street. 
    115.25 Lot, corner. A lot at the juncture of and fronting on two (2) or more intersecting streets. 
    115.26 Lot area. The computed area contained within the lot lines. 
    115.27 Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
    115.28 Lot lines. The property lines bounding the lot. 
    115.29 Lot line, front. The property line separating the lot from a street right-of-way. 
    115.30 Lot line, rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    115.31 Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line. 
    115.32 Lot width. The width of the lot measured at the building setback line. 
    115.33 Mobile home. A single- or two-family residence, not including camp or travel trailers designed for transportation after fabrication on streets, highways, land, air, or water, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy after location on the site whether the location be by wheels, jacks, or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities and the like. 
    115.34 Motel or tourist court. A building, or group of buildings, comprising individual sleeping or living units for the accommodation of transient guests, not containing individual cooking or kitchen facilities. 
    115.35 Nonconforming use. A building, structure or premises legally existing or used at the time of adoption of this ordinance which does not conform with the use or area regulations prescribed by this ordinance for the district in which it is located. 
    115.36 Parking space. The area required for parking one automobile (not less than two hundred (200) square feet in size) of useable and convenient shape, orientation and grade. 
    115.37 Planning and zoning commission. The New Albany Planning and Zoning Commission as appointed by the governing body of the City of New Albany. 
    115.38 Setback line. The closest point at which a building may be constructed in relation to the lot line. 
    115.39 Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    115.40 Structure. Anything constructed, the use of which required permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    115.41 Tourist home. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, boardinghouse, lodging house, or motel, where lodging is provided by a resident family in its home for compensation, mainly for transients. 
    115.42 Tourist court. See motel or tourist court. 
    115.43 Yard. An open space at grade between the edges of a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    115.44 Yard, front. An open space extending the full width of the lot between the edge of a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein. 
    115.45 Yard, rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot between the edge of a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein. 
    115.46 Yard, side. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the edge of a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein. 
    115.47. Zoning administrator. The person authorized to issue building permits and to enforce the zoning ordinance of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, as designated by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
SECTION 116. - VALIDITY 
    116.01. If for any reason, any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provisions of this, or any other ordinance of the city, to which these rules and regulations relate. 
SECTION 117. - REPEALER 
    117.01. All other ordinances and/or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
SECTION 118. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
    118.01. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force thirty (30) days from and after its passage. Adopted this 27th day of May, 1980. 
      G. W. Henson 
      Mayor, City of New Albany   ATTEST: 
      Frances Dodds 
      Clerk, City of New Albany       The foregoing Ordinance, having been previously reduced to writing, was offered and introduced by Alderman Mary R. Phyfer who moved its adoption. The ordinance was read and considered by sections at a public meeting by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. And each section, after having been read and considered, was unanimously adopted. Then on final passage, as a whole, on motion of Alderman Mary R. Phyfer and seconded by Alderman Herman R. Hendrix, with four Aldermen present, all four Aldermen voted "Yea", to-wit: Mary R. Phyfer, Jerry B. Mauldin, Herman R. Hendrix and Malcom Reeves. Thereupon, the Mayor declared the motion unanimously passed and the ordinance unanimously adopted and approved in open session at this meeting on May 27, 1980. 
Approved: __________________ 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
_____________________ 
 City Clerk 
by: Ann Gregory 
 Deputy Clerk 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
UNION COUNTY 
CITY OF NEW ALBANY 
The undersigned Mrs. Frances Dodds, Clerk of the City of New Albany, hereby certifies that the above and foregoing is a copy of an ordinance passed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of said City on May 27th, 1980, as the same appears in the records of said City in my official custody. 
Given under my hand and the official seal of the City of New Albany, Mississippi, this, May 28, 1980. 
____________________ 
City Clerk 
(SEAL) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a numerical and/or chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
No. Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 24  9-12-04 6-5 35 1 14-4 38  1- 3-07 18-10 41  5- 7-07 18-11 51  9- 5-12 1 14-3  
Ordinance 
Date Section Section 
this Code  3- 2-37 1 14-1  7- 5-38 1 10-2 11-29-40 1 2-1  6- 1-43 1 18-9  6- 3-47 1 19-1  8- 5-47 1, 2 17-1 12- 7-54 1, 3 18-8  3- 4-58 1 21-1  6- 3-58 1 3-3  6- 6-61 19-5  6- 6-61 101-118 21-22 201 21-23 202 21-24 203 21-88 204 21-25 301 21-89 302 21-91 303 21-92 304 21-90, 21-93 305 21-94 306 21-95 307 21-97 401, 402 21-57 403-405 21-58-21-60 406 21-61, 21-62 407-410 21-63-21-66 411 21-62 412, 413 21-67 414 21-66 501, 502 21-27 503 21-26 504, 505 21-28 506-510 21-29-21-33 601 21-35 701 21-34 801, 802 21-36  7- 3-62 1 2-4  6- 6-67 I-VI App. A, §§ I-VI 12-23-68 1, 2 1-12 11- 3-70 1 13-44  3- 2-71 1, 3, 4 12-23  1- 4-72 1, 2 7-45, 13-22  1- 4-72 1 13-22 10- 2-73 1 6-27 2 6-28 3 6-30 4, 5 6-29  1- 8-74 1, 2 7-21, 7-69, 7-118 1 10-26, 10-56 2 10-27, 10-57 3 10-28, 10-29, 10-32, 4 10-5, 10-29, 10-33 5 10-31, 10-58 6 10-31, 10-61, 10-62 7 10-63 8 10-4, 10-30 9 10-3 10 10-62 11, 12 10-59 13, 14 10-60 15 10-1  2-12-74 1 2-44-2-47 2-49 2 2-48, 2-50 3 2-51 11- 5-74 1 7-93 5 7-94  6- 3-75 I, II 8-21  7- 1-75 I, III 14-2  8-20-76 1 12.5-1 2 12.5-2 3-6 12.5-4-12.5-7 7 12.5-3  1- 4-77 1, 2 2-3 4 2-2 10- 4-77 1-3 7-1 10- 4-77 1, 2 7-21 10- 4-77 1, 2 7-45 10- 4-77 1, 2 7-69 10- 4-77 1, 2 7-93 10- 4-77 1, 2 7-118 10- 4-77 1-3 7-131-7-133 4 7-135 5 7-134 6-12 7-136-7-142 10- 4-77 1, 2 8-21 11- 3-77 1, 2 8-21 12- 6-77 1.1 12-1 1.2 12-2 1.3 12-4 1.4 12-3 1.5.1 12-20 1.5.2 12-23 1.6 12-21 1.7 12-20 1.8-1.10 12-5-12-7 1.12 12-8 2.1.1 12-19 2.1.2 12-22 2.2.1, 2.2.2 12-30 2.2.3 12-34 2.2.4-2.2.6 12-31-12-33 2.2.7 12-35 2.2.8 12-29 2.2.9 12-36  4- 4-78 1-5 13-45  8- 1-78 1 18-47 2 18-48 3 18-47 4-8 18-49-18-53 10 18-54 11 18-55  8- 1-78 1-11 18-47-18-55  9- 5-78 1 14-3  9- 5-78 1, 2 7-6 11- 6-79 App. B  5-27-80 App. C  1- 5-82 App. C, § 101(note)  4- 6-82 1-15 10-71-10-85  4- 6-82 1-4 11-41-11-44  8- 3-82 20-27, 20-29 20-31, 20-32, 20-63  4- 2-85 App. C, § 101.06 12- 3-85 App. C, §§ 113.16, 113.17, 114.25 12-23-85 App. C, §§ 109A.01-109A.05, 111.02  5- 5-87 1, 2 21-2  7- 1-87 1, 2 14-3.1 12- 1-87 App C, §§ 106A.01-106A.08  2- 2-88 1       Rpld 6-28 2       Rnbd 6-29       as 6-28       Amd 6-28 3       Added 6-29 4       Rpld 6-30 5       Added 6-20 6       Added 6-31  4- 5-88 2-52  6-15-88 1-8 21-3  7- 5-88 1 11-32  9- 6-88 1 App. C, § 102.02-4(a)  3- 7-89 1 7-21 2 7-25  3- 7-89 1 7-45 2 7-49  3- 7-89 1 7-69 2 7-73  3- 7-89 1 7-93 2 7-97  3- 7-89 1 7-118 2 7-122  3- 7-89 1 7-126 4 7-127  3- 7-89 1 8-21 2 8-25  6- 6-89 2 1-12  7- 6-89 1       Rpld App. B, §§ 402.04-01, 402.04-02 2       Added App. B, § 402.04-1, 402.04-02 3 App. B, § 411.03  7- 6-89 1 App. C, § 108.02(n)  4-10-90 1 14-3  6- 5-90 1 7-151 2, 3 7-152 11-20-90 1-5 16-21-16-25 12-12-91 1 7-21(5)  2- 4-92 1 App. C, § 107.3(c) App. C, § 108.3(b)  8- 4-92       Rpld 21-2  9-13-93 1-4 11-51-11-54 11- 2-93 1-6 10-91-10-96 12-14-93 1-5 2-61-2-65  3-17-93 1-5 11-61-11-65  5- 3-94 1 App. C, § 102.02-4(g)  7-19-94 App. C, § 114.02(F) 12- 5-95 1 5-98(a)  3- 5-96 14-5  3- 5-96 7-21 7-45 7-69 7-118 7-126  9-23-96 App. C, § 105.03(c) 10-21-96 1 13-96 11- 4-97 12-5 11- 4-97 1 7-21 11- 4-97 1 7-181 11- 4-97 1 7-161 11- 4-97 1 7-126 11- 4-97 1 7-171 11- 4-97 1 7-118 11- 4-97 1 7-69 11- 4-97 1 8-21 2 8-25 11- 4-97 1 8-26 11- 4-97 App. C, § 113.11.1  3- 3-98 16-21(a)(4) 10-12-98       Added App. C, § 107.03(d)       Added 7-2 12- 1-98 2-4  5- 4-99 10-97  5-18-99       Rpld 20-32  6- 6-00 21-33 10- 3-00 App. C, § 112.03-5 11- 7-00 2-63  1- 2-01 2 1-12  1- 2-01 2-3  3-22-01 1 7-191-7-195  8-28-01 10-98 10- 2-01 7-201-7-206  1-28-02 App. C, § 108.03 App. C, § 110.02 App. C, § 112.03       Added App. C, § 112.05  4-25-02 7-6 12- 3-02(Min.) 16-26 12-19-02       Rpld 6-1-6-6, 6-27-6-31       Added 6-1-6-16  8-26-03(Res.) A-C       Added App. C, § 112.03       Rnbd App. C, § 112.03       as App. C, § 112.06  7- 6-04       Added 10-98(c)(3)  8-24-04 2-3 10- 7-04 App. C, § 112.05 App. C, § 105.03(c) 7-45(1)       Added App. C, § 112.03.06-11  4- 5-05 21-33  5- 3-05       Added App. C, § 103.03(e)  7- 5-05       Added App. C, § 114.02(F)  7-18-05 10-97  8- 2-05 7-118(1)  1-19-06 8-26  1-19-06(Amend.) 13-46(b)  6- 6-06(Amend.) 7-118(1)  6- 6-06 App. C, § 112.03  9- 5-06(Res.) 10-57 10-59(a) 10-62(a)       Added 10-64       Added 10-65  9- 5-06       Added App. C, § 105.03(d) 10- 3-06 1-5       Added 21-109-21-113  7-16-07 I-XVII       Added 2-76-2-92 11- 6-07 Art. 1, A-E 9-1-9-5 Art. 2 9-26 Art. 3, A-I 9-27-9-35 Art. 4, A-C 9-36-9-38 Art. 5, A-E 9-51-9-55 Art. 6, A-G 9-66-9-72 11- 4-08       Added App. C, § 107.07       Added App. C, § 108.07  8-25-09       Rpld 6-1-6-16       Added 6-1-6-20 6-27-6-30 6-37-6-46 12- 1-09 7-1 7-21 7-45  3- 2-10       Added 4-1-4-9  6- 4-10 2, 3 8-26  8-16-10 1-5       Added 14-6  1-14-11 1-4       Added 14-8  4- 5-11 14-8(d)  5- 3-11 10-59  7- 5-11(1) 7-1 7-21 7-45  7- 5-11(2)       Added 7-3 11- 1-11 1-11       Added 14-7 12-20-11       Added App. C. §§ 110.01, 110.02       Added App. C. §§ 110A.01-110A.03  8- 7-12       Added App. C. § 113.02 10- 2-12       Added 21-136-21-139 12- 4-12       Added 10-99  1-13-13 7-69-7-73 7-93-7-97 7-118-7-122 7-126, 7-127 7-161       Rpld 7-171       Rpld 7-181       Added 7-220 8-21-8-25  2- 5-13(1) 2-3  2- 5-13(2)       Added 14-9  5- 1-13       Added 7-231-7-252  5- 7-13       Added 4-25-4-42  6-25-13       Added App. C, § 112.03A 11- 5-13 4-35(b) 12- 2-14 8-26  1- 6-15 6-1 6-2 10- 6-15 11-41, 11-42 13-45 11- 3-15 1-9       Added 14-21-14-29 12- 1-15       Added 7-7-7-9 1-8 11- 1-16 4-25-4-32       Dltd 4-33       Added 4-33 4-34-4-42 21-57 21-91 13-46 App. C, § 113.17 App. C, § 114.05 App. C, §§ 110.01, 110.02  2- 7-17 1-11 14-7 11- 7-17(1) 14-6 11- 7-17(2)       Added 20-80-20-88 11- 7-17(3)       Dltd App. B, §§ 200-203, 300-302, 400-413, 500-507       Added App. B, §§ 200-203, 300-303, 400-428, 500-506, 600-605, 700-707, 800-804, Apps. 1-8  1- 2-18(1) App. C, § 113.07  6- 5-18(1) App. C, § 107.03 App. C, § 108.02  6- 5-18(2)       Added 11-70-11-75  
