ARTICLE III 
DISTRICTS 

SECTION 1. ZONING DISTRICTS 
In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings erected, reconstructed,altered or enlarged for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected, reconstructed,altered or enlarged; to regulate and determine the area of yardsand other open spaces and to regulate and limit the density of population, the City of Philadelphia is hereby divided into districts of which there shall be eleven (13) as follows: 
A-I General Agricultural District 
R-l Single-Family Residential District 
R-2 Two-Family Residential District 
R-3 Mobile Home Residential District 
R-4 Multi-Family Residential District 
R-5 Mobil~ Home Park Residential District 
C-l Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-2 Community Commercial District 
C-3 Highway Commercial District 
1-1 Planned Industrial District 
1-2 Light Industrial District 
1-3 Heavy Industrial District 
F-l Flood Plain District 
The order of classification shall be as enumerated above with the F-l Flood Plain District being the most restrictive and the 1-3 Heavy Industrial District the least restrictive classification. 
The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, being designated as the "Official Zoning Map" and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all fullydescribed herein. 
Except as hereinafter provided.
First. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged nor shall any building or land be used for any purposeother than is permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. 
Second. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged to exceed the height or bulk limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
Third. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed bythis Ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulationsherein established. 
No building permit shall be issued by the City for the construction or placing of, and no person shall construct or place, any dwelling, structure or edifice, designed or usable as a dwelling place, on any lot, tract or parcel of land unless the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which each such structure is to be located, or is located, has been defined, delineated or described by a map or plat filed for record in the Deed Records of the County; provided, that this Ordinance shall not prohibitthe issuance of a building permit for the construction or placingof any single structure, designed or usable as a dwelling,located on any tract of land set apart, delineated or defined by a metes and bounds description and recorded in the Deed Records of the County of Neshoba, and shown on a plat, giving an accurate location of such tract relative to any existing recorded addition or subdivision, when the only structure (with its permittedappurtenances) is located or, to be located thereon, faces or fronts upon a legally established public thoroughfare. 
No building permit shall be issued by the City for the erection or placing of any dwelling on a lot, the width or street frontageof which has been decreased from the width or street frontage as originally platted or as replatted and recorded in the Deed Records of the County, (nor shall a building permit be issued for the erection or placing of any dwelling on the rear yard of any corner lot situated in Districts R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5.) 
A building permit may be issued by the City or its agent for the construction or placing of a dwelling on a lot or tract of land composed of portions of two or more lots as same appear uponthe map thereof as recorded in the Deed Records of the County, only when such lot or tract has a street frontage of not less than the street frontage of any lot in the same block. 
Fourth. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of open space for any other building; provided further that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
Fifth. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one 
(1) building on one (1) lot, except as permitted by the ZoningBoard of Adjustment. 
SECTION 2. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
1. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

2. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following plattedlot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

3. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following citylimits shall be construed as following such city limits; 

4. 	
Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad right-of-way, such boundary shall be deemed to be located on the right-of-way line to which it is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless otherwise designated;


16 
5. 	
Boundaries indicated as following shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams,rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;

6. 	
Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extension of features indicated in subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;

7. 	
Where physical or cultural features existing on the groundare at variance with those shown on the Official ZoningMap, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; 

8. 	
Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may permit, as a specialexception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 100 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 


ARTICLE IV 
SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

SECTION 1. A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTICT 
1.1 	General Description
This 	district shall provide an area for agricultural and 
horticultural uses. The rural nature and low density of 
population in this district requires only that uses 
essential to agriculture and horticulture have a 
reasonable setback of buildings from dedicated streets 
and/or highways. It is the purpose of this district to 
encourage and protect such uses from urbanization until 
such 	is warranted and the appropriate change in district 
classification is made. 

1.2 	USES PERMITTED 
The following uses of property, buildings or structures: 
(1) 	
Cultivation of field and truck crops, orchards,and vineyards.

(2) 	
Pasturing and grazing.

(3) 	
Dairies, poultry, small animals and livestock,provided that no more than one domestic anima1 each 20,000 square feet of lot will be permitted.

(4) 	
Greenhouses, nurseries and landscape gardening.

(5) 	
Barns, silos, sheds, warehouses and cooling houses for storage, grading, packing and processing of farm produce other than commercial slaughtering or processing of animals. 

(6) 	
One family detached dwellings and their customaryaccessory uses. 


1.3 	Area and Setback RegulationsYards (See Appendix B)Front: setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Rear: setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Side: set back a minimum of ten(10) feet, provided that any permitted pen or building in which livestock is keptshall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any lot line. 
Lot Area 
Each 	one-family dwelling in the A-I District, together
with 	its accessory buildings, hereafter erected, shall be 
located on a parcel having an area of not less than three 
(3) acres which was in existence on the date of passageof this Ordinance, provided that all buildings erected on such lots shall meet all of the other requirements of this or any other applicable ordinances. 
HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height
and shall not be more than two and one-half stories, and 
accessory buildings shall not be more than two stories. 
Silos, barns and like farm buildings are hereby exempt 
from 	these height restrictions with the provision that their height be limited to the distance from the structure to the nearest property line less 20 feet, but with the provision that no structure be more than 120 feet in height. 
SECTION 2. R-l SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
2.1-Purpose and Intent. The Residential District R-1 is hereby created in order that certain areas within the City of Philadelphia will be reserved exclusively for single-family residential and related uses. It is the intent of this ordinance that existing residential developments be protected .from encroachment of undesirable and incompatible uses and new developments be constructed according to sound, reasonable, and desirable regulations as stated within this ordinance and related codes, ordinances and regulations of the City. 
2.2-Permitted Uses. Within the Residential R-1 District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi", the following use provisions shall apply: 
1. 
Single family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes-or shell homes. 

2. Publi~ utility distribution facilities. 

3. 
One (1) non-illuminated sign advertising the sale or rent of the land or buildings upon which it is located. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be located at a point not less than one-half (1/2) the front yard depth from the street line. The sign may remain in place until no longer needed, provided it is kept in a non-deteriorating condition. 

4. 
Customary signs in conjunction with residential usage, such as mailbox signs, names of residents and house numbers. 

5. 
Non-commercial greenhouses, provided that no structure, odor or dust-producing substance or use shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any property line and that no productsshall be publicly displayed or offered for sale. 

6. 
Accessory uses (after completion of main dwelling), provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than five (5) feet from any property line, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of gross floor area of the primary use. 

7. 
The renting of rooms within the residential structure, provided that the establishment shall possess al~ required permits and licenses. The number of persons accommodated in each bedroom shall not exceed two (2). 

8. 
Customary home occupations, including the offices of a medical, legal, design artistic, religious or similar professional, conducted within the dwelling, provided that not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the total floor area of the structure shall be used for such occupation; and no external evidence of such occupation is visible except a non-illuminated sign not more than six (6) inches by eighteen (18) inches may be displayed. 


9. Public Streets and Highways. 
2.3-Conditional Land Uses. Within a Residential R-I District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia,Mississippi," the following conditional land use provisions shall apply: (uses permitted after public notice and hearing and approvalby the Board of Alderman) 
1. 
Churches and related accessory buildings, provided theyare located on a lot fronting principal or minor arterial roads and are placed not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any other property line and shall maintain a front yard setback of at least forty (40) feet with required off-street parking spaces separatedfrom property lines by a planted buffer at least five (5) feet in width and/or an impenetrable fence not less than three (3) feet in height. (All newly organized or relocated churches must be on a minimum three (3) acre lot.) 

2. 
Public and private schools offering general education courses. 

3. 
Public and semi-public recreational facilities includingparks, playgrounds, lakes, golf courses and country clubs. 


4. Bed and Breakfast Establishments 
2.4 Area and Setback Regulations 
1. Park and playground. 
2. Sign or bulletin board, unlighted, not to exceed four (4)square feet in area pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of property, buildings or structures " ,which bulletin board or signshall be moved as soon as the property, building or structure has been leased, hired or sold. 

2.5 Area and Setback Regulations 
Yards (See Appendix B) 
Front: 	setback a minimum of not less than twenty-five (25)feet. 
Rear: 	setback a minimum depth of not less than twenty-five
(25) per cent of the lot provided such yard need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
Side: 	On interior lots of fifty (50) feet or less in width, at the building line, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten (10) per cent of the width of the lot, provided that each side yard shall not be less than five (5) feet. For lots of more than fifty
(50) feet in width, either of the side yards may be five (5) feet and the sum of the side yards shall be twenty (20) per cent of the lot width, but not to exceed twenty (20) feet in width. 
On corner lots the sid~ yard regulation shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of reversed ~rontage where the corner lot rears on the side of the lot facing the other intersecting street, in which case, there shall be a side yard on the corner lot on not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lot abutting the rear of the corner lot or separated only by an alley. No accessory buildings on a said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, nor shall a building be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, closer than five (5) feet to the line of the abuttinglot to the rear. 
Lot Width 
A minimum of fifty (50~ feet at building setbac~ line. 
Lot Area 
A minimum of seven thousand and two hundred (7,200) square feet. For lots not served by public sanitary sewer, or a central sewagedisposal system, the minimum lot size shall be determined by the State Board of Health and the City Engineer. The builder shall furnish a certificate from the State Board of Health which sets out the minimum size of each such residential lot. 
Height Regulation 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
Accessory Buildings 
Not to exceed one (1) story in height nor be located not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, nor less than the distance required for the main building from any side lot line; providedthat if the accessory building is located within the rear yard, no clearance from a side line will be required. In the R-l and R-2 Districts the utility services to accessory buildings shall be metered through the same meters as those serving the main buildingon the premises. The area of accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the area in the main building. An accessory 
building may be constructed as a part of the main building, in which case the regulations controlling the main building shall apply. 
23 

SECTION 3-USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-2 
3.1 Purpose and Intent. The Residential District R-2 is hereby created in order that certain areas within the City of Philadelphia be reserved exclusively for single-family residential and two-family uses. It is the intent of this ordinance that existing residential developments be protected from encroachment of undesirable 9nd incompatible uses and new developments be constructed according to sound, reasonable, and desirable regulations as stated within this ordinance. 
3.2 
Permitted Uses. Wi thin a Residential R-2 District as shown on the "Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi", the following use provisions shall apply: 

1. 
All uses permitted in the R-1 District. 

2. 
Two (2) unit residential structures (duplex). 



3.3 
Conditional Uses. Within a Residential R-2 District as shown on the "Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi", the following conditional land use provisions shall apply: (Permittedafter public notice and hearing and approval by the Board of Alderman) 


1. All conditional uses permitted in R-1 District. 
2. 
Churches and related accessory buildings, provided theyare located on a 3 acre lot fronting a major artery or connectingroute and are placed not less than fifteen (15) feet from any other property line and shall maintain a front yard setback of at least thirty (30) feet with required off-street parking spaces separatedfrom property lines by a planted buffer at least five (5) feet in width and/or an impenetrable fence not less than three (3) feet in height. 

3. 
Private nursery or childcare center located in a church and operated under the auspices of the Church. 


3.4 Area and Setback Regulations. 
Yards 
Front: Same as R-1. 
Rear: Same as R-1. 
Side: Same as R-1. 



------. 
Zero lot line -In zero lot line lots there shall be no minimum on one side and 10 feet on the opposite side. However, in no case shall a zero lot line dwelling be built closer than 10 feet to the lot line of a lot which is zoned as R-l, Residential. On corner lot, same as "R­
I." 
Lot width 
Single-Family: 	Same as R-l. 
Two-Family: 	A minimum of seventy-five (75) feet at the front building setback line. 
Zero lot line: 	The minimum lot width shall be forty (40)feet. 
Lot Area 
Single-Family: 	A minimum of 5,000 square feet. 
Two-Family: 	A minimum of 4,000 square feet/family. 
Lot Area Per Family: Duplex and Zero Lot Line-In the R-2" Medium Dens~ty Residential District every buildinghereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged,shall provide a lot area of not less than four thousand 
(4000) square feet per family; provided, however, that where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record and in separate ownership on the effective date of this Ordinance said lot may be occupied by not more than one family. 
For lots not served by public sanitary sewer or a central sewerage disposal system, the minimum lot size shall be determined by the State Board of Health and the Air and Water Pollution Control Commission and the City Engineer. 
The builder shall furnish a certificate from the State Board of Health which sets out the minimum size of such residential lot. 
Heiqht Regu1ations 
Single-Family: Same as R-l. 
Two-Family: Same as R-l. 
Accessory Bui1dinqs 
Same as R-l. 

SECTION 4 -USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3 
4.1 Purpose and Intent. The Residential District R-3 is hereby created in order that certain areas within the City of Philadelphia will be maintained for medium density single-family residential and related uses. It is the intent of this ordinance that existing residential areas of the City be protected from encroachment by undesirable and incompatible uses, that developmentdensi ty be limited to that capable of being supported by Citystreets, utili ties and services, and that new developments be constructed according to sound, reasonable, and desirable regulations as stated in all applicable City developmentordinances. 
It is further the City's intention to encourage and permit the upgrading of older substandard residential areas, to accommodate affordable housing, and to encourage repair, rebuilding, renovation or replacement of deteriorated and dilapidated housing units of all types. This specifically includes modular, manufactured housing,and mobile homes as defined in Article II of this ordinance, on 
t
lots and in situations where a significant mixture of these housingtypes already existed on the effective date of this ordinance. 
4.2 Permitted Uses. Within a Residential R-3 District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia,Mississippi," the following use provisions shall apply: 
1. 
All uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts subjectto the R-1 and R-2 use requirements and R-2 dimension requirements. 

2. All conditional uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 Districts. 

3. 
Modular homes and manufactured housing as defined in Article II hereof, subj ect to all the same lot, parking and inf~astructure requirements as conventionally built single familydeta~hed residences constructed after the effective date of this ordinance in the R-3 District. 

4. 
Repair, rebuilding, renovation or replacement of existingsubstandard housing in the R-3 District including modular,manufactured housing, and mobile homes as defined in Article II of this ordinance; however, limited to one residential structure perlot of record which must meet or exceed the minimum size and dimensional"standards for lots in the R-3 district, as set forth in the Schedule of District regulations in Section 4.4 of this Ordinance. 


A. New or replacement residential structures on lots in this district regardless of type must observe all structural setback requirements for the district. 
B. Each residential structure in this district regardless of type must provide for sufficient on site, off street parking as required in Section of this Ordinance. 
C. All residential structures in this district regardless of type must at the time of construction or repair, rebuilding,renovation or replacement have direct frontage access on a publicstreet fully improved to City standards. 
D. All residential structures in this District regardless of type must be connected to all necessary municipal and franchised utilities before they may be occupied. 
E. All new and replacement conventional site built housing,modular and mobile homes as defined in Article II of this Ordinance placed on lots in the. R-3 district regardless of type must be installed on a properly engineered foundation. 
F. A permitted alternative properly engineered foundation may be one based on the latest edition of the ~Permanent Foundation Guide for Manufactured Housing," prepared by the U. S. Departmentof Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
G. Requirements for providing properly engineeredfoundations must fulfill all State of Mississippi rules and regulations promulgated under §75-49-5 of the Mississippi Code of 1972; must adhere to the manufacturer's installation instructions for the individual unit, and comply with the City's properly engineered foundation requirements. 
5. Public streets and utility infrastructure. 
4.3 Conditional Uses. Within a Residential R-3 District as shown on the ~Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia,Mississippi," the following conditional use provisions shall apply: 
1. Public utility stat i.crrs such as electrical substations, sewage pumping stations, etc., provided that an impenetrable fence surrounds them at least eight (8) feet high, have a reasonable buffer zone on all four sides, and there is no storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises. 
28 

4.4 Area and Setback Regulations Yards Front: Two-Family-Same as R-1. Multi-Family-Same as R-1. Mobile Home-Same as R-1. Rear: Two-Family-Same as R-1. Multi-family-Same as R-1. Mobile Home-There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet. 
Side: 	Two-Family-Same as R-1. Multi-Family-Same as R-1; however, an additional two (2) feet for each side yard shall be requiredfor each story above the first story. 
Mobile Home-A minimum of seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet. 
Lot Width 
Two-Family-A minimum of seventy-five (75) feet at the buildingsetback line. 
Multi-Family-A minimum of one hundred (100) feet at the building setback line. 
Mobile Home-A minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
Lot Area 
Two Family-Same as R-2. 
Multi-Family-A minimum of 3,000 square feet per family. 
Mobile Home-A minimum of 4,000 square feet per family. 
Modular Home-A minimum of 7,200 square feet per family. 

Height Regulations 
Two-Family-Same as R-l. 
Multi-Family-Three (3) stories or thirty-six (35) feet. 

30 

SECTION 5-USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-4 
5.1 Purpose and Intent. The Residential District R-4 is hereby created in order that certain areas wi thin the City of Philadelphia may be developed for multi-family residential purposes, and that older, existing structures be converted to multi-family residential uses. 
5.2 Permitted Uses. Within a Residential R-4 District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi," the following use provisions shall apply: 
1. 	
All residential uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts. 

2. 	
All conditional uses in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts. 

3. 	
All non-residential uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts, subject to the R-l and R-2 Use Requirements. 


4 . 	Multi-family dwellings, townhouses, and apartmen t complexes. 
5. 	Group childcare facilities, nursery schools and kindergartens . 
. 
6. 	Adult daycare .facilities. 
,~ 
5.3 Conditional Uses. Within a Residential R'=4 District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi," the following conditional use provisions shall apply:
(Permitted by ETC.) 
1. 	
Halfway houses, and group homes. 

2. 	
Assisted Living Facilities (Personal Care Homes). 

3. 	
Residential Group Homes. 

4. 	
Limited Residential Child Care Homes. 

5.4 
Area and Setback 


Same 	as R-1. 
Side: Same as R1; However, an additional two (2) feet for each side yard shall be required for each story above the first story. 
.. ­
Yards 
Front: 	Multi-Family-Same as R-1. Mobile Home-Same as R-1. 
Rear: 	Multi-Family-Same as R-1. Mobile Home-There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet. 
Side: 	Multi-Family-Same as R-1; however, an additional two 
(2) feet for each side yard shall be required for each story above the first story. 
Lot Width 
Multi-Family-A minimum of one hundred (100) feet at the building setback line. 
Lot Area 
Two-Family-Same as R-2. 
Multi-Family-A minimum of 3,000 square feet per family . 

. 
Town House-A minimum of 2,400 square feet per family. 
Height Regulations 
Two-Family-Same as R-1. 
Multi-Family-Three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. 

SECTION 6-USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-S 
6.1 Purpose and Intent. T,he Residential District R-5 is hereby created in order that certain areas wi thin the City of Philadelphia ~an be developed for new medium density Manufactured Housing Subdivisions, Manufactured Housing Parks and related uses. 
It is the intent of this ordinance to protect existingresidential areas of the City from encroachment by undesirable and incompatible uses, that development density be limited to that capable of being supported by City streets, utilities, and services, and that new developments be constructed according to sound, reasonable and desirable regulations as stated in all applicable City development ordinances. 
It is the intent of this ordinance to provide appropriatelylocated and fully developed able sites for development of new manufactured housing parks. Manufactured housing subdivisions are intended to be primarily for owner occupancy of both the housingunit and the site upon which it is located. Manufactured housingparks are intended for primarily renter occupancy of either both the housing unit and the site upon which it is located or owner occupancy of the housing unit and renter occupancy of the site uponwhich it is located. 
It is further the 'City's intention to accommodate affordable housing. This specifically includes manufactured housing, as defined in Article of this Ordinance, in locations appropriateto this housing type and in situations where successful neighborhoods containing manufactured housing can be created and maintained. The City intends to upgrade its housing situation through encouraging new improved quality settings for new housing. 
6.2 Permitted Uses. Wi thin a Residential R-5 District as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Philadelphia,Mississippi," the following use provisions shall apply: 
1. 
Mobile Homes subdivisions, designed to conform with standards established at Section of the Zoning Ordinance to accommodate owner occupied manufactured housing units as defined in 

Article of the Ordinance on individual lots, subdivided in conformance with the "Subdivisions Regulations, City of Philadelphia, Mississippi" and subject to subdivisions review and approval. 

2. 
Mobile Homes parks designed to conform with standards established at Section of the Zoning Ordinance to accommodate owner or renter occupied mobile home units as defined in Article of the Ordinance, sited on rented spaces within a tract of land under single or unified ownership, management and operation that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing for dwelling purposes, and subject to site plan review and approval bythe City. 

3. 
All mobile homes.' in either a manufactured housingsubdivision or a mobile home park must be individually connected to all necessary municipal and franchised utilities before they may be occupied. 

4. 
All manufactured housing units as defined in Article of this ordinance in the R-5 district regardless of situation must be installed on a properly engineered foundation. 


A. A properly engineered foundation is one designed byan architect or structural engineer licensed by the State of Mississippi. 
B. A permitted al ternati ve properly engineered. foundation may be one based on the latest edition of the Permanent Foundation Guide for Mobile Homes prepared the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
C. Requirements for providing properly engineeredfoundations must fulfill all State of Mississippi rules and regulations promulgated under §75-49-5 of the Mississippi Code, as annotated; must adhere to the manufacturer's installation instructions for the individual unit, and comply with the City's properly engineered foundation requirements. 
5. 
Common storage areas, either open or enclosed, intended to serve only residents of the mobile home subdivision or mobile home park in which they are situated. 

6. 
Ancillary non residential uses, intended to serve onlyresidents of the mobile home subdivision or mobile home park in which they are situated, including-but not limited to Laundromat, car wash, day care facility, recreation room, swimming pool,playground, health studio or gymnasium, or small convenience store. 

7. 
Public utility stations such as electrical substations, sewage pumping stations, etc., provided that they are surrounded byan impenetrable fence at least eight (8) feet high, have a reasonable buffer zone'on all four sides, and there is no storageoi vehicles or equipment on the premises. 


8. Public parks and playgrounds. 
6.3 	Special Provisions Required for Mobile Homes on Separate Lots 
1. 	
Mobile homes shall be set on permanent concrete foundation bocks with appropriate tie down hooks. 

2. 	
Mobile Homes shall be connected to all utilities in basically the same manner as a permanent residence so that all connections are sanitary, safe and do not create a nuisance. 

3. 	
Mobile homes shall be equipped with foundation skirt and permanent steps fastened to the ground. 


6.4 Special Provisions for Mobile Home Parks 
1. 	
More than one (1) Mobile home per lot constitutes a mobile home park. 

2. 	
Mobile Home parks shall not exceed a density of eight (8)mobile home units per gross acre within the mobile home park. 

3. 	
Mobile home parks shall be surrounded by a buffer stripat least fifteen (15) feet in depth on all sides and rear from an R-l, or R-2 district. 

4. 	
Buffers shall be unoccupied except for landscaping,utility facilities, signs or entrance ornamentation. 

5. 	
All mobile home lots shall abut upon a paved driveway,which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 

6. 	
All streets, roadways and driveways within the park shall meet the minimum construction standards recommended bythe consulting engineer of the Planning Commission. Theyshall be appropriately lighted at night. 

7. 	
No mobile home park shall contain less than eight (8)stands. 

8. 	
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with foundation blocks patio, parking area and utilities as recommended by the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association and approvedand recommenaed by the City Engineer. 

9. 	
Every mobile home stand shall provide a storage structure of at least two hundred (200) square feet, however, such structure shall not exceed three hundred (300) squarefeet. 

10. 	
Mobile Homes shall be set on permanent concrete foundation blocks with appropriate tie-down hooks. 


SECTION 7. C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
7.1 General Description 
Mobile Homes shall be set on permanent concrete foundation blocks with appropriate tie-down hooks. 
The purpose of this commercial district is to provide retail stores and personal services for the convenience of the people in adjacent areas. 
7.2 Uses Permitted 
The following uses of property, buildings or structures: 
(1) 	Bakery-employing not more than five people and limited to retail sales only.
(2)	Medical and dental clinics 
(3 ) 	Church (All newly organized or relocated churches must be on a minimum three (3) acre lot. 
(4 ) 	Barber shop, beauty parlor, chiropody, massage or similar personal shop.
(5 ) 	Bicycle sales and repair.
(6 ) 	Offices, including insurance, real estate, architects,engineers, accountants and lawyers. 
(7 ) 	Restaurants (not drive-in). 
(8 ) 	Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, shoe repairing, repairing of household utility articles or similar trade. 
( 9) 	Liquor store (Subject to State law).
(10) 	Specialty shop for the conduct of a retail business as limited herein: such as furniture, fabric, apparel, jewelry, etc. 
(11)	Photographer's studio. 
(12) 	
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, including signs or bulletin boards not exceeding twelve (12) square feet and lighted by floodlight only.

(13) 	
The above-specified stores, shops or businesses shall be retail establishments exclusively, selling merchandise and conducted wholly within an enclosed building. Each store,shop, or business shall not exceed eighteen hundred (1800)square feet of floor area. Nei ther drive-in nor curb services shall be permitted. 


7.3 Uses Permitted after Public Notice and Hearing and !pproval by the Planning Commission. 
Other uses similar to the above stated uses as may be determined bythe Planning Commission. 
7.4 	Area and Setback RegulationsYards 
Front: A minimum of thirty-five (35) feet. 
Rear: No rear yard shall be required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. Such space shall be screened from the abuttingresidential district by walls or by fences or by other screeningnot less than six (6) feet in height, in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
Side: No side yards are required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district bywalls or by fences or by other screening not less than six (6) feet 
height, except on approval of the Planning Commission. 
in  height,  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  the  Planning  Commission.  
Lot  Width  
A line.  minimum  of  one  hundred  (100)  feet  at  the  building  setback  
Height Regulations.  
No  building  or  structure  shall  exceed  thirty-five  (35)  feet  in  

Lot Coverage 
Main and accessory buildings or structures-thirty (30) percent of lot area. 
SECTION 8. C-2 COMMUNITYCOMMERCIALDISTRICT (Central Business District) 
8.1 General Description 
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and retail business of the communi ty. Traffic generated by these uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods. 
8.2 Uses Permitted 
The following uses of property, buildings or structures: 
(I) 	Any commercial use permitted in the C-l NeighborhoodCommercial District. 
(2)	Banks. 
(3 ) 	Dry or steam cleaning shop or plant employing not more five-(5) people. 
(4 ) 	Drug stores. 
(5) 	Grocery stores. 
( 6) 	Hospitals.
(7 ) 	Coin operated laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(8 ) 	Shop for the repair of plumbing, radio and electric equipment, shoes, furniture and similar personal or household commodities. 
( 9) 	New and used car dealerships.
(10)	Department stores. 
(11) 	
Mortuary (funeral home). 

(12) 	
Retail stores, businesses or shops for custom work or the manufacture of articles to be sold at retail on the premises, excluding coal and wood yards, provided that in such manufacture the total mechanical power shall not exceed ten (10) horse power for the operation of anyonemachine provided that the space occupied by the manufacturing use permitted herein shall not exceed fifty

(50) percent of the total floor area of the entire building or the equivalent of the ground floor area thereof, and provided further that such manufacturing use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise,odor, dust, smoke or fumes. 

(13) 	
Printing shop, including sale of office supplies and equipment.


(14)	Newspaper publication.
(15)	Sign painting shop.
(16) Blueprinting shop.
(17)Interior decorating shop.
(18)Catering establishments. 

(19)	Train stations, bus depots and travel agencies.
(20) 	
Theaters, auditoriums. 

(21) 	
Recreational or amusement classification when conducted wholly inside an enclosed building.

(22) 	
Hardware or appliance stores. 

(23) 
Variety stores including discount stores. 

(24) 	
Paint and hobby store, including sale of carpets, wall covering and similar household items. 

(25) 	
Florists provided no greenhouses are maintained on premises.

(26) 	
Service stations. 

(27) 	
Hotels or motels. 

(28) 
Automotive parts and equipment sales. 

(29) 	
Mail order stores. 

(30) 
Stamp redemption centers. 


8.3 Uses Per.mitted After Public Notice and Hearing and Approval bythe Planning Commission 
Other uses similar to the above stated uses as may be determined by the Planning Commission. 
8.4 Area and Setback Regulations 
Yards 
Front: No front yard shall be required except where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is partly in the C-2 Commercial District and partly in a residential district, the front yard regulations of the residential district shall apply. 
Rear: Same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
Side: Same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
Lot Width 
None required. 
Height Regulations 
No building shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height. 
SECTION 9. C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
9.1 General Description 
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personaland business services for the motoring public. 
9.2 Uses Per.mitted 
(1) 	
Any uses permitted in C-2 Community Commercial District. 

(2) 	
Billboards-as regulated by Mississippi State Law. 

(3) 	
Laboratory, dental or medical. 

(4) 	
Drive-in restaurant. 

(5) 	
Small animal clinic. 

(6) 	
New and used machinery sales and service. 

(7) 	
Public garages.

(8) 	
Automobile graveyards, providing they are enclosed by a six (6) foot concealing fence and are set back at least one-hundred (100) feet from highway right-of-way.

(9) 	
Marble and granite works sales. 

(10) 	
Yard and Garden Center including nursery and greenhouses.

(11) 
Welding shops.

(12) 
Storage yards 	for commercial vehicles and trucks and truck terminals provided that the storage yards are enclosed bya concealing fence not less than six (6) feet in height.

(13) 
Upholstery repair.

(14) 	
Food storage locker and ice manufacturing plant.

(15) 	
Wholesale establishments and storage.

(16) 	
Lumber and building supplies sales and carpenter shop.

(17) 	
Commercial kennels, when enclosed. 

(18) 	
Service yard for Rublic utilities. 

(19) 
Riding academy.

(20) 
Open-air sports. 


9.3 Uses Per.mitted After Public Notice and Hearing and Approvalby the Planning Commission 
Other uses similar to the above stated uses as may be determined by the Planning Commission. 
9.4 Area and Setback Regulations 
Yards 
Front: Same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
Rear: Same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
Side: Same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
. 41 
Lot Width 
None required. 
Lot Area 
None required. 
Height Regulations 
No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height, except on approval of the Planning Commission. 
•... 	, -_._ _. --~-. 
SECTION 10 I-1 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT 
10.1 	Uses Per.mitted 
The owner, or owners, of any contiguous and compact tract of land shall submit to the Planning Commission a petition for the rezoningand subsequent exclusive use and development of all such tract of land as a Planned Industrial Park District. The petition submitted shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study, hearing and report as provided by law. 
In a Planned Industrial Park District, no building, structure,land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered until such use, erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration shall have been specifically authorized by the governing authority,after study and recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
Any industrial use, upon approval of the Planning Commission,shall be permitted in a Planned Industrial Park District provided no nuisance will result with regard to excessive: 
(1) 	
Smoke and other particular matter. 

(2) 	
Noise. 

(3) 	
Odor. 

(4) 	
Fire or explosive hazard. 

(5) 	
Gases. 

(6) 	
Glare or heat. 

(7) 	
Vibration. 

(8) 	
Water pollution.

(9) 	
Other fa6tors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area. 


10.2 	Special Requirements 
The Planning Commission shall satisfy themselves that the conditions listed above are met before recommending approval of anyuse in a Planned Industrial Park District. Pursuant to this section, the applicant shall be required to furnish: 
(1) 	
Overall development plan.

(2) 	
Data describing all processes and equipment involved in the proposed use. 

(3) 	
Plans showing location and design of structures, deliverypoints, loading and storage areas, walls, fences, screen planting, signs, lighting devices, and pedestrian walks. 

(4) 	
Plans illustrating adequate off-street parking according to standards established by the Planning Commission. 

(5) 	
Traffic routing system so designed as to minimize nuisance effects due to the generation of traffic to and from the use. 

(6) 	
Comprehensive landscaping plan.

(7) 	
Any other information the Planning Commission may need to adequately consider the effect the proposed uses may have upon the cost of providing adequate services to the area. 


This Planning Commission shall further satisfy themselves that the uses proposed for any Planned Industrial Park District shall be compatible with the adjacent and nearby uses of land and is consistent with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance, to promote the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
SECTION 11. I-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
11.1 	General Description 
This industrial district is intended primarily for production and assembly plants that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust and glare of each operation are properly controlled. 
11.2 	Uses Permitted 
The following uses of property, buildings or structures: 
(1) 	Bottling plant.
(2 ) 	Dairy products plant.
(3 ) 	Lumberyard provided that yard is enclosed by a concealingfence not less than six-(6) feet height.
(4 ) 	Garment factory
(5 ) 	Landing fields for aircraft. 
(6) 	Wireless transmission facility.
(7 ) 	Railroad facility.
(8 ) 	Steam power plant.
(9 ) 	Experimental laboratory.
(10)	Furniture manufacturing.
(11) Furniture manufacturing.
(12)Carpet and rug cleaners. 

(13 ) 	Electroplating.
(14)Galvanizing, small utensils, etc. 
(15)Ice plants or storage houses. 

(16) 	Meat processing (no slaughtering). 
(17)	Wholesale establishment and storage.
(18)	Gasoline distribution center or bulk plant.
(19) 	Contractor's establishments and storage yards provided that the storage yards are enclosed by a concealing fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
11.3 Uses Permitted After Public Notice and Hearing and Approvalby the Planning Commission. 
Other uses similar to the above after review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
11.4 	Area and Setback Regulations 
Yards 
44 

Front: a minimum of forty (40) feet at the building setback line. 
Rear: Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alley way, service court, rear yard or combination thereof of not less than fifty (50) _feet except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by walls or by fences or by other screening not less than six (6)feet in height in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
Side: The side yard building setback line on each side of the lot shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of sixty (60) feet shall be providedon the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by walls or byfences or by other screening not less than six (6) feet in height,in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
Lot Width 
None required. 
Height RegU1ations 
No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
45 

SECTION  12. I-3  HEAVY  INDUSTRIAL  DISTRICT  
12.1  General  Description  
This industrial industrial uses.  district  is  intended  to  provide  for  heavy  
12.2  Uses  Pe~itted  

The following uses of property, buildings Qr structures: 
(1) 	
Any use permitted in the 1-2 Light Industrial District. 

(2) 	
Brick and pottery manufacturing.

(3) 	
Concrete and cement manufacturing.

(4) 	
Cotton ginning and baling.

(5) 	
Automobile wrecking yards provided the yard is enclosed by a concealing fence at least six (6) feet in height.

(6) 	
Metal working or blacksmith shops. 

(7) 	
Enameling, lacquering and paint mixing shops. 

(8) 	
Garbage dumps.

(9) 	
Saw mills. 

(10) 	
Creosote plants.

(11) 
Slaughter houses. 

(12) 
Cement 	products including cement block plants and cast stone works. 

(13) 
Poultry killing and dressing. 


12.3 Uses Pe~itted After Public Notice and Hearing and Approvalby the Planning Commission 
Other uses similar to the above after review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
12.4 	Area and Setback Regulations 
Yards 
Front: a minimum of fifty (50) feet at the building setback line. 
Rear: The rear yard building setback line shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by walls or by fences or by other screening not less than six (6) feet in height in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
Side: The side yard building setback line on each side of the lot shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by walls or byfences or by other screening not less than six (6) feet in heightin a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
Lot Width 
None required. 
Height Regulations 
No building or structure sh~ll exceed 5 stories and/or sixty (60)feet in height except on special permission of the PlanningCommission. 
SECTION 13. F-1 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT 
13.1 	General Description 
This district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic or occasional inundation from stream overflows and, therefore, area usually unsuited for residential, commercial and industrial use. 
13.2 	Uses Permitted 
The use of property and buildings or structures in the F-l Flood Plain Zone shall be limited to the following: 
(1) 	
The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock and gardening.

(2) 	
The keeping of agricultural livestock. 

(3) 	
Public recreation. 

(4) 	
Golf course. 

(5) 	
Fish camp. 


13.3 Uses Permitted After Public Notice and Hearing and Approvalby the Planning Commission 
Other uses similar to the above stated uses as may be determined by the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE V 
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
SECTION 1. CONDITIONS OF A MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT 
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restrictive district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restrictive district unless other wise specified. 
SECTION 2. OPEN SPACE 
No open space or lot area required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by, or counted as open spacefor any other building or structure. 
(1) 	
In any residential district, except the R-1 District, the front yard minimum setback of any lot unoccupied as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be equal in depth to the average depth of the front yards of the nearest adjacent occupied lots. 

(2) 	
Fences, walls, and hedges in residential districts may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of anyyard provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed thirty-six

(36) inches in height within a twenty-five (25) foot setback of the front lot line. 

(3) 	
Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet, the depth of the front yard shall be measured starting at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the street easement. 

(4) 	
No dwelling units shall be erected on a lot that does not abut or have direct access to a public street. 

(5) 	
On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plantgrowth, shall obstruct sight lines at elevations over two feet, six inches (2'6") above any portion of the crown of bhe adjacent roadways. A sight triangle shall be formed by measuring back twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines and connecting the points so as to establish a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 

(6) 	
An attached or detached private garage or carport that faces on a street shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the street right-of-way line. 


SECTION 3. HEIGHT 

The regulations, herein set forth, qualify or otherwise supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulationsappearing in Article III. 
(1) 	
Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit. 

(2) 	
Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the heightlimitation of the district if the minimum depth of the side yards required in the district is increased one (1)foot for each two (2) feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the prescribedheight limit. 


SECTION 4. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 
4.1 PUrpose of Provisions 
For the purpose of allowing and encouraging greater design and flexibility in development, the requirements of this Ordinance may be modified by the Planning Commission, provided that grosspopulation and building density of any area proposed under the planned unit approach complies with the population and buildingdensity set forth for the zoning district in which the development shall be located. 
The owners of any tract of land containing at least three (3)acres may submit a plan for the use and development of the entire tract for residential, compatible commercial and related uses as a single and unified project. The basic control developmentintensity shall be one or more of the residential districts. The Planned Unit Development qhall be a superimposed designationproviding broader latitude of design to achieve the above stated goals. 
4.2 Uses Pe~itted 
Uses specified and/or permitted on review by the PlanningCommission for the zoning district in which the development shall be located. 
4.3 Area and Setback Regulations 
Lot dimensions, building setbacks and area requirements may be modified, provided that a more functional and desirable use of property is attained. 
(1) 	PERIPHERAL BOUNDARY SETBACK REQUIREMENTS 
Where the peripheral boundary of a Planned Unit Development abuts a street or road right-of-way, the building setback shall be the front yard requirements of the district. Where the peripheral boundary of a Planned Unit Development abuts the property line of adjoiningholdings, the building setback shall be the rear yardrequirement of the district in which the development is located. 
(2) 	HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
Building height shall be that established for the district in which the development is located, however, height regulations may be modified by the PlanningCommission following review of development plans. 
4.4 Plan Review and Approval Required 
A detailed plan of any proposed Planned Unit Development shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. Within 30 days of the receipt of plans, the Planning Commission shall transmit the plans together with its report to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. Said Council shall review the plans and the recommendat1ons of the Planning Commission and shall either approve or reject the proposed development plan. The PlanningCommission and the Mayor and Board of Alderman may imposeconditions regarding layout, circulation and performance of the proposed Planned Unit Development and may require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed. 
A plat of the approved development shall be recorded and shall show all applicable features as required by the Ordinance regulating the subdivision of land. 
SECTION 5. HOME OCCUPATION 
-
5.1 Regulations 
(1) 	
Home occupations shall not be carried out in more than twenty (20) percent of the total dwelling, building area. 

(2) 	
There shall be no external evidence of the use exceptfor the allowance of one unaminated; non-illuminated sign not to exceed one (1) square foot in area mounted flush against the main building.

(3) 	
No goods or merchandise shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises. 

(4) 	
The Planning Commission after due notice and publichearing may terminate home occupation permits thereon. 


'_'I I 
ARTICLE  VI  
OFF-STREET  AUTOMOBILE  AND  VEHICLE  
PARKING  AND  LOADING  
SECTION  1. GENERAL  INTENT  AND  APPLICATION  
It is parking  the and  intent of these requirements that adequate off-street loading facilities be provided for each use of land  

within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. These requirementsshall be applied in all districts. 
SECTION 2. SIZE OF AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE SPACE 
For the purpose of this section a parking or automobile storagespace shall be computed on the basis of three hundred (300)square feet per space. 
SECTION 3. ALL-WEATHER SURFACE REQUIRED 
Parking facilities for residential, commercial and industrial uses shall have an all-weather surface, be properly drained to prevent ponding and shall be maintained free of trash and rubbish. 
SECTION 4. OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE 
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses stated in this section are hereafter established. Where space is not available on the lot, space shall be provided within three hundred (300)feet of such uses and such space shall have vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use or uses least the uses as set forth herein: 
<'I I 
USE 	REQUIRED PARKING SPACE . 
Single-family dwellings: 	2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Multifamily dwelling: 	1 ~ parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Mobile homes: 	2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Hotels, motels, tourist homes,
Tourist courts, and rooming houses: 	1 parking space for each guest or sleeping room or suite, exclusive of restaurant requirementsplus 1 space for each 3 employees. 
Private clubs, lodges, fraternities 
and sororities: 1 parking space for each 50 squarefeet of total floor area in the auditorium,assembly hall, dining room in such building and 1 space per sleeping room. 
Churches: 	1 parking space for each five seats in the main auditorium. 
Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums,Gymnasiums, convention halls and Other places of public assembly: 1 parking space for each 
4 seats in the buildingor structure based on maximum seating capacity. 
Elementary schools: 	1 ~ parking spaces for each classroom 
Secondary schools: 	10 parking spaces for each classroom. 
Business colleges and trade 
Schools: 	1 parking space for each 2 student seats at maximum enrollment. 
Use  Required  Parking  Space  
Hospitals:  1 2  parking spacebeds intended  for for  each  
patients, excludingbassinets, and 1 spacefor each 3 employees,plus 1 space for each staff doctor.  
Sanitariums,Convalescent  nursing homes,homes, orphanages:  1 parking space for 8 beds plus 1 spaceeach 2 employees or members.  each for staff  
Medical  and  dental  clinics:  1 parking space for each 100 square feet of grossfloor area plus 1 spacefor each 3 employees and 1 space for each doctor.  
Funeral  homes:  1 parking space for each 3 seats in parlors and chapels.  
Retail  sales  stores:  1 parking space100 square feet floor area.  for each of retail  
Drive-in  retail  business:  Minimum of 10 parking spaces, plus 1 space for each 100 square feet of retail floor area.  
Personal service and repair shops  establishments  1  parking space for each 100 square feet of grossfloor area.  

Wholesale, general business 
and warehouses 1 	parking space for each 4 employees based on maximum employment and 1 space for each vehicle to be stored or stoppedsimultaneously. 
I' .1'.11._ I I '! 
USE 	Required Parking Space 
Industrial and manufacturing
establishments: 	1 parking space for each 400 square feet of grossfloor area or per 4 employees, on largestshift, whichever is greatest, plus 1 spacefor each vehicle to be stored or stoppedsimultaneously or as determined by the Planning Commission. 
Eating establishments and taverns: 	1 1/2 parking spaces for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
Drive-in eating establishments: 	Minimum of 10 parking spaces, plus 1 space for each 4 seats of total capacity. 
Office and professional buildings: 	1 parking space for each 200 square feet of office space. 
Filling stations: 	2 parking spaces for each grease rack or similar facility: 1 parking spacefor each gas pump, plus 1 space for each employeeon duty. 
Bus terminals: 	5 parking spaces for each loading or unloading bay. 
Auto sales and repair: 	1 parking space for each employee at maximum employment on a single shift plus 2 spaces for each 300 square feet of auto repairor sales space. 
Other uses: 	Parking requirements for uses other than those stated in this section shall be determined bythe Planning Commission. 
61 
1'_ 1111 '1'1 "I 
SECTION 5. COMBINED PARKING SPACES 
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one (1) lot but the required space assigned to one 
(1) use may be assigned to another use at the same time, except
that one-half (1/2) of the parking spaces required for churches,
theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at 
night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed 
at nights or on Sundays. 


'_'I I
ARTICLE VI
OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE
PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION 1. GENERAL INTENT AND APPLICATION
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate off-street
parking and loading facilities be provided for each use of land
within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. These requirements
shall be applied in all districts.
SECTION 2. SIZE OF AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE SPACE
For the purpose of this section a parking or automobile storage
space shall be computed on the basis of three hundred (300)
square feet per space.
SECTION 3. ALL-WEATHER SURFACE REQUIRED
Parking facilities for residential, commercial and industrial
uses shall have an all-weather surface, be properly drained to
prevent ponding and shall be maintained free of trash and
rubbish.
SECTION 4. OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be
provided on every lot on which any of the uses stated in this
section are hereafter established. Where space is not available
on the lot, space shall be provided within three hundred (300)
feet of such uses and such space shall have vehicular access to a
street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the
minimum requirements for the specific use or uses least the uses
as set forth herein:
58
<'I I
USE REQUIRED PARKING SPACE .
Single-family dwellings: 2 parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
Multifamily dwelling: 1 ~ parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
Mobile homes: 2 parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
Hotels, motels, tourist homes,
Tourist courts, and rooming houses: 1 parking space for each
guest or sleeping room or
suite, exclusive of
restaurant requirements
plus 1 space for each 3
employees.
Private clubs, lodges, fraternities
and sororities: 1 parking space for each 50 square
feet of total floor area
in the auditorium,
assembly hall, dining
room in such building and
1 space per sleeping
room.
Churches: 1 parking space for each
five seats in the main
auditorium.
Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums,
Gymnasiums, convention halls and
Other places of public assembly: 1 parking space for each
4 seats in the building
or structure based on
maximum seating capacity.
Elementary schools: 1 ~ parking spaces for
each classroom
Secondary schools: 10 parking spaces for
each classroom.
Business colleges and trade
Schools: 1 parking space for each
2 student seats at
maximum enrollment.
59
Use Required Parking Space
Hospitals: 1 parking space for each
2 beds intended for
patients, excluding
bassinets, and 1 space
for each 3 employees,
plus 1 space for each
staff doctor.
Sanitariums, nursing homes,
Convalescent homes, orphanages: 1 parking space for each
8 beds plus 1 space for
each 2 employees or staff
members.
Medical and dental clinics: 1 parking space for each
100 square feet of gross
floor area plus 1 space
for each 3 employees and
1 space for each doctor.
Funeral homes: 1 parking space for each
3 seats in parlors and
chapels.
Retail sales stores: 1 parking space for each
100 square feet of retail
floor area.
Drive-in retail business: Minimum of 10 parking
spaces, plus 1 space for
each 100 square feet of
retail floor area.
Personal service establishments
and repair shops
1 parking space for each
100 square feet of gross
floor area.
Wholesale, general business
and warehouses 1 parking space for each 4
employees based on
maximum employment and 1
space for each vehicle to
be stored or stopped
simultaneously.
60
I' .1'.11._ I I '!
USE Required Parking Space
Industrial and manufacturing
establishments: 1 parking space for each
400 square feet of gross
floor area or per 4
employees, on largest
shift, whichever is
greatest, plus 1 space
for each vehicle to be
stored or stopped
simultaneously or as
determined by the
Planning Commission.
Eating establishments and taverns: 1 1/2 parking spaces for
each 100 square feet of
gross floor area.
Drive-in eating establishments: Minimum of 10 parking
spaces, plus 1 space for
each 4 seats of total
capacity.
Office and professional buildings: 1 parking space for each
200 square feet of office
space.
Filling stations: 2 parking spaces for each
grease rack or similar
facility: 1 parking space
for each gas pump, plus 1
space for each employee
on duty.
Bus terminals: 5 parking spaces for each
loading or unloading bay.
Auto sales and repair: 1 parking space for each
employee at maximum
employment on a single shift
plus 2 spaces for each 300
square feet of auto repair
or sales space.
Other uses: Parking requirements for
uses other than those
stated in this section
shall be determined by
the Planning Commission.
61
1'_ 1111 '1'1 "I
SECTION 5. COMBINED PARKING SPACES
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be
combined in one (1) lot but the required space assigned to one
(1) use may be assigned to another use at the same time, except
that one-half (1/2) of the parking spaces required for churches,
theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at
night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed
at nights or on Sundays.
SECTION 6. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry
shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and
unloading of vehicles. Such space shall have access to a public
street or: alley.
(1) Retail business: Minimum of one (1) space of five hundred
(500) square feet per location plus one (1) space of three
hundred (300) square feet for each three thousand (3,000)
square feet of floor area.
(2) Wholesaling and industry: Minimum of one (1) space of
five hundred (500) square feet per location or one (1)
space of five hundred (500) square feet for each ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is
the greatest.
(3) Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate
the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to
be loading or unloading at the terminal at anyone time.

SECTION 6. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industryshall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles. Such space shall have access to a publicstreet or: alley. 
(1) 
Retail business: Minimum of one (1) space of five hundred 

(500) square feet per location plus one (1) space of three hundred (300) square feet for each three thousand (3,000)square feet of floor area. 

(2) 	
Wholesaling and industry: Minimum of one (1) space of five hundred (500) square feet per location or one (1) space of five hundred (500) square feet for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is the greatest. 

(3) 	
Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at anyone time. 


----------~~-----------_ 
~~~~~~~~~~~'i~ ~--------------------------~~_'~ Ii~l~'l~"-_'~'­
ORDINANCE NO. 655 

AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND PRIOR 
ORDINANCE NO. 515 OF THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, ADOPTED 
OCTOBER, 1987 AND TO AMEND SECTION 6 TITLED SIGNS 
AND TO MAKE SAID AMENDMENTS TO ADD THE FOLLOWING." 

SECTION 6-SIGNS 
The regulations herein set forth shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. as hereinafter provided. No sign or outdoor advertising device shall be erected unless it is in compliancewith regulations for the district in which it is located as specified in this section. 
Section 6.1-General Requirements and Limitations: 
A. 	Business (on-premise) Sign Requirements 
1. 	Business (on-premises) signs must be flat on the building with the largest square foot of the signattached to the building with no more than a two (2)inch extension for attachments. 
I.-I_'_-­
3. 	
The height limitation of the business signs shall be thirty-five feet to the top of the sign. 

4. 	
A business sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in a neighborhood commercial zone (C-1); 80 square feet in a community commercial zone (C-2); 150 square feet in a highway commercial Zone (C-3). 

5. 	
Shopping centers or multiple commercial buildings on the same premises are considered as one business in this section, and paragraph 6.1 A.1 through 4 shall apply. Each business in the shopping area may be identified on the business sign. 


52 
_n ,:. _ 
2. 	Business nature,industrysetback line. 
(on-premises)acti vi ties or conducted or a minimum of 
signs advertising the primaryproducts of the business or sold on the premises shall 5 feet from the right-of-way 
B, Outdoor advertising signs off premises is not allowed in the City of Philadelphia. 
C. 	Limita tions 
1. 	
Portable trailer signs or mobile signs are not allowed in the City of Philadelphia. Phase out within six months. 

2. 	
Signs with flashing, or blinking lights shall be restricted to 75-watt bulb capacity, and red, amber or blue flashing lights are prohibited. 

3. 	
The placing, tacking, painting, hanging or otherwise affixing of any kind of sign, outdoor advertising Or poster of a miscellaneous character, visible from the public highways, streets or roads, on the walls of buildings, barns, sheds, trees, vehicles, fences,utility poles or any other structure except as otherwise provided in these regulations is prohibited. 

4. 	
Signs shall not interfere with driver visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or with the visibility of the street, road, thoroughfare or expressway itself. Such signs shall maintain a setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of two (2) streets, except if the signis constructed with the bottom of the sign no lower than nine (9) feet from the ground and mounted on a pole no larger than nine (9) inches in diameter. 

5. 	
All signs that are illuminated shall be permanentlywired to meet the national electric code. Specialcare shall be given to ground fault connections,underground wire and/or conduit with proper circuit breakers. Connecting wire from sign to permanentoutlet shall not exceed four (4) feet. 

6. 	
Any sign which by reason of size, shape, content,coloring, location or manner of illumination interferes wi th driver visibility of any traffic control device or sign; or any sign which resembles any traffic control or emergency device or sign which creates any traffic hazard is not allowed. 


, I " I_"-,UUU_ J_
,'_" 'I I 
Signs placed on any city building, structure or lot or within the right-of-way of any city road or easement without a permitissued therefor by appropriate city authority shall be subjectto immediate removal by the City. 
Section 6.4-Desiqn and Maintenance: 
It shall be the owner's responsibility that all signs shall be designed according to generally accepted engineering practicesto withstand wind pressures and that loads are distributed to structural supports to avoid over stress, and that all signsare properly anchored to avoid being swept away by wind. Also,all signs shall be maintained in good repair and appearance. 
Section 6.S-Permit required: 
It shall be unlawful to erect, enlarge, rebuild or structurallyalter any sign without first obtaining proper permit exceptpermitted and exempted signs as in Section 6.2 
A. 	Permit Fees Permit Fees shall be as adopted and approved by the CityCouncil. 
Section 6.6-Penalty: 
A fine, up to $500.00 and jail time up to 6 months or both shall punish any person violating this ordinance. Anyviolation that continues each day shall be a separate offense. 
This amendment to Ordinance No. 515 and to Section 6 of the Philadelphia Code has been reduced to writing and having been fully read to the Aldermen as stated for the amendment, the following action was taken: 
Motion by Janice Payne to approve the Ordinance. 
Seconded by Joe Tullos; the vote was as follows: 
Alderwoman Janice Payne voted Aye
Alderman Joe Tullos voted Aye
Alderman Roy White voted Aye
Alderman Ronnie Jenkins voted Aye 
___ I UJIJ J. 
J. 	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildingsexcept letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
K. 	Signs not exceeding four (4) square feet, and guidingtraffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
L. 	On-si te signs, advertising property for sale or rent provided such signs in single-family residential districts shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
M. 	On-site church directory or bulletin board not exceedingthirty-two (32) square feet and not over eight (8) feet in height. 
N. 	Special purpose signs advertising a special area event 
(i.e., Neshoba County Fair or Choctaw Indian Fair) may be erected on property by the owner thereof or with the property owner's consent provided such sign or postershall not be erected more than sixty (60) days prior to the event and shall be removed within ten (10) days after the event and provided such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
Section 6.3-Signs in Disrepair or Abandoned: 
Any outdoor advertising sign, whether permitted to remain as non-conforming sign structure or an erected advertising signstructure under the terms of this ordinance, which is found to be abandoned, or is not properly maintained and in a state of disrepair, or signs which do not meet all requirements of the building codes, including the issuance of a permit therefor,shall be removed by the property owner or sign owner within thirty (30) days after written notice to the property owner or lessee is provided by the City. Advertising signs not removed within thirty (30) days are subject to removal by the City,without liability. 
Signs which are not properly maintained and are in a state of disrepair, or which are abandoned, may likewise be removed bythe city, without liability, following a thirty (30) day period of notification to the property owner or lessee. 
55 

Ii "I _" 	'J __ 
Section 6.2-Per.mitted and Exempted Signs: 
A. 	On-Site signs on the site of any construction work bearingthe name of the building, owner, and those furnishingconstruction or professional services or materials used on such construction work of a temporary nature, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. 
B. 	Temporary poster signs erected behind glass windows or temporary signs painted on glass windows. 
C. 	Any political sign or poster not exceeding twenty-four
(24) square feet erected on property by the owner's consent pertaining to a candidacy or issue to be voted upon at any election or referendum, provided such sign or poster shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to such election or referendum and shall be removed wi thin ten (10) days after referendum, or last such election in which the candidate is eligible. No political~ign or poster shall be allowed at any time on utilitypoles. 
D. 	Signs painted on, or attached to, trucks or other vehicles for identification purposes. 
E. 	Signs on glass doors or windows not exceeding six (6) square feet of sign area stating name or nature of business, location and hours of business. 
F. 	Signs at entrances to subdivisions, multifamily dwellingsor mobile home parks showing name, description or location only and not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet. 
G. 	Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of premises or other identification of premises not having commercial connotation. 
H. 	Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
I. 	Legal notice or identification, information or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies. 
_' '_lllt"_ 1 "J I II , ,_')1_' Ut, J 
ARTICLE VII 
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES 
AND USES OF LAND 
SECTION 1. NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
A NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE EXISTING AT THE TIME OF ADOPTION OF THESE REGULATIONS MAY BE CONTINUED AND MAINTAINED EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION. 
1.1 A1teration or Enlargement of Buildings and Structures 
A non-conforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless said building or structure,including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portionof structure by destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 per cent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.2 Outdoor Advertising Signs and Structures 
Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertisingstructure or statuary, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time these regulations became effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof shall not be structurallyaltered and shall be completely removed from the premises not later than three (3) years from the effective date of these regulations. 
1.3 Building Vacancy 
A non-conforming building, structure or portion thereof, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of six (6) months shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to the use of regulationsof the district in which it is located. 
1.4 Change in use 
A non-conforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e., commercial use in dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure nor changed except to a conforming use. 
_'_ I I 
SECTION 2. NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND 
A non-conforming use of land, existing at the time of these Regulations, which has been discontinued for a period of three 
(3) months may not be extended or renewed. 
A-­
."1111 __ 1_ 
ARTICLE VIII 
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

SECTION 1. BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT AND METHODS OF APPEAL 
There is hereby authorized for Philadelphia, Mississippi a Board of Adjustment with the powers and duties as hereinafter set forth to be made effective by resolution or order of the Mayorand Board of Aldermen. 
SECTION 2. MEMBERSHIP 
The Philadelphia Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five 
(5) members, residents of the City appointed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen for a term of three (3) years; provided,however, that for the first appointment under the provisions of these Regulations two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years. 
SECTION 3. PROCEDURE 
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its meetings. 
SECTION 4. APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
Appeals may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by any personaggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the City Inspecting Officer. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by filing with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
SECTION 5. POWERS 
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
____ ' 1111__ '-1 
(1) 	
To hear and decide appeals.

(2) 	
Powers Relative to Variances: Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the original adoption of the regulations, or by reason of exceptionaltopographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, which condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict application of these regulationswould result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, the Board of Adjustment is hereby empowered to authorize upon an appeal relating to such property a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, but mayestablish such requirements relative to such property as would carry out the purpose and intent of these regulations.

(3) 	
Powers Relative to Exceptions: Upon appeal, the Board of Adjustment is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions: 

(a) 	
To permit the extension of a district not to exceed on~ hundred (100) feet where the boundary lines of a district divides a lot in singleownership as shown of record. 

(b) 	
To interpret the provisions of these regulations where the street layout actually on the groundvaries from street layout as shown on the mapfixing the several districts which map is attached to and made a part of these regulations. 




In exercising the above mentioned powers of the Board of Adjustment may, in conformance with the provisions of these regulations reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made under these regulations, the Board shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion in the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of the people of Philadelphia,Mississippi. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by a written findings of fact based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the 
II j I_'I)UUL '_ 
Board of Adjustment and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. 
SECTION 6. APPEALS TO A COURT OF LAW 
An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any officer, department, board or bureau of Philadelphia to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen and by filing notice of appeal with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days from the filing of the decision of the Board of Adjustment which notice of appeal as herein provided, the City Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen the original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or rulingof the Board of Adjustment. Any person aggrieved at any final decision of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen may appeal there-from to the Circuit Court of Neshoba County, Mississippi, within the time and in the manner prescribed by law for appeals from any order of the governing authority of a municipality. 
'II I 
SECTION 2. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or anybuilding, structure, or land, is used in violation of this Ordinance, the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,business, or use in or about such premises. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall knowingly and willfully violate the terms, conditions or provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and uponconviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both. Each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
SECTION 3. AMENDMENTS 
The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition from a property owner, ~r on recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend the regulationsand districts herein established. No change in regulations,restrictions or district boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto by the Citycouncil, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen-(15) day's notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in Philadelphia,Mississippi and Neshoba County. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred to the Planning Commission for report. For each petition for amendment to the Zoning Regulations a depositof fifty.dollars ($50.00) shall be required by persons requestingsuch change to pay the cost of legal publication. 
SECTION 4. CLASSIFICATION OF NEWLY ANNEXED PROPERTY 
All annexation of land to the City shall be in an R-1 residential zone unless otherwise classified by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, for a period of time not to exceed one (1)year from the effective date of the Ordinance annexing said property. 
Within this one year period of time the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall instruct the Planning Commission to study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within said annexed 
~IL' I 
area to promote the general welfare, and upon request of such recommendations the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall establish the district classification of said property; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as preventing said Board from establishing the district classification at the time of said annexation. 
SECTION 5. INVALIDITY OF A PART 
In case any portion of these regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of these regulationsshall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
SECTION 6. CONFLICTING REGULATIONS 
It is hereby provided that the provisions of these regulations shall not be construed as being in conflict with the provisions of any other regulations of Philadelphia, Mississippi. In any case when the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of other regulations both apply, the provisions of greatestrestriction shall govern. 
SECTION 7. EMERGENCY CLAUSE 
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof these regulations shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval. 
Passed and adopted this 20th day of October 1987. 
Attest: 
Brenda H. Mills Charles A. McClain City Clerk Mayor 

~~~~~~-- ~ -
'II I
SECTION 2. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure, or land, is used in violation of this
Ordinance, the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings, to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate
such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,
structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall knowingly and
willfully violate the terms, conditions or provisions of this
zoning ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days or both. Each day the violation
continues thereafter shall be a separate offense.
SECTION 3. AMENDMENTS
The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may, from time to time, on its
own motion, or on petition from a property owner, ~r on
recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend the regulations
and districts herein established. No change in regulations,
restrictions or district boundaries shall become effective until
after a public hearing held in relation thereto by the City
council, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen- (15) day's notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an
official paper or paper of general circulation in Philadelphia,
Mississippi and Neshoba County. Every such proposed amendment
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for report. For
each petition for amendment to the Zoning Regulations a deposit
of fifty.dollars ($50.00) shall be required by persons requesting
such change to pay the cost of legal publication.
SECTION 4. CLASSIFICATION OF NEWLY ANNEXED PROPERTY
All annexation of land to the City shall be in an R-1
residential zone unless otherwise classified by the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen, for a period of time not to exceed one (1)
year from the effective date of the Ordinance annexing said
property.
Within this one year period of time the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen shall instruct the Planning Commission to study and make
recommendations concerning the use of land within said annexed
71
~IL' I
area to promote the general welfare, and upon request of such
recommendations the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall establish
the district classification of said property; provided, however,
that this shall not be construed as preventing said Board from
establishing the district classification at the time of said
annexation.
SECTION 5. INVALIDITY OF A PART
In case any portion of these regulations shall be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of these regulations
shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and
effect.
SECTION 6. CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
It is hereby provided that the provisions of these regulations
shall not be construed as being in conflict with the provisions
of any other regulations of Philadelphia, Mississippi. In any
case when the provisions of these regulations and the provisions
of other regulations both apply, the provisions of greatest
restriction shall govern.
SECTION 7. EMERGENCY CLAUSE
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety, an emergency is hereby declared
to exist, by reason whereof these regulations shall take effect
and be in full force from and after its passage and approval.
Passed and adopted this 20th day of October 1987.
Attest:
Brenda H. Mills
City Clerk
Charles A. McClain
Mayor
