BOZEMAN MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
 
> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BOZEMAN, MONTANA 
____________ 
Cynthia Andrus 
Mayor 
____________ 
Chris Mehl, Deputy Mayor 
Jeffrey Krauss 
I-Ho Pomeroy 
Terry Cunningham 
City Commission 
____________ 
Andrea Surratt 
City Manager 
____________ 
Greg Sullivan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Robin Crough 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of 
Bozeman, Montana. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and 
ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the 
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the 
section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative 
tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as 
supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state 
law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the 
Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
CODE 
CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 
CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth 
Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to 
the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the 
project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Greg Sullivan, City Attorney, and Ms. Stacy Ulmen, City Clerk, 
for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that 
their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active 
law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day 
administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City 
of Bozeman, Montana. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of 
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering 
system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used 
or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code 
Corporation and the City of Bozeman, Montana. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Bozeman, Montana. 2011. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and 
permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be 
able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. 
Date  
Adopted 
Included/Omitted 
Supp. No. 1 
1802 
?4-11-2011 
Included 
1804 
?7-11-2011 
Included 
1808 
?7-11-2011 
Included 
1809 
?7-11-2011 
Included 
1811 
?7-11-2011 
Included 
1812 
?7-25-2011 
Included 
1814 
?8-?1-2011 
Included 
1817 
10-24-2011 
Included 
1818 
11-28-2011 
Included 
1819 
11-?7-2011 
Included 
1823 
?3-?5-2012 
Included 
Supp. No. 2 
1827 
?9-10-2012 
Included 
1828 
?9-10-2012 
Included 
1830 
?9-24-2012 
Included 
1831 
?7-25-2012 
Included 
1832 
?6-18-2012 
Included 
1834 
?7-23-2012 
Included 
1838 
?9-10-2012 
Included 
1839 
?9-10-2012 
Included 
1833 
?8-?6-2012 
Included 
1843 
11-?5-2012 
Included 
1849 
12-?3-2012 
Included 
1850 
?1-28-2013 
Included 
1851 
?1-28-2013 
Included 
1853 
?2-25-2013 
Included 
1857 
?3-18-2013 
Included 
1863 
?3-18-2013 
Included 
1864 
?3-18-2013 
Included 
Supp. No. 3 
1856 
?4-22-2013 
Included 
1861 
?6-?3-2013 
Included 
1862 
?6-?3-2013 
Included 
1873 
11-?4-2013 
Included 
1870 
12-16-2013 
Included 
1874 
12-?2-2013 
Included 
1877 
12-?2-2013 
Included 
1875 
?1-13-2014 
Included 
Supp. No. 4 
1887 
?5-19-2014 
Included 
1890 
?6-?2-2014 
Included 
1892 
?7-?7-2014 
Included 
1893 
?8-11-2014 
Included 
1905 
?2-?2-2015 
Included 
Supp. No. 5 
1910 
?5-?4-2015 
Included 
1922 
12-?7-2015 
Included 
1925 
11-16-2015 
Included 
1928 
12-?7-2015 
Omitted 
1930 
?1-?4-2016 
Included 
1927 
?4-11-2016 
Included 
1940 
?4-18-2016 
Included 
1942 
?4-25-2016 
Included 
1944 
?4-25-2016 
Included 
1945 
?4-25-2016 
Included 
1946 
?4-25-2016 
Included 
1948 
?5-?9-2016 
Included 
Supp. No. 6 
1869 
?7-22-2013 
Included 
1915 
11-?7-2016 
Included 
1920 
?2-13-2017 
Included 
1923 
?3-?6-2017 
Included 
1936 
?3-21-2016 
Included 
1950 
?3-20-2017 
Included 
1952 
?7-11-2016 
Included 
1958 
?8-?8-2016 
Omitted 
1959 
11-?7-2016 
Included 
1962 
12-12-2016 
Included 
1963 
12-12-2016 
Included 
1964 
12-12-2016 
Included 
1965 
12-12-2016 
Included 
1970 
?2-?6-2017 
Omitted 
1971 
?3-20-2017 
Included 
1975 
?6-19-2017 
Included 
1977 
?6-22-2017 
Omitted 
Supp. No. 7 
1974 
?9-11-2017  
eff. 12-1-2017 
Included 
1976 
10-?2-2017 
Included 
1979 
10-?9-2017 
Included 
1980 
10-16-2017 
Included 
1993 
?1-?4-2018 
Included 
1978 
?3-31-2018 
Included 
1994 
?3-31-2018 
Included 
1997 
?3-19-2018 
Included 
1998 
?4-23-2018 
Included 
1999 
?4-16-2018 
Included 
2000 
?4-?9-2018 
Included 
2001 
?4-?9-2018 
Included 
2002 
?3-26-2018 
Included 
Order No. 2018-01 
?4-18-2018 
Included 
Supp. No. 8 
2010 
10-?1-2018 
Included 
2013 
12-17-2018 
Included 
2012 
?1-14-2019 
Included 
2014 
?6-?3-2019 
Included 
2019 
?6-?3-2019 
Included 
 


PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Bozeman City Charter proposed by the City of Bozeman's 2004-
2006 Local Government Study Commission and was approved by voters at the November 7, 2006, 
general election. Section 2.03(b) of the charter became effective with the 2007 election; all other sections 
became effective on January 1, 2008. Amendments are indicated by a history note following in 
parentheses following the amended section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Other changes 
made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Self-government Charter, Const. of Mt. Art. XI, § 5; nature of self-government 
local governments, MCA 7-1-101 et seq.; charter government, MCA 7-3-701 et seq. 


PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Bozeman, under the constitution and laws of the State of Montana, in 
order to secure the benefits of local self-government and to provide for an honest and accountable 
commission-manager government, do hereby adopt this Charter and confer upon the city the following 
powers, subject to the following restrictions, and prescribed by the following procedures and 
governmental structure. By this action, we secure the benefits of home rule and self-governance and 
affirm the values of representative democracy, professional management, strong political leadership, 
citizen participation, and regional cooperation. 


ARTICLE I. - POWERS OF THE CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nature of self-government local governments, MCA 7-1-101 et seq. 


Sec. 1.01. - Powers of the City. 
    The City of Bozeman shall have all powers possible for a city with self-governing powers to have 
under the constitution and laws of the State of Montana as fully and completely as though they were 
specifically enumerated in this charter. 


Sec. 1.02. - Construction. 
(a) ?Powers. The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor on the city, 
and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any 
way the general power granted in this article. 
(b) ?Priority Construction. As provided by Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of Montana, provisions 
herein establishing executive, legislative, and administrative structure and organization are superior 
to statutory provisions. 


Sec. 1.03. - Intergovernmental Relations. 
    The City of Bozeman may participate by contract or otherwise with any governmental entity of the 
State of Montana or any other state or states or the United States in the performance of any activity which 
one or more of such entities has the authority to undertake. 


ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— A local government with self-government powers is subject to state laws 
establishing legislative procedures or requirements, MCA 7-1-114(1)(c); local government ordinances, 
resolutions, and initiatives and referendum, MCA 7-5-101 et seq.; office of city council member, MCA 7-4-
4401 et seq.; conduct of municipal government, MCA 7-5-4101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.01. - General Powers and Duties. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the city commission, except as otherwise provided by law or 
this charter, and the commission shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all 
duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 


Sec. 2.02. - Eligibility, Terms, and Composition. 
(a) ?Eligibility. Only registered voters whose principal residence is in the City of Bozeman shall be 
eligible to hold the office of commission member or mayor. 
(b) ?Terms. The term of office of elected officials shall be four years elected in accordance with Article 
VI. 
(c) ?Composition. The commission shall be composed of four members elected by the voters of the city 
at large in accordance with provisions of Article VI and the mayor. The mayor shall be elected as 
provided in §2.03(b). 


Sec. 2.03. - Mayor. 
(a) ?Powers and Duties. The mayor shall be a voting member of the city commission and shall attend 
and preside at meetings of the commission; represent the city in intergovernmental relationships; 
present an annual state of the city message; add an item to the commission agenda prepared by the 
city manager; assign, subject to the consent of commission, agenda items to sub-committees of the 
commission; and perform other duties specified by the commission. The mayor shall be recognized 
as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of 
military law but shall have no administrative duties and shall not interfere with the administration of 
the city as provided in §2.05(c), below. The mayor shall not have any appointment power to city 
boards except where required by state law. 
(b) ?Mayor Elected At Large. At every regular city election the voters of the city shall elect a mayor at 
large for a term of four years. The person so elected shall serve as deputy mayor and a 
commissioner for the first two years of his or her term, and mayor for the balance of his or her term 
of office. 
State Law reference— Office of mayor, MCA 7-4-4301 et seq. 


Sec. 2.04. - Compensation; Expenses. 
    The city commission may determine the annual salary of the mayor and commission members by 
ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of 
commencement of the terms of commission members elected at the next regular election. The mayor and 
commission members shall receive their actual ordinary and necessary expenses incurred in the 
performance of their duties of office. 
State Law reference— Compensation of municipal officers and employees, MCA 7-4-4201 et 
seq. 


Sec. 2.05. - Prohibitions. 
(a) ?Holding Other Office. Except where authorized by law, no commission member shall hold any other 
elected public office during the term for which the member was elected to the commission. No 
commission member shall hold any other city office or employment during the term for which the 
member was elected to the commission. No former commission member shall hold any 
compensated appointive office or employment with the city until one year after the expiration of the 
term for which the member was elected to the commission, unless granted a waiver by the board of 
ethics. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the commission from selecting any 
current or former commission member to represent the city on the governing board of any regional or 
other intergovernmental agency, or any city board. 
(b) ?Appointments and Removals. Neither the city commission nor any of its members shall in any 
manner control or demand the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer or employee 
whom the city manager or any subordinate of the city manager is empowered to appoint, but the 
commission may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything 
pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c) ?Interference with Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries, and investigations under §2.09, 
the commission or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the 
direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the 
commission nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or 
privately. 


Sec. 2.06. - Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
a) ?Vacancies. The office of a commission member shall become vacant upon the member's death, 
resignation, or removal from office or forfeiture of office in any manner authorized by law. If the 
mayor is absent, incapacitated, dies, resigns from office, or is removed from office, the deputy mayor 
shall succeed as mayor during said time or absence or incapacity or for the balance of the mayor's 
term, as appropriate; and the commission vacancy created therein shall be filled pursuant to this 
section. 
b) ?Forfeiture of Office. A commission member shall forfeit that office if the commission member: 
(1) ?Fails to meet the residency requirements, 
(2) ?Violates any express prohibition of this charter, 
(3) ?Is convicted of a felony, or 
(4) ?Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission without being excused 
by a majority of the Commission. 
c) ?Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the city commission shall be filled for the remainder of the 
unexpired term, pursuant to state law. 
State Law reference— Filling of vacancy, MCA 7-4-4112. 


Sec. 2.07. - Judge of Qualifications. 
    The city commission shall be the judge of the grounds for forfeiture of a member's office, pursuant to 
§2.06.b. In order to exercise these powers, the commission shall have power to subpoena witnesses, 
administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting 
grounds for forfeiture of office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing 
shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city pursuant to state law. 


Sec. 2.08. - City Clerk. 
    The city commission or the city manager, as designated by ordinance, shall appoint an officer of the 
city who shall have the title of city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of commission meetings to its 
members and the public, keep the journal of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are 
assigned by this charter, by the commission or by state law. 
State Law reference— Office of municipal clerk, MCA 7-4-4501 et seq. 


Sec. 2.09. - Investigations. 
    The city commission may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city 
department, office, or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take 
testimony, and require the production of evidence. Failure or refusal to obey a lawful order issued in the 
exercise of these powers by the commission shall be a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to state law. 


Sec. 2.10. - Procedure. 
    The city commission shall, by ordinance, establish its rules of procedure and time and place of 
meetings, in accordance with state law. 


Sec. 2.11. - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
    In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this charter to be done by 
ordinance, those acts of the city commission shall be by ordinance which: 
(1) ?Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish any city department, 
office, or agency; 
(2) ?Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or 
other penalty is imposed; 
(3) ?Levy a new tax; 
(4) ?Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(5) ?Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the city; 
(6) ?Adopt or amend zoning and subdivision regulations; 
(7) ?Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted; or 
(8) ?Adopt, with or without amendment, ordinances proposed under the initiative power. 
Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance or by 
resolution. 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinances and resolutions, MCA 7-5-4201 et seq. 


Sec. 2.12. - Ordinances in General. 
    Ordinances, regular, emergency, and technical regulations, will be proposed, published, and 
approved in accordance with state law. In addition to the requirements of state law, ordinances, 
administrative regulations, resolutions, and the Bozeman Municipal Code will be published electronically. 


ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 


Sec. 3.01. - Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. 
    The city commission, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a city manager for an 
indefinite term and fix the manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the 
basis of education and experience in the accepted competencies and practices of local government 
management. The manager need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment, but may 
reside outside the city while in office only with the approval of the commission. 


Sec. 3.02. - Removal. 
    If the city manager declines to resign at the request of the city commission, the city commission may 
suspend the manager by a resolution approved by the majority of the total membership of the city 
commission. Such resolution shall set forth the reasons for suspension and proposed removal. A copy of 
such resolution shall be served immediately upon the city manager. The city manager shall have fifteen 
days in which to reply thereto in writing and, upon request, shall be afforded a public hearing, which shall 
occur not earlier than ten days nor later than fifteen days after such hearing is requested. After the public 
hearing, if one is requested, and after full consideration, the city commission, by a majority vote of its total 
membership, may adopt a final resolution of removal. The city manager shall continue to receive full 
salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 


Sec. 3.03. - Acting City Manager. 
    By administrative order filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate a city officer or 
employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the manager's temporary 
absence or disability. The city commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another 
officer of the city to serve until the city manager returns. 


Sec. 3.04. - Powers and Duties of the City Manager. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city, responsible to the commission for 
the management of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. The city 
manager shall: 
(1) ?Appoint and suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers 
provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter, or 
personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any 
administrative officer subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these 
powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(2) ?Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, 
except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3) ?Attend all city commission meetings unless excused. The city manager shall have the right to 
take part in discussion but shall not vote; 
(4) ?See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city commission subject to 
enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and 
supervision are faithfully executed; 
(5) ?Prepare and submit the annual budget and multi-year capital program to the city commission 
for its approval, and execute the final budget approved by the commission to achieve the goals 
of the city; 
(6) ?Submit to the city commission and make available to the public a complete report on the 
finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7) ?Make such other reports as the city commission may require concerning operations; 
(8) ?Keep the city commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
(9) ?Make recommendations to the city commission concerning the affairs of the city and facilitate 
the work of the city commission in developing policy; 
(10) ?Provide staff support services for the mayor and commission members subject to the 
provisions regarding the city clerk under §2.08; 
(11) ?Assist the commission in developing long term goals for the city and strategies to implement 
these goals; 
(12) ?Encourage and provide staff support for regional and intergovernmental cooperation; 
(13) ?Promote partnerships among commission, staff, and citizens in developing public policy and 
building a sense of community; 
(14) ?Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the city 
commission; 
(15) ?Prepare the commission agenda; and 
(16) ?Appoint members of temporary advisory committees established by the city manager or the 
city commission. 


ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Officers and employees, MCA 7-4-101 et seq. 


Sec. 4.01. - General Provisions. 
(a) ?Creation of Departments. The city commission may establish city departments, offices, or agencies 
in addition to those created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, 
offices, and agencies. No function assigned by this charter to a particular department, office, or 
agency may be discontinued or, unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other. 
(b) ?Direction by city manager. All departments, offices, and agencies under the direction and 
supervision of the city manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the 
direction and supervision of the city manager. With the consent of commission, the city manager may 
serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices, or agencies or may appoint one person 
as the head of two or more of them. 


Sec. 4.02. - Personnel System. 
    Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, all appointments and promotions of city officers 
and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and qualifications demonstrated by a valid and 
reliable examination or other evidence of competence. 


Sec. 4.03. - Legal Officer. 
(a) ?Appointment. There shall be a legal officer of the city appointed by the city manager subject to 
confirmation by the city commission. 
(b) ?Role. The legal officer shall serve as chief legal adviser to the commission, the manager and all city 
departments, offices and agencies, shall represent the city in all legal proceedings, and shall perform 
any other duties prescribed by state law, by this charter, or by ordinance. 
State Law reference— Office of city attorney, MCA 7-4-4601 et seq. 


Sec. 4.04. - Land Use, Development, and Environmental Planning. 
    Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws with respect to land use, development, and 
environmental planning, the city commission shall: 
(1) ?Designate an agency or agencies to carry out the planning function and such decision-making 
responsibilities as may be specified by ordinance; 
(2) ?Adopt a comprehensive plan and determine to what extent zoning and other land use control 
ordinances must be consistent with the plan; 
(3) ?Determine to what extent the comprehensive plan and zoning and other land use ordinances 
must be consistent with regional plan(s); and 
(4) ?Adopt development regulations, to be specified by ordinance, to implement the plan. 
The designated agency, the city manager, and the mayor and commission shall seek to act in 
cooperation with other jurisdictions and organizations in their region to promote integrated approaches to 
regional issues. 
State Law reference— Land resources and use, MCA 76-1-101 et seq. 


Sec. 4.05. - Municipal Court. 
    There shall be a municipal court as prescribed by state law. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, MCA 3-6-101 et seq. 


Sec. 4.06. - Neighborhood Associations. 
(a) ?Purpose. The citizens of Bozeman value the contribution neighborhoods can make to the 
governance of the city. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to strengthen neighborhood 
participation where it exists, and to encourage and support neighborhood participation where it does 
not yet exist. 
(b) ?Recognition of neighborhood associations. The city commission shall establish by ordinance 
minimum recognition requirements for neighborhood associations. These standards shall include, 
but not be limited to: 
(1) ?clear geographic boundaries; 
(2) ?procedures for defining a resident for neighborhood association membership; 
(3) ?adherence to established by-laws that ensure democratic deliberative and voting procedures; 
(4) ?periodic meetings, including an annual meeting; 
(5) ?copy of the by-laws and all amendments filed with the city; 
(6) ?inclusion of all residents in the neighborhood association; and 
(7) ?demonstrating that it has a means of communicating with all residents in a neighborhood 
association. 
(c) ?Minimum Standards. A neighborhood association must meet and continue to maintain conformity 
with the minimum standards as established by ordinance in order to be recognized by the city and to 
be eligible to elect members to the InterNeighborhood Council. Neighborhood associations existing 
on the date of the enactment of this charter shall have one year after the enactment of said city 
ordinance to come into compliance. 
(d) ?InterNeighborhood Council. There is hereby established an InterNeighborhood Council to be 
composed of representatives selected by each recognized neighborhood association. 
(1) ?The InterNeighborhood Council shall provide a forum for Neighborhood Associations to come 
together, share information, and make recommendations to the city commission, city staff, and 
the mayor on city-wide issues. This does not preclude a neighborhood association from taking 
its concerns directly to the city or the commission. 
(2) ?The InterNeighborhood Council shall meet on a regular basis to address city-wide concerns 
and foster dialogue between neighborhoods. 
(3) ?The InterNeighborhood Council shall adopt by-laws governing the conduct of their business. 
Such by-laws shall be approved by the city commission, or as designated by ordinance. A 
vacancy on the InterNeighborhood Council shall be filled only by the affected neighborhood 
association. The city may appoint a city commissioner as a non-voting member of the 
InterNeighborhood Council. 
(e) ?City Liaison. The City shall designate a staff member to serve as liaison to the InterNeighborhood 
Council and neighborhood associations. 


Sec. 4.07. - City Boards, Commissions and Committees. 
    Except for boards and commissions established by statute, the commission may create boards, 
commissions, or committees as determined necessary. All city boards, commissions, or committees will 
be established by the city commission and members appointed by the commission and the mayor, when 
so required by law, following a public solicitation through the newspaper advertised not less than twice 
annually. Between public solicitations for members, appointments may be made to fill unexpected 
vacancies or vacancies not filled through the last round of advertisements from those applications on file 
as of the date of appointment. Subcommittees of existing boards, commissions, or committees may be 
appointed by the city commission without the necessity of public solicitation. The commission may 
authorize the city manager to establish ad hoc special commissions for specific purposes without public 
advertisement. Except where prohibited by law, the terms on all boards shall be staggered. 


ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Financial administration and taxation, MCA 7-6-101 et seq.; debt management, 
MCA 7-7-101 et seq. 


Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June, or as 
otherwise provided by state law. 


Sec. 5.02. - Submission of Budgets and Budget Message. 
    The city manager shall submit to the city commission a preliminary budget for the ensuing fiscal year 
and an accompanying message and a final budget, both in a timely manner. The publication requirements 
must conform to the provisions of state law for a municipality and be available electronically. 


Sec. 5.03. - Budget Message. 
    The city manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work 
programs, linking those programs to organizational goals and community priorities. It shall outline the 
proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and the impact of those policies on future 
years. It shall describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current 
year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes; 
summarize the city's debt position, including factors affecting the ability to raise resources through debt 
issues; and include such other material as the city manager deems desirable. 


Sec. 5.04. - Budget. 
(a) ?Statutory Provisions. The preliminary annual operating budget, the final budget, and amended 
budgets must be prepared in accordance with state laws governing municipal budgets as then in 
effect. 
(b) ?Unreserved Fund Balance. A minimum level of budgeted general fund unreserved fund balance 
shall be established by ordinance and shall be in accordance with the GFOA (Government Finance 
Officers Association) recommended practice on appropriate levels of unreserved fund balance in the 
general fund. This provision does not limit appropriations in case of emergency pursuant to state law. 


Sec. 5.05. - Adjusting Appropriations. 
(a) ?Reduction of Appropriations. In addition to the requirements of state law, if at any time during the 
fiscal year it appears probable to the city manager that the revenues or fund balances available will 
be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been authorized, the 
manager shall report to the city commission without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the 
deficit, any remedial action taken by the manager, and recommendations as to any other steps to be 
taken. The commission shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or 
reduce any deficit and, for that purpose, it may by ordinance reduce or eliminate one or more 
appropriations. 
(b) ?Transfer of Appropriations. In addition to the requirements of state law, at any time during or before 
the fiscal year, the city commission may by resolution transfer part or all of the unencumbered 
appropriation balance from one department, fund, service, or organizational unit to the appropriation 
for other departments or organizational units or a new appropriation as provided by state law. The 
city manager may transfer funds among programs within a department, fund, service, or 
organizational unit and shall report such transfers to the commission in writing in a timely manner. 
(c) ?Limitation; Effective Date. In addition to the requirements of state law, no appropriation for debt 
service may be reduced or transferred, except to the extent that the debt is refinanced and less debt 
service is required, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be 
appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental 
and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer or appropriations authorized by this section 
may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 


Sec. 5.06. - Administration and Fiduciary Oversight of the Budget. 
    The city commission shall provide by ordinance the procedures for administration and fiduciary 
oversight of the budget. 


Sec. 5.07. - Capital Program. 
(a) ?Submission to City Commission. The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city commission 
a multi-year capital program no later than December 15 for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b) ?Contents. The capital program shall include: 
(1) ?A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2) ?Identification of the long-term goals of the community; 
(3) ?A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be 
undertaken during the fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to 
the necessity for each; 
(4) ?Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital 
expenditure; 
(5) ?Method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant; 
(6) ?The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or 
acquired; 
(7) ?A commentary on how the plan addresses the sustainability of the community and the region of 
which it is a part; and 
(8) ?Methods to measure outcomes and performance of the capital plan related to the long-term 
goals of the community. 
The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or 
in process of construction or acquisition. 


Sec. 5.08. - City Commission Action on Capital Program. 
(a) ?Notice and Hearing. The city commission shall publish the general summary of the capital program 
and a notice stating: 
(1) ?The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the 
public, and 
(2) ?The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the 
capital program. 
(b) ?Adoption. The city commission by resolution shall adopt the capital program for the ensuing fiscal 
year, with or without amendment after the public hearing, but no later than the last day of March of 
the current fiscal year. 


Sec. 5.09. - Independent Audit. 
    The city commission shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts in accordance 
with state law and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. No accountant or firm 
may provide any other services to the city during the time it is retained to provide independent audits to 
the city; however, the city commission may waive this requirement by a majority vote at a public meeting. 


ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, MCA 13-1-101 et seq. 


Sec. 6.01. - City Elections. 
(a) ?Regular Elections. Regular city elections shall be held and administered in odd numbered years, 
pursuant to state law. Candidates shall run for office without party designation. 
(b) ?Beginning of term. The terms of new commission members shall start at the beginning of the first 
regularly scheduled meeting in January after their election. 


Sec. 6.02. - Methods of Electing Commission Members. 
    At the first election under this charter, commission members shall be elected at large for four-year 
terms. The mayor shall be elected pursuant to §2.03(b). 


Sec. 6.03. - Initiative; Citizen Referendum, and Recall. 
    The powers of initiative, citizen referendum, and recall are hereby reserved to the electors of the city 
as provided by state law. In verifying petitions for initiatives and referendums, the percentage of 
signatures required under state law shall be reduced in proportion to the number of inactive registered 
voters as most recently certified by the county election administrator pursuant to state law. 


ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 7.01. - Conflicts of Interest; Board of Ethics. 
(a) ?Conflicts of Interest. The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. The city commission shall 
implement this prohibition by ordinance, the terms of which shall include, but not be limited to: acting 
in an official capacity on matters in which the official has a private financial interest clearly separate 
from that of the general public, the acceptance of gifts and other things of value, acting in a private 
capacity on matters dealt with as a public official, the use of confidential information, and 
appearances by city officials before other city agencies on behalf of private interests. This ordinance 
shall include a statement of purpose and shall provide for reasonable public disclosure of finances by 
officials with major decision-making authority over monetary expenditures and contractual and 
regulatory matters and, insofar as permissible under state law, shall provide for fines and 
imprisonment for violations. 
(b) ?Board of Ethics. The city commission shall, by ordinance, establish an independent board of ethics 
pursuant to state law. The city commission shall appropriate sufficient funds to the city manager to 
provide annual training and education of city officials, city boards, and employees regarding the state 
and city ethics codes. City officials, board members, and employees shall take an oath to uphold the 
state and city ethics codes. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, MCA 2-2-101 et seq. 


Sec. 7.02. - Campaign Finance. 
    In order to combat the potential for, and appearance of, corruption and to preserve the ability of all 
qualified citizens to run for public office, the city shall, insofar as is permitted by state and federal law, 
have the authority to enact ordinances designed to limit contributions and expenditures by candidates for 
locally elected office. Ordinances pursuant to this section may include, but are not limited to: limitations 
on candidate and candidate committees that affect the amount, time, place, and source of financial and 
in-kind contributions; and voluntary limitations on candidate and candidate committee expenditures tied to 
financial or non-financial incentives. 


ARTICLE VIII. - CHARTER AMENDMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Amendment of charter, MCA 7-3-709. 


Sec. 8.01. - Proposal of Amendment. 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and proposed: 
(1) ?In the manner provided by state law, or 
(2) ?By ordinance of the commission containing the full text of the proposed amendment, or 
(3) ?By report of a study commission created pursuant to state law, or 
(4) ?By voters of the city. Proposal of an amendment by the voters of the city shall be by petition 
containing the full text of the proposed amendment and shall be governed by the same 
procedures and requirements prescribed in Article VI for initiative petitions until such time as a 
final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition is made, except that there shall be no 
limitation as to subject matter and that the petition must be signed by registered voters of the 
city equal to that required by state law. In verifying petitions, the percentage of required 
signatures shall be reduced pursuant to §6.03, above. 


Sec. 8.02. - Election. 
    Upon delivery to the election authorities of the report of a charter commission or delivery by the city 
clerk of an adopted ordinance or a petition finally determined sufficient, proposing an amendment 
pursuant to §8.01, or as otherwise provided by state law, the election authorities shall submit the 
proposed amendment to the voters of the city at an election, pursuant to state law. 


Sec. 8.03. - Adoption of Amendment. 
    If a majority of those voting upon a proposed charter amendment vote in favor of it, the amendment 
shall become effective at the time fixed in the amendment or, if no time is therein fixed, 30 days after its 
adoption by the voters. 


ARTICLE IX. - TRANSITION AND SEVERABILITY 


Sec. 9.01. - Officers, Employees and Elected Officials. 
(a) ?Rights and Privileges Preserved. Nothing in this charter except as otherwise specifically provided, 
shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time 
of its adoption. 
(b) ?Continuance of Office or Employment. Except as specifically provided by this charter if, at the time 
this charter takes full effect, a city administrative officer or employee holds any office or position 
which is or can be abolished by or under this charter, he or she shall continue in such office or 
position until the taking effect of some specific provision under this charter directing that he or she 
vacate the office or position. Elected officials serving at the time this charter is approved by the 
voters shall continue in office for the balance of their term. 
(c) ?Personnel System. An employee holding a city position at the time this charter takes full effect, who 
was serving in that same or a comparable position at the time of its adoption, shall not be subject to 
competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position but in all other respects shall be 
subject to the personnel system provided for in §4.02. 


Sec. 9.02. - Pending Matters. 
    All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal administrative proceedings shall continue 
except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried 
on, or dealt with by the city department, office, or agency appropriate under this charter. 


Sec. 9.03. - State and Municipal Laws. 
    All city ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations in force when this charter becomes fully 
effective shall be updated to conform with this charter pursuant to state law. Any ordinance or resolution 
required to be established pursuant to this charter shall be completed as required by state law. 


Sec. 9.04. - Schedule. 
(a) ?Mayor Election. Section 2.03(b) shall take effect with the 2007 city election, with said mayor being 
seated after serving as deputy mayor at the beginning of the first commission meeting in January, 
2010. 
(b) ?Referendum on Increasing the Commission. At the general election in 2010, the city commission 
shall place before the voters, with conforming charter amendments, the issue of adding two 
members to the city commission. Should the voters approve said increase, said commission 
members shall be elected during the regular city election in 2011 and seated at the first regular 
commission meeting in January 2012. 
(c) ?Time of Taking Full Effect. The charter shall be in full effect for all purposes pursuant to the 
schedule established by state law. 


Sec. 9.05. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected. 
If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the 
application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 


CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance  
Number 
Date 
Section 
?Section  
this Charter 
 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 1.01.010. - Title; citation; reference. 
    This Code shall be known as the "Bozeman Municipal Code" and it may be referred to as the 
Bozeman Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or any proceeding 
at law or equity. Prosecutions for violations of the city's ordinances and actions based thereon shall refer 
to the sections of this Code as well as the underlying ordinance upon which the prosecution or action is 
based. Amendments to any ordinance or portions thereof of Bozeman, Montana, shall also refer to the 
Bozeman Municipal Code sections under which such ordinances are codified. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.020; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 
State Law reference— Register of ordinances and codification, MCA 7-5-107; adoption and 
amendment of codes by reference, MCA 7-5-108. 


Sec. 1.01.020. - Provisions codified. 
    This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative 
ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.030; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.030. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city and this Code, shall 
be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or 
unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such 
words or phrases: 
1. ?Agencies. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency, shall include any successor 
agency. 
2. ?City. The term "city" means the City of Bozeman, Montana, or the area within the territorial limits 
of the City of Bozeman, Montana, and such territory outside the city over which the city has 
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
3. ?City commission. The term "city commission" means the City commission of the City of 
Bozeman. "All its members" or "all commissioners" means the total number of commissioners 
holding office. 
4. ?Code. The term "Code" means the "Bozeman Municipal Code," as designated in section 
1.01.010. 
5. ?County. The term "county" means the county of Gallatin. 
6. ?Health department. The term "health department" means the Gallatin City/County Health 
Department or any other health department created by the city commission pursuant to title 50, 
MCA. 
7. ?Law. The term "law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of 
Montana, the ordinances of the City of Bozeman, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and 
regulations which may be promulgated thereunder, and including all amendatory or successor 
laws or rules. 
8. ?May. The term "may" is permissive. 
9. ?MCA. The abbreviation "MCA" shall mean the Montana Code Annotated, as hereafter amended, 
and any successor statute. 
10. ?Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
11. ?Must, shall. The terms "must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
12. ?Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, 
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and 
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
13. ?Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, means and includes any part 
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part 
of such building or land. 
14. ?Person. The term "person" means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock 
company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or 
the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of any of them. 
15. ?Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, 
things in action and evidences of debt. 
16. ?Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, 
respectively. 
17. ?Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
18. ?Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and 
hereditaments. 
19. ?Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the 
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
20. ?State. The term "state" means the State of Montana. 
21. ?Street. The term "street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, 
courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may 
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in 
any law of this state. 
22. ?Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, mean and 
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or 
with others. 
23. ?Written. The term "written" means and includes printed, type-written, mimeographed, 
multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
24. ?Year. The term "year" means a calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.010; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982; Ord. No. 1950 , § 2, 3-20-2017) 
State Law reference— General laws and definitions, MCA 1-1-101 et seq. 


Sec. 1.01.040. - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the 
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and 
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and 
appropriate meaning. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.030; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.050. - Grammatical interpretation. 
A. ?The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city and this Code, unless it is 
apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
1. ?Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
2. ?Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
3. ?Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, 
unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.040; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.060. - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the Bozeman Municipal Code or to any portion 
thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and 
additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.050; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.070. - Chapter, article, division, subdivision and section headings. 
    Chapter, article, division, subdivision and section headings contained in this Code shall not be 
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of 
any chapter, article, division, subdivision or section hereof. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.060; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.080. - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are 
otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise 
and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the 
corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.070; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.090. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, 
employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.020; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.100. - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by this Code or an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as 
well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts 
performed by an authorized agent. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.050; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.110. - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, 
allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.060; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.120. - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be 
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, 
in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.070; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.130. - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are to be construed with 
a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.080; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.140. - Repeal shall not renew any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or renew any 
ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Code 1982, § 1.04.090; Ord. No. 1118, § 2, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.150. - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or 
portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, 
which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of 
any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed 
as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or 
penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or 
cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all 
rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.080; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.160. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
A. ?Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal any of the following when not 
inconsistent with this Code: 
1. ?Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or 
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or 
any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
2. ?Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the commission; 
3. ?The annual tax levy; 
4. ?Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution on any person or corporation; 
5. ?Any ordinance relating to the city boundaries or the corporate limits; 
6. ?Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
7. ?Any ordinance naming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; 
8. ?Any ordinance relating to street, sidewalk, alley, sewer and other public improvements and 
assessments; 
9. ?Any ordinance relating to zoning map amendments; 
10. ?Any ordinance relating to schedules containing descriptions of restricted or prohibited parking 
areas and one-way streets; 
11. ?Any ordinance relating to the establishment or designation of through streets or stop 
intersections or the turning or moving of vehicles; 
12. ?Any ordinance relating to automatic grade crossing signals; 
13. ?Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective 
date of this Code. 


Sec. 1.01.170. - Special ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall contain a specific codification instruction. The city attorney has discretion 
whether to codify special ordinances of restricted application, such as those providing for emergency or 
interim measures; bond issues; elections; the conveyance of real property; the granting, renewal, or 
extension of a franchise; annexations; street vacations and dedications; street and sidewalk 
improvements; and the repeal of other ordinances. Such ordinances, if not codified, shall be kept in a 
separate index by the city clerk. 


Sec. 1.01.180. - Codification powers. 
    The city attorney may change the wording of captions; rearrange sections and change reference 
numbers to agree with the renumbered chapters, sections or other parts; substitute the proper 
subsection, section, chapter or other division numbers; strike out figures or words that are merely 
repetitious; change capitalization and style for the purpose of uniformity; and correct manifest clerical or 
typographical errors. 


Sec. 1.01.190. - Supplementation of Code. 
A. ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever 
authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive 
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission during the period covered 
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all 
amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that 
they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become 
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been 
inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in 
the supplement. 
B. ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
C. ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or 
organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in 
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to 
embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
1. ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
2. ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the 
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
3. ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision 
numbers; 
4. ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," 
"this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers 
to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance 
incorporated into the Code); and 
5. ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the 
Code. 


Sec. 1.01.200. - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be 
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
The city commission declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, 
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, 
sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this 
Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance shall be in full force and 
effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1.01.100; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 1982) 


Sec. 1.01.210. - General penalty for Code violations. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided in the Bozeman Municipal Code, any person, firm or 
corporation, their agents or servants, who violates any of the provisions of the Bozeman Municipal Code 
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in any 
sum not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine 
and imprisonment, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses of the case. A separate offense shall 
be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1982, § 1.16.010; Ord. No. 1372, § 1, 1993) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCA 7-1-111(8), 7-5-109. 


Sec. 1.01.220. - Criminal restitution. 
    Pursuant to MCS 46-18-201(5), as amended, and Art. II Sect. 28(1) and Art. II Sect. (36)(1)(n) of the 
Constitution of the State of Montana, in addition to any other penalties imposed, if a person has been 
found guilty of violating a provision of this Code that constitutes a misdemeanor, upon a verdict of guilty 
or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and the sentencing judge finds that a victim, as defined in MCA 46-
18-242, as amended, has sustained a pecuniary loss, the sentencing judge shall, as part of the sentence, 
require payment of full restitution to the victim, as provided in MCA 46-18-241 through 46-18-249, 
regardless of whether any part of the sentence is deferred or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1975 , § 2, 6-19-2017) 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Government structure and administration, MCA 2-1-101 et seq.; nature of self-
government local governments, MCA 7-1-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 2.01.010. - Corporate seal adopted. 
    A seal of circular form, with the words "City of Bozeman, Gallatin County, Montana," on the edge of 
the circle, and having in the center thereof a self-binding harvester and a prostrate sheaf, and underneath 
the date 1883, is hereby adopted and declared to be the corporate seal of the city of Bozeman, to be 
used in all cases in which a seal is necessary to be used by the corporation. 
(Code 1982, § 1.08.010) 


ARTICLE 2. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— A local government with self-government powers is subject to state laws 
establishing legislative procedures or requirements, MCA 7-1-114(1)(c); local government ordinances, 
resolutions, and initiatives and referendum, MCA 7-5-101 et seq.; office of city council member, MCA 7-4-
4401 et seq.; conduct of municipal government, MCA 7-5-4101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.02.010. - Oath of office. 
    Every person elected commissioner shall, within ten days thereafter, file with the city clerk an oath of 
office which the clerk shall then file with the county clerk and recorder. 
(Code 1982, § 2.04.010; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.010), 12-3-2007; 
Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.010), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 1807, § 2(2.04.010), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.020. - Mayor and deputy mayor; powers and duties. 
    The presiding officer of the commission shall be the mayor. During the absence of the mayor, the 
deputy mayor shall discharge the duties and exercise the powers and authority of the mayor. The 
presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings of the commission and confine 
members in debates to the question under consideration. The presiding officer may assign each 
commissioner to a seat at the commission table as the presiding officer deems advisable. Upon passing 
the gavel, the presiding officer may move or second any item of business then before the commission 
and may not resume presiding officer status until the motion is decided. The presiding officer shall state, 
or cause to be stated, every motion coming before the commission, announce the decision of the 
commission on all subjects, and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the 
commission, in which event a majority vote of the commission shall govern and conclusively determine 
such question of order. The presiding officer shall vote on all questions with the presiding officer's name 
being called last. The mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the commission during 
the mayor's presence. In the event of the absence of the mayor, the deputy mayor or presiding officer 
shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted. 
(Code 1982, § 2.04.030; Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.030), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.030), 
2-23-2009; Ord. No. 1807, § 3(2.04.020), 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 2000 , § 1, 4-9-2018) 


Sec. 2.02.030. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall, pursuant to section 2.02.130, record all meetings of the commission and shall 
create minutes of the proceedings of the commission and shall maintain all files and records, including 
the record of all ordinances and resolutions, and perform such other duties as may be required by 
ordinance or resolution or order of the commission, and the city clerk shall be the custodian of the 
corporate seal of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.060), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.060), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 4(2.04.030), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.040. - Parliamentary authority. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided herein or provided by statute, all meetings and hearings of the 
commission shall be conducted in accordance with this article. In all cases not covered by this article, the 
controlling parliamentary authority shall be the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.100), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.100), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 5(2.04.040), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.050. - Meeting agendas. 
A. ?All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be 
submitted to the commission shall be submitted to the city clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 
Thursday immediately preceding the next scheduled commission meeting; provided, however, the 
city manager may approve late submittals deemed to be in the city's best interest, but only if the 
items are provided to the commission and made available to the public at least 48 hours prior to the 
scheduled meeting time, excepting items of an emergency nature. The city clerk, the mayor, and the 
city manager shall arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business specified herein, 
and furnish each member of the commission, the city manager, city attorney and the public through 
the city's website with a copy of the agenda and all supporting information no later than 48 hours 
immediately preceding the commission meeting for which that item has been scheduled. Copies of 
the agenda shall be available from the city clerk and one copy shall be posted at the designated 
posting board in the city hall for public viewing and made available on the city's website. Pursuant to 
MCA 7-1-4135, the city commission designates as its official posting place the posting board in the 
lobby of city hall located at 121 North Rouse, Bozeman, Montana. 
B. ?The city manager shall prepare the commission regular meeting agenda and shall consult with the 
mayor in preparing the agenda. The mayor or any three commissioners may add to or remove an 
item from the agenda. The agenda shall be in substantially the following form: 
1. ?Executive session (if required). 
2. ?Pledge and moment of silence. 
3. ?Changes to the agenda (if required). 
4. ?Public service announcement (if required). 
5. ?Approval of minutes. 
6. ?Consent items (consent items are those which staff considers no discussion is necessary, 
including resolutions. However, at the beginning of each meeting, any commissioner may 
request items be removed from the consent agenda for the purpose of discussion. 
7. ?Public comment. 
8. ?Special presentations (if required). 
9. ?Action items. 
10. ?FYI/discussion. 
11. ?Adjournment. 
The order of the above may be adjusted by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.110), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.110), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 6(2.04.050), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.060. - Call to order. 
    The mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the deputy mayor, shall take the chair precisely at the hour 
appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the commission to order. In the absence of the 
mayor or deputy mayor, the city clerk shall call the commission to order, whereupon a temporary 
presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the commission present. Upon the arrival of the 
mayor or deputy mayor, the temporary presiding officer shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of 
the agenda item immediately pending before the commission. The city clerk shall enter the names of 
those commissioners present in the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.130), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.120), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 7(2.04.060), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.070. - Meetings. 
A. ?General/regular meetings. 
1. ?The city commission shall hold a regular meeting on each of the first four Mondays of every 
month. The city commission may hold a regular meeting on the fifth Monday of the month. The 
commission shall meet in regular session from 6:00 p.m. to no later than 10:00 p.m. in the City 
Commission Room, City Hall, 121 North Rouse Avenue, or in an alternative location as duly 
noticed to the public. However, when the day affixed for any regular meeting of the commission 
falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meeting may be 
scheduled at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a holiday or the meeting may be 
canceled by the commission. 
2. ?The meeting may be extended beyond the time specified in subsection A.1 of this section by the 
mayor or a majority vote of the members of the commission should additional matters remain on 
the commission agenda. 
3. ?Any meeting of the commission may be adjourned to a later date and time, provided that no 
adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular or specially scheduled 
meeting. 
4. ?The mayor or majority of the commission may cancel a regular meeting if no business is 
scheduled for that meeting. 
B. ?Public hearings. 
1. ?Public hearings are meetings of the commission required to be held as a public hearing 
pursuant to law. The provisions of subsection A of this section apply to public hearings. 
2. ?Unless prohibited by law, a public hearing may be rescheduled or adjourned to a later date and 
time. 
C. ?Executive sessions. Executive sessions are meetings of the commission with the purpose to discuss 
litigation strategy, a matter of individual privacy, or other matters wherein a meeting may be closed 
pursuant to law and will be scheduled as needed. Although each executive session will commence 
as an open public meeting, executive sessions may be closed to the public pursuant to authority and 
limitations in MCA 2-3-201 et seq. An executive session may be called at any time during any 
meeting if authorized by law. 
D. ?Work or policy sessions. Work or policy sessions are meetings of the commission to review 
forthcoming issues of import to the city and programs of the city, receive progress reports on current 
programs or projects, view sites or community projects of interest, or receive other similar 
information from the city manager and staff. All discussions and conclusions thereon shall be 
informal and no final action may be taken, but the commission may give direction to staff regarding 
items to be scheduled for a future action. Work or policy sessions provide an informal setting for 
discussion of topics for which no formal action is immediately required. At the commission's 
discretion, public comment may be received during the work or policy session. The commission work 
or policy sessions may be scheduled as needed and may be held during a regular meeting. The 
commission is not bound by Robert's Rules of Order during work or policy sessions. 
E. ?Optional concept reviews. The commission may, at the request of a landowner, developer or other 
interested party considering the future submittal of a land use development application, conduct a 
concept review. Concept review is an initial, informal exchange of ideas prior to formal submittal of a 
land use development application. The commission's decision on any subsequently submitted formal 
application will be based on staff findings, the applicable criteria, applicant presentation, evidence 
submitted and public testimony provided at a regular meeting or public hearing. A final decision 
regarding any item discussed during a concept review may not be based on information provided 
during the concept review. Formal public comment will be received during review of a formal 
application; however, the commission may, at its discretion, accept questions and written comment 
from the public during the concept reviews. The commission is not bound by Robert's Rules of Order 
during concept reviews. 
F. ?Optional post mortem reviews. Post mortem review is a review by the commission of a previous 
decision but is not a reconsideration of a previous item. Following action on any matter, the 
commission may request a post mortem review to be scheduled at a subsequent meeting to 
determine if revisions to code provisions or other procedural changes are needed to address 
concerns raised during consideration of the particular agenda item. The commission is not bound by 
Robert's Rules of Order during optional post mortem reviews. 
G. ?Special meetings. The mayor, any two members of the commission, or the city manager may call 
special meetings of the commission, upon at least 48 hours' notice to each member of the 
commission and give notice to the public by, at a minimum, posting an agenda on the city's website, 
or personally served on each member or left at his usual place of residence. 
H. ?Emergency meetings. In the event of an emergency situation, such as a storm, fire, explosion, 
community disaster, insurrection, act of God, or other potential destruction or impairment of city 
property or business that affects the health and safety of the residents, employees or the functions of 
the city, a meeting may be convened by a majority of the commission directing the city manager to 
schedule a meeting without adhering to 48-hour time limit. The city clerk shall use reasonable efforts 
to inform the public of the emergency meeting. 
(Code 1982, § 2.04.040; Ord. No. 1100, § 5, 1982; Ord. No. 1537, § 3, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 
1654, § 2, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.040), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1737, § 1, 1-28-2008; 
Ord. No. 1737, § 1, 1-28-2008; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.040), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 1807, § 
8(2.04.070), 5-9-2011) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, MCA 2-3-201 et seq. 


Sec. 2.02.080. - Order of presentation/public participation. 
A. ?The order of presentation in which items are presented to the commission shall be as follows: 
1. ?The city manager shall present an agenda item to the commission. 
2. ?The city staff may present a background report on the matter for discussion. Upon conclusion of 
a staff report, commissioners may ask questions of staff for the purposes of understanding and 
clarification. If the agenda item is a public hearing, the presiding officer will open the public 
hearing prior to staff presentation. 
3. ?If applicable, comments from the applicant, or his agent, shall be heard by the commission. The 
applicant's presentation/testimony is limited, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer, to 
ten minutes. 
4. ?After being recognized by the presiding officer, a commissioner may direct questions to the staff 
or applicant. 
5. ?Members of the audience or their agents may be invited to present testimony or evidence. To be 
recognized, each person desiring to give testimony or evidence shall step to the podium and, 
after being recognized, give their name and address for the record. The audience 
presentation/testimony is limited to three minutes per speaker. The presiding officer may 
lengthen or shorten the time allotted for public testimony. 
6. ?After being recognized by the presiding officer, a commissioner may direct questions to any 
person so testifying for purposes of clarification. 
7. ?Following public comment, staff shall be given the opportunity to comment on any testimony or 
other evidence. 
8. ?Following staff comment, and if a public hearing, the applicant will be given the opportunity to 
rebut or comment on any testimony or other evidence. The applicant's comments and rebuttal 
are limited, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer, to five minutes. 
9. ?If a public hearing, following applicant rebuttal and any further questions, the presiding officer 
will close the hearing and bring the agenda item to the dais for discussion, motion and vote. 
10. ?If a public hearing, after being recognized by the presiding officer, a commissioner may direct 
questions limited to the rebuttal testimony and evidence. 
11. ?The city clerk shall enter into the record all correspondence that has been received but was not 
yet provided to the commission. 
12. ?The commission may continue the discussion to a date certain, close discussion and vote on 
the matter, or close the discussion and continue the vote to a date certain. 
13. ?The commission, upon the request of a commissioner who is to be absent from a meeting at 
which a public hearing on a particular item of interest is scheduled, may reschedule the public 
hearing until a full commission is present, unless precluded from doing so due to statutory time 
constraints. 
B. ?All testimony and evidence shall be directed to the presiding officer. No person, other than a 
commissioner and the person recognized as having the floor shall be permitted to enter into the 
discussion. No questions shall be asked of a commissioner except through the presiding officer. 
C. ?The commission may ask staff for its recommendation. 
D. ?If a public hearing, in the event the applicant does not appear at the scheduled time and place, 
unless the applicant has waived the applicant's appearance in writing, and which waiver has been 
accepted by the commission, or unless the matter is submitted as a consent item, the matter shall be 
continued to the next available regular meeting, public hearing date, or other date certain. 
E. ?For all public hearings involving land use and annexation decisions, the commission will wait a 
minimum of one week before making a decision whenever requested by a member of the 
commission, unless a decision is required due to a statute, ordinance or other law. 
F. ?Commissioners are urged to state the reasons for their decisions, particularly on land use issues. 
The record must reflect findings regarding legal criteria for all quasi-judicial decisions. 
G. ?Witnesses may be required to testify under oath. 
H. ?The commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence and may exclude irrelevant, 
immaterial, incompetent or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. 
I. ?The presiding officer shall rule on all questions relating to the admissibility of evidence with advice 
from the city attorney, which ruling may be overruled by a majority vote of the commission. 
J. ?A public hearing which has been formally closed for all public input may not be reopened and no 
additional evidence or testimony from the public shall be received or considered except as provided 
herein. If additional information is required from the public before a decision can be made, the 
commission, upon motion duly made, seconded and passed, may call for an additional public 
hearing which hearing shall be noticed as required by law, specifying date, time place and subject 
matter of hearing. This subsection does not preclude the commission, after the public hearing, from 
asking questions of staff, receiving additional evidence from staff or, after a hearing held on a 
preliminary plat, pursuant to MCA 76-3-101 et seq., from consulting the subdivider about conditions 
or other mitigation required of the subdivider. Upon decision by the presiding officer or upon a duly 
adopted motion of the commission to reopen the public hearing prior to close of the agenda item in 
which the hearing was held, the requirement to provide public notice does not apply; the public 
hearing may be reopened and the additional input provided prior to a final decision on the item. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.180), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.170), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 9(2.04.080), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.090. - Quorum and voting. 
    A quorum shall consist of three commissioners. If a quorum is not present, those in attendance shall 
be named and shall adjourn to a later time. The city clerk shall reduce motions to writing and, upon 
request, the city clerk shall read the motion prior to the vote. The affirmative vote of three commissioners 
shall be necessary to adopt or reject any motion, resolution or ordinance, or pass or fail any measure 
unless a greater number may be required by law. Upon every vote, the ayes and nays shall be called and 
recorded. A commissioner has an obligation to vote unless there is a conflict of interest. In the event of a 
tie vote a commissioner is required to vote after disclosing the conflict of interest pursuant to section 
2.02.100.E. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.150), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.140), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 10(2.04.090), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.100. - Rules of debate; reconsideration; conflict of interest. 
A. ?Every commissioner desiring to speak shall address the presiding officer, and, upon recognition by 
the presiding officer, shall confine discussion to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities 
and indecorous language. 
B. ?A commissioner, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless the commissioner 
is to be called to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a commissioner, while speaking, is called 
to order, the commissioner shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in 
order, the commissioner shall be permitted to proceed. 
C. ?Order of rotation in matters of debate or discussion shall be at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
D. ?Reconsideration of previous commission action. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the 
commission must be made on the day such action was taken. It must be made either immediately 
during the same session, or at a recessed and reconvened session thereof. Such motion shall be 
made by a commissioner of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any commissioner, and 
may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a commissioner has 
the floor. It shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any commissioner from 
making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the commission, but 
the matter must be duly scheduled as an agenda item. 
E. ?Conflict of interest. A commissioner may rely upon the advice of the city attorney as to whether the 
commissioner has a conflict of interest pursuant to law. If the commissioner is advised there is a 
conflict of interest, the commissioner shall recuse himself or herself, step off the dais, and refrain 
from discussion and vote except when the commissioner's participation is necessary to obtain a 
quorum or otherwise enable the commission to act. In such a case, the commissioner shall disclose 
the interest creating the appearance of impropriety and comply with the disclosure requirements of 
MCA 2-2-101 et seq., prior to performing the official act. 
F. ?After a motion, duly made and seconded, by the commission, no person shall address the 
commission without first securing the permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.170), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.160), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 11(2.04.100), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.110. - Open meetings and email. 
A. ?Except for properly called executive sessions as permitted by state law, all meetings of the city 
commission shall be open to the public and media, freely subject to recording by radio, television and 
photography at any time, provided that such arrangements do not interfere with the orderly conduct 
of the meetings. 
B. ?A majority of the commission shall not conduct synchronized email discussions involving a matter 
over which the commission has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power. Synchronized 
email discussions are email exchanges among three or more commissioners within minutes of each 
other that create the quality of simultaneity similar to instant messaging or chat room discussions. 
Such discussions are characterized as an active exchange of information rather than the passive 
receipt of information. An example of synchronized email discussion would be three commissioners 
sitting at their computers and instantly exchanging emails concerning city business, whereas a 
passive receipt of information is where a commissioner receives an email and responds in the 
normal course of time similar to responding by letter received in the mail. The commission shall not 
view emails or other electronic communication mechanisms concerning any matter on the agenda 
during a city commission meeting unless the submission is part of a specifically approved and 
adopted electronic public testimony program. Electronic communication mechanisms include text 
messaging or any other emerging technology that violates the spirit of open meeting laws. This does 
not preclude viewing emails or electronic communication mechanisms that were received prior to the 
commission meeting. Emails received by commissioners concerning an agenda item shall be 
forwarded to the city clerk and retained in accordance with the city's retention policy. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.120), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.110), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 12(2.04.110), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.120. - Decorum. 
A. ?While the commission is in a session, the commissioners must preserve order and decorum, and a 
commissioner shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the 
peace of the commission nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the 
commission or its presiding officer. 
B. ?Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous 
while addressing the commission may be barred from further audience with the commission by the 
presiding officer, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the commission. 
C. ?The commission shall not debate, in a heated or argumentative manner, with a member of the public 
presenting testimony during a meeting. 
D. ?Speakers shall only address the agenda item before the commission. Any person speaking on an 
agenda item not before the commission may be called out of order. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.190), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.180), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 13(2.04.120), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.130. - Recording of meetings and minutes; televising of meetings. 
A. ?Minutes of all meetings shall be recorded. All meetings of the commission shall be electronically 
recorded and the recording shall constitute the official record of the commission meeting. The city 
clerk shall prepare a summary of all meetings from the recording to be known as the "minutes" which 
shall be maintained by the clerk and approved by the commission. It shall not be necessary to 
formally read the minutes prior to approval. Such minutes may be revised by the city clerk to correct 
spelling, numbering and other technical defects. Prior to approval, any commissioner may, through 
the mayor or the clerk, request the privilege of amending or correcting the minutes to accurately 
reflect the substance of the prior meeting. If objection is made by any commissioner to such 
amendment or correction, a majority vote of the commission shall be necessary for adoption of the 
correction or amendment. The audio or video recording may not be amended. 
B. ?Executive session minutes. 
1. ?Executive sessions shall be recorded and minutes prepared by the city clerk. The commission 
shall approve the minutes of an executive session in open session; provided, however, that any 
discussion concerning the contents of the minutes, prior to approval, shall be conducted in 
executive session. The city clerk will distribute the draft executive session minutes to the 
commission in a manner that ensures and retains confidentiality. 
2. ?Following approval of executive session minutes by the commission, the city clerk shall forward 
all executive session minutes to the city attorney. The city attorney shall review these minutes, 
determining which, if any, can be released to the public in whole or in part, and advise the city 
clerk. If the city attorney determines any minutes from an executive session may be released, 
the city clerk shall then present a resolution to the commission for adoption releasing the 
executive session minutes, in whole or in part. Those executive session minutes to be released 
shall be designated by subject matter. Upon adoption of the resolution, those minutes or 
portions of minutes approved for release shall be available for public inspection. 
3. ?If a member of the public requests from the city clerk access to executive session minutes not 
yet released to the public as set forth above, the requestor shall submit a public records request 
to the city clerk. The city clerk shall consult with the city attorney on the subject matter as 
requested. The city attorney shall advise the city clerk if the minutes can be released in 
complete or redacted form. If approved for release by the city attorney, a resolution releasing 
either a complete or redacted minutes shall be presented to the city commission for adoption at 
their next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon adoption of the resolution by the city commission, 
the minutes shall be released to the public as authorized. 
C. ?Televising and broadcasting of meetings. Unless the city commission determines televising or 
webcasting of a meeting is impracticable, all meetings of the city commission shall be televised and 
webcast. Meetings of the commission closed to the public pursuant to law shall not be televised or 
webcast. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.160), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.150), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 14(2.04.130), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.140. - Ordinances and resolutions; requirements. 
A. ?Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and shall not contain more than 
one comprehensive subject, which shall be clearly stated in its title, except ordinances for the 
codification and revision of ordinances and general appropriation ordinances which may contain the 
various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated. An ordinance must be 
adopted at two meetings of the commission not less than 12 days apart. Every ordinance or 
resolution passed by the commission shall be filed immediately with the city clerk. The enacting 
clause of all ordinances passed by the city commission shall be: 
    "Be it ordained by the City Commission of the City of Bozeman." 
B. ?All ordinances shall be in effect from, and after, 30 days from the date of their passage by the 
commission, except as otherwise provided by law. All resolutions are immediately effective unless a 
delayed effective date is specified in the resolution. 
C. ?The commission may, by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, pass emergency measures 
to take effect at the time indicated therein. An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for 
the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, or safety, or providing for the usual 
daily operation of a municipal department, in which the emergency is set forth and defined in a 
preamble thereto. 
D. ?Every ordinance or resolution passed by the commission shall be signed by the mayor or two 
members, attested and filed by the city clerk. 
E. ?After a resolution is adopted, an ordinance is provisionally adopted, or an ordinance is finally 
adopted, the city clerk shall make a copy available to the public through the city's website. For 
provisional and final adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall publish a notice of passage in a 
newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 1982, § 2.04.090; Ord. No. 1100, § 6, 1982; Ord. No. 1381, § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 1537, § 6, 
5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.090), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.090), 2-23-2009; 
Ord. No. 1807, § 15(2.04.140), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.150. - Salaries for mayor and commissioners. 
    The salary of each commissioner shall be established by ordinance, and the salary of the 
commissioner acting as mayor shall be 1½ times that of the other commissioners. 
(Code 1982, § 2.04.070; Ord. No. 1075, §§ 1, 2, 1981; Ord. No. 1093, §§ 1, 2, 1982; Ord. No. 
1100, § 4, 1982; Ord. No. 1569, §§ 1—3, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.070), 12-3-2007; 
Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.070), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 1807, § 16(2.04.150), 5-9-2011) 


Sec. 2.02.160. - Boards, commissions, agencies and committees. 
A. ?In addition to boards, agencies, committees, and commissions established by law, the commission 
may create boards, commissions, agencies, or committees as determined necessary for the conduct 
of the city's business. 
B. ?All boards, commissions, agencies, or committees of the city will be established by the commission 
and members appointed following a public solicitation posted not less than twice annually. Between 
public solicitations for members, appointments may be made to fill unexpected vacancies or 
vacancies not filled through the last round of advertisements from those applications on file as of the 
date of appointment. Subcommittees of existing boards, commissions or committees may be 
appointed by the city commission without the necessity of public solicitation. Members shall be 
appointed by a majority of the commission for all appointments made by the city commission. In the 
case of statutorily authorized mayoral appointments, the mayor shall seek the concurrence of at least 
two other commissioners. 
C. ?The authority to vote despite a conflict included in section 2.02.100.E shall not apply to any 
appointed board, commission, agency, or committee. 
D. ?All quasi-judicial boards shall have governing rules of procedure to be approved by the commission, 
and said rules shall be in substantial conformance with law and this article. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1(2.04.200), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 1757, § 1(2.04.190), 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 
1807, § 17(2.04.160), 5-9-2011) 


ARTICLE 3. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Officers and employees, MCA 7-4-101 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 2.03.010—2.03.150. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 


Sec. 2.03.160. - Appointment; powers and duties. 
A. ?The commission shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the administrative head of the city 
government and be responsible for the efficient administration of all its departments. The city 
manager shall hold office at the will of the commission. 
B. ?The city manager shall have the powers and duties conferred by the Charter and law. 
C. ?The city manager is authorized to promulgate administrative orders within the areas of powers and 
duties conferred by the Charter and this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 2.08.010; Ord. No. 1537, § 7, 5-29-2001) 


Sec. 2.03.170. - Compensation; oath of office. 
    The city manager shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the commission. Before entering upon 
the duties of office, the city manager shall take and subscribe to the oath of office, and such oath shall be 
filed with the clerk thereof." 
(Code 1982, § 2.08.020; Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 5-29-2001) 


Sec. 2.03.180. - Assistant city manager. 
    The city manager shall appoint an assistant city manager who shall serve as acting city manager in 
the absence of the city manager. The assistant city manager shall perform such other duties by direction 
of the city manager or as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 7-18-2005) 


Secs. 2.03.190—2.03.300. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Office of municipal clerk, MCA 7-4-4501 et seq. 


Sec. 2.03.310. - Appointment; powers and duties. 
A. ?The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve until removed by the city 
manager, or until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
B. ?Powers and duties of the city clerk shall include: 
1. ?Attend all meetings of the commission and record and sign the proceedings thereof. 
2. ?Keep records of the commission. Maintain and preserve the minutes and records of the 
proceedings of the commission in accordance with state statutes, ordinances and resolutions. 
3. ?Enter into a book all ordinances and resolutions passed and adopted by the commission and be 
the legal custodian of the same. 
4. ?Maintain all contracts passed, adopted or entered into by the city. 
5. ?Countersign and cause to be posted or published, as provided by state statute, all ordinances or 
resolutions adopted by the commission. 
6. ?Publish all legal notices as required by state statute or ordinance. 
7. ?Take and administer oaths. 
8. ?Make and certify copies of all records, books and papers in the possession of the office. 
9. ?Make and keep a complete index of the minutes, ordinances and resolutions on file in the office. 
10. ?Post meeting notices. Cause notices of special meetings of the city commission to be posted in 
accordance with state statutes, ordinances or resolutions. 
11. ?Maintain the city seal. Have custody of the seal of the city and affix it to such documents as 
may be required and authorized pursuant to law. 
12. ?Records manager. Serve as the city's records manager, ensuring that all records of the city are 
retained and maintained in accordance with state statutes and adopted records retention 
schedules. 
13. ?Perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution or by order of the city 
manager. 
C. ?The city clerk shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 2.03.320. - Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city clerk shall take and subscribe to the oath of 
office. 
(Code 1982, § 2.32.050; Ord. No. 1537, § 13, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1632, § 2, 4-4-2005) 


Secs. 2.03.330—2.03.450. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - CODE OF ETHICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, MCA 2-2-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.03.460. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of the city government requires that public officials and employees be 
independent, impartial, accountable, and responsible; that governmental policies and decisions be made 
in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office and employment not be used for 
personal gain nor be used to harass, intimidate, or retaliate against citizens and other employees and 
officials; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. The purpose of this code of 
ethics is to set forth standards of ethical conduct, to assist public officials and employees in establishing 
guidelines for their conduct, to foster the development and maintenance of a tradition of responsible, 
accountable and effective public service, and to prohibit conflict between public duty and private interest. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve any employee or official of the responsibilities set forth in 
MCA 2-2-104, 2-2-105, 2-2-121, 2-2-131, and 7-5-4109. Where a provision or interpretation of this 
division conflicts with a provision of the Montana Code Annotated, the more stringent provision or 
interpretation that requires a greater level of public disclosure shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.010; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 1342, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 
5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.010), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.010), 4-20-2009; 
Ord. No. 1775, § 2(2.01.010), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.470. - Definitions. 
A. ?As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context 
clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
1. ?"Agency" means the city commission and all other agencies, board, committees, departments, 
and offices of the city, without exception. 
2. ?"Board" means the board of ethics. 
3. ?"Confidential information" means any information which is not available to the general public 
and which is obtained only by reason of an official's or employee's position. 
4. ?"Direct advantage" means a gain or benefit to the former public servant; the public servant's 
present principal or employer. 
5. ?"Employee" means all individuals employed by the city and its agencies, but does not include 
independent contractors hired by the city, city commissioners, or any municipal judge. 
6. ?"Financial interest" means any ownership interest, contractual relationship, business 
relationship, or other interest which will result in a monetary or other material benefit to an 
official or employee, either tangibly or intangibly, which has a value of more than $15.00, other 
than the official or employee's duly authorized salary or compensation for the official or 
employee's services to the city, and which interest is not common to the interest of all other 
citizens of the city. The following financial interest shall be imputed to be those of an official or 
an employee of the city: that of a spouse or child of an official or employee; that of any prime 
contractor or subcontractor of the city, in which the official or employee or any member of the 
official or employee's immediate family has any direct or indirect interest as the proprietor, by 
ownership of stock or partnership interest. 
7. ?"Immediate family" means spouse and children. 
8. ?Improper governmental action. 
a. ?"Improper governmental action" includes any action taken by an official or employee during 
the performance of the officer's or employee's duties, regardless of whether the action is 
within the scope of the employee's employment or the officer's duties, and that: 
(1) ?Violates the standards of conduct listed in section 2.03.490 or 2.03.510; 
(2) ?Violates the standards prescribed by title 2, chapter 2, of Montana Code Annotated 
(MCA 2-2-101 et seq.); 
(3) ?Is intended to harass, intimidate, or retaliate against any other employee, official, or 
any member of the public for the conduct protected under this division or state or 
federal law; 
(4) ?Violates a fiduciary duty to the city or its citizens; or 
(5) ?Creates a substantial or specific danger to the public's health or safety. 
b. ?Improper governmental action excludes personnel actions, including, but not limited to: 
employee grievances, complaints, appointments, promotions, transfers, assignments, 
reassignments, reinstatements, restorations, reemployments, performance evaluations, 
reductions in pay, dismissals, suspensions, demotions, reprimands, violations of collective 
bargaining or civil service laws, or alleged violations of agreements with labor 
organizations under collective bargaining. 
c. ?A properly authorized city program or budgetary expenditure does not become an improper 
governmental action because a reporting person dissents from or disagrees with the city 
policy or decision. 
9. ?"Officials" means all officers and members of the city's agencies, whether elected or appointed, 
whether paid or unpaid, whether permanent, temporary, or alternate, and that are not 
employees. 
10. ?"Personal interest" means any interest in the matter which would affect the action of the official 
or employee other than a financial interest, and other than an interest because of membership 
in, or affiliation with, but not employment by a social, fraternal, charitable, service, educational, 
religious, governmental, health service, philanthropic, cultural, or similar nonprofit institution or 
organization. 
11. ?"Public servant" means officials, members of the parking commission and library board and 
employees as defined in this section. 
12. ?"Transaction" means the offer of, or the sale, purchase, or furnishing of, any real or personal 
property or services, by or to any person or entity directly or indirectly, as vendor or vendee, 
prime contractor, subcontractor, or otherwise, for the use and benefit of the city or of such other 
person or entity for a valuable consideration. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.020; Ord. No. 1240, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 1342, § 2, 1992; Ord. No. 1537, § 2, 
5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.020), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.020), 4-20-2009; 
Ord. No. 1775, § 3(2.01.020), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.480./Persons covered. 
    All city officials and employees shall be bound by this division. All officials, including members of the 
parking commission and library board, and all employees shall be bound by this division. Upon initial 
employment and annually thereafter each employee, official and member of every board or committee 
shall verify that such employee, official and board or committee member has not and will not knowingly 
violate any provision of this division or the rules, standards of conduct or rules of ethics established by 
state law. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.030; Ord. No. 1240, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.030), 11-26-2007; 
Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.030), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 1775, § 4(2.01.030), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.490. - Standards of conduct. 
A. ?Officials and employees have an obligation to act morally and honestly in discharging their 
responsibilities. 
B. ?Officials and employees shall conduct themselves with propriety, discharge their duties impartially 
and fairly, and make continuing efforts toward attaining and maintaining high standards of conduct. 
C. ?Each official or employee serving on a multimember agency is expected to devote the time and 
effort necessary to the successful functioning of such agency. 
D. ?No official or employee shall improperly use, directly or indirectly, the official or employee's city 
position to secure any financial interest or personal interest for said official employee, or others. 
E. ?No official or employee shall, for any reason, use or attempt to use the official or employee's position 
to improperly influence any other official or employee in the performance of such official or 
employee's official duties. 
F. ?No employee shall act in a private capacity on matters that they are directly responsible for as an 
employee. 
G. ?No official shall act in a private capacity on matters acted upon as an official. 
H. ?All officials and employees shall refrain from improper governmental action as defined in this 
division. 
I. ?No official or employee shall retaliate against any employee, official, or member of the public 
regarding an allegation of improper governmental action because that employee, official, or member 
of the public proceeded or is proceeding in good faith under this division including acting under 
section 2.03.580.D. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.040; Ord. No. 1240, § 4, 1987; Ord. No. 1342, § 3, 1992; Ord. No. 1726, § 
2(2.01.040), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.040), 4-20-2009) Ord. No. 1775, § 
5(2.01.040), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.500. - Use of city resources. 
    No official or employee shall use, or permit the use of, city-owned vehicles, equipment, material, or 
city personnel for personal use of the employee or official or anyone else or to be used in any manner 
prohibited by state statutes or city ordinance. No city automobile shall be used by a city employee or 
official going to or from home, except when such use is for the benefit of the city, as in the case of an 
employee on call outside of the employee's working hours. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.050; Ord. No. 1240, § 5, 1987; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.050), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.510. - Treatment of the public. 
    City officials and employees represent the city government to the public. In their contact with the 
public, officials and employees must bear in mind their role as public servants. Each member of the public 
shall be treated courteously, impartially, and fairly. All employees and officials shall, in the exercise of 
their official duties, refrain from taking any action, making of any statement, or authoring any document 
that is intended to-harass, intimidate, or retaliate against any member of the public. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.060; Ord. No. 1240, § 6, 1987; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.060), 11-26-2007; 
Ord. No. 1775, § 6(2.01.060), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.520. - Conflict of interest. 
A. ?Nothing in this section shall be interpreted or construed to prohibit any official or employee from 
exercising their own individual legal rights as to their own personal interests in a transaction or 
matter pending before the city or any of its agencies, or to prohibit an official or employee from 
testifying as a witness in any administrative or judicial proceeding. However, no official or employee 
who represents their own personal interest before an agency of which they are a member or 
employee, or a member or employee of an agency to which the matter may be appealed, shall 
participate in the decision of that agency or the appellate agency. 
B. ?No official or employee shall engage in any employment or business which conflicts with the proper 
discharge of such official or employee's duties. 
C. ?No official or employee shall take or influence official action if the official or employee has a financial 
or personal interest in a transaction or matter with the city. 
D. ?If an official or employee has a financial or personal interest in the outcome of a transaction or 
matter coming before the agency of which they are a member or by which they are employed, such 
official or employee shall: 
1. ?Publicly disclose on the record of the agency, or to their superior or other appropriate authority, 
the existence of such financial or personal interest; and 
2. ?Except as authorized pursuant to 2.03.520.A and G, shall not engage in deliberations 
concerning the matter or transaction, shall be disqualified from acting on the matter or 
transaction and shall not communicate about such matter or transaction with any person who 
will participate in an action to be taken on such matter or transaction. 
E. ?No employee, whether paid or unpaid shall represent or appear on behalf of any individual or entity 
before any agency of the city, or take any appellate proceedings from any action of such agency, 
either personally or through an associate or partner. 
F. ?No official whether paid or unpaid, shall represent or appear on behalf of any individual or entity in 
transaction or matter of concern to the agency on which that official serves, either before that agency 
or any other agency of the city, or before the city commission, or take any appellate proceedings 
from any action of such agency or the commission. Such representation may be made by the 
official's associate or partner, provided no reference to the participation of the involved official is 
made except for certification or other required identification on prepared documents. The involved 
official shall not engage in deliberations concerning a transaction or matter represented by an 
associate or partner, shall disqualify himself/herself from acting on the transaction or matter, and 
shall not communicate about such matter with any person who will participate in the action to be 
taken on such transaction or matter. 
G. ?A city commissioner or mayor, as authorized pursuant to 2-2-121(10), MCA, may take action despite 
a conflict of interest described in this section if that commissioner's or mayor's participation is 
necessary for the city commission to obtain a quorum or to otherwise enable the city commission to 
act. If so, the commissioner or mayor shall disclose the interest creating the conflict prior to 
performing the official act. 
H. ?This section does not absolve any official or employee from complying with Title 2, Chapter 2, MCA. 
If any provision of this section is in conflict with Title 2, Chapter 2, MCA the more stringent provision, 
the provision that requires greater disclosure, or the provision that provides less authority to act in 
furtherance of a conflict, shall apply. 
I. ?Any official or employee with a conflict of interest under this section shall, in addition to other 
requirements in this section and when required by law, comply fully with the disclosure requirements 
of 2-2-131, MCA, and shall file this disclosure with the Montana Commissioner of Political Practices 
prior to acting. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.070; Ord. No. 1240, § 7, 1987; Ord. No. 1342, § 4, 1992; Ord. No. 1726, § 
2(2.01.070), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1856, § 3, 4-22-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.03.530. - Confidential information. 
A. ?No official or employee shall, without legal authority, disclose confidential information concerning the 
personnel, property, government, or affairs of the city. 
B. ?No official or employee shall use confidential information to advance such official or employee's own 
financial or personal interest or the financial or personal interests of any other person. 
C. ?Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting the disclosure of information required by 
law to be disclosed. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.080; Ord. No. 1240, § 8, 1987; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.080), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.540. - Gifts, gratuities and favors. 
A. ?Legislative Intent. The intent of this section is to further implement the declaration of policy set forth 
in 2.03.460 and establish specific standards of conduct related to gifts, gratuities, and favors that are 
provided to a person because of a person's employment or official position with the city. These 
standards recognize legitimate governmental interests exist that allow an employee or official to 
accept a gift, gratuity or favor in limited circumstances without such acceptance being considered the 
use of public office for private gain. These interests include, but are not limited to, establishing 
effective relationships with citizens, acceptance of professional and community awards for public 
service, and attending public events in an official capacity. At the same time, these standards make it 
clear that each public officer and employee holds such office or employment as a public trust. 
B. ?No official or employee shall accept a gift, gratuity, or favor from any person or entity: 
1. ?That would tend improperly to influence a reasonable person in the person's position to depart 
from the faithful and impartial discharge of the person's public duties; 
2. ?That the person knows or that a reasonable person in that position should know under the 
circumstances is primarily for the purpose of rewarding the person for official action taken; or 
3. ?Has a value of $100.00 or more for an individual. 
C. ?An employee or official may accept a gift, gratuity, or favor that has a value greater than $25.00 but 
less than $100.00 for an individual only if such gift, gratuity or favor: 
1. ?Complies with 2.03.540.B.1 and 2; and 
2. ?Is provided incidental to and in conjunction with a public event where the official or employee's 
attendance is in fulfillment of their official duties. 
D. ?1. ?An employee or official may accept a gift, gratuity, or favor that has a value greater than $25.00 
but less than $100.00 for an individual only if such gift, gratuity or favor that complies with 
2.03.540.B.1 and 2 and is provided incidental to and in conjunction with a public event where 
the official or employee's attendance is in fulfillment of their official duties. 
2. ?An employee or official may accept payment or reimbursement from a person or entity for 
necessary expenses such as travel, lodging, meals, and registration fees in excess of $100.00 if 
the expense is incurred while representing the city and the reimbursement would not violate 
2.03.540.B.1 and 2. Reimbursement or payment for educational activities in excess of $100.00 
is permissible if the payment or reimbursement does not place or appear to place the official or 
employee under obligation, clearly serves the public good, and is not lavish or extravagant. 
E. ?Upon the acceptance of a gift, gratuity, favor or award pursuant to 2.03.540.C, the recipient shall file 
a disclosure statement with the board of ethics. Such disclosure statement shall indicate the gift, its 
estimated value, the person or entity making the gift, the relationship to the employee or official, and 
the date of the gift. The disclosure statement is a public record. 
F. ?A gift, gratuity, or favor does not include: 
1. ?Items or services provided an employee or official in their private capacity and without 
relationship to their employment or official position: 
2. ?A prize received upon a random drawing at an event where the official or employee attends in 
their capacity as an employee or official, the drawing is open to all attendees, and receipt of the 
prize does not place the official or employee under obligation; 
3. ?An award publically presented to an employee or official in recognition of public servicer; and 
4. ?Compensation for officiating at a ceremony. 
(Code 1982, § 2.01.090; Ord. No. 1240, § 9, 1987; Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.090), 11-26-2007; 
Ord. No. 1833, § 1, 8-6-2012) 


Sec. 2.03.550. - Financial disclosure statement. 
A. ?The ethics board shall prepare for approval by the city commission a financial disclosure statement 
form, and recommendations for filing deadlines, procedures, and who must file consistent with the 
following: 
1. ?The director of administrative services shall certify to the city clerk a list, current as of the 
previous January 1, of the names and mailing addresses of persons who are required to file a 
financial statement in the current year. 
2. ?The financial statement must include the following information: 
a. ?The name and address of the public servant and describe any current employment in 
addition to employment with the city; 
b. ?Each present or past employing entity from which benefits, including retirement benefits, 
are currently received by the individual; 
c. ?Each business, firm, corporation, partnership or other business or professional entity or 
trust in which the individual holds an equity interest of ten percent or more of the entity; 
d. ?Each entity not listed under subsection 2.a. through c. in which the individual is an officer, 
director or registered agent, regardless of whether or not the entity is engaged for profit; 
and 
e. ?All real property, other than a personal residence, in which the individual holds an equity 
interest of ten percent or more of the real property. Real property may be described by 
general description such as street address or highway location. 
3. ?Who must file financial statements. Financial statements must be filed by the members of the 
city commission, the city manager, department heads and other major financial decision makers 
which may include members of the library board and parking commission. 
4. ?Each department annually shall develop and then review a list of vendors and service providers 
of that department who provide through contract, purchase order or otherwise, services or 
materials greater than $2,500.00 each month or more than $10,000.00 per year. Each member 
of that department receives these services or materials must disclose if such member has an 
economic relationship with that vendor. If the decision maker has a substantial economic 
relationship with that vendor, that decision maker may not make decisions regarding that 
vendor. For the purposes of this section, substantial economic relationship is that amount of 
interest in the organization, compensation including all benefits or other valuable consideration 
exceeding $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.100), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.100), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 
1850, § 4, 1-28-2013) 


Sec. 2.03.560. - Post employment/service activities. 
A. ?Within 12 months following the date on which a former public servant ceases service to the city, a 
former public servant may not, without complying with the provisions of 2.03.570: 
1. ?Make any formal or informal appearance before, or negotiate with any decision maker regarding 
a transaction or matter which was under the former public servant's direct responsibility or 
which the former public servant participated personally and substantially; or 
2. ?Represent or act or appear on behalf of an individual or entity other than the city in connection 
with any a transaction or matter which was under the former public servant's direct responsibility 
or which the former public servant participated personally and substantially as a public servant. 
B. ?No former public servant may use any former city title, including on business cards, email, or 
stationery, except that such use is not prohibited if the former public servant clearly indicates service 
to the city is no longer ongoing. 
C. ?The provisions of this section do not absolve a public servant from complying with the prohibitions 
against contracting in 2-2-105(3), MCA, or the prohibitions against obtaining employment in 2-2-201, 
MCA. If any provision of this section is in conflict with Title 2, Chapter 2, MCA, the more stringent 
provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.110), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.110), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 
1856, § 4, 4-22-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.03.570. - Public notice required for former public servants/compliance with state law. 
    During the first 12 months following the date on which a former public servant ceases service to the 
city: 
A. ?A former public servant desiring to perform an act restricted by 2.03.560.A. shall: 
1. ?File with the city clerk and with the city attorney not less than six business days prior to the 
appearance a written public notice of the former public servant's desire to perform an act 
restricted under 2.03.560.A. Such written notice shall state in substance the purpose for 
which the former public servant wishes to act other than as required by 2.03.560.A and 
shall also indicate the responsibility the former public servant held over the transaction or 
matter or the nature of the former public servant's participation in the transaction or matter. 
2. ?At the onset of the appearance orally disclose to the decision maker all offices or 
employment held by the former public servant while serving the city and the responsibility 
the former public servant held over the transaction or matter or the nature of the former 
public servant's participation in the transaction or matter. 
The city clerk shall post the written notice in a publicly accessible location on the city's website. 
B. ?A former public servant desiring to perform an act restricted by 2.03.560.A who cannot 
reasonably meet the six-day notice period described in subsection A of this section may appear 
before a decision maker only at a duly noticed public meeting where a formal record of the 
proceedings is made. At the time of doing so, the former public servant shall comply with 
subsection A of this section. 
C. ?Unless the act is otherwise prohibited by Title 2, Chapter 2, MCA, upon complying with 
subsections A or B of this section as appropriate, a former public servant is not prohibited from 
the activities proscribed in section 2.03.560.A. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as 
authority to absolve any former public servant of their duty to comply with Title 2, Chapter 2, 
MCA. If any provision of this section is in conflict with Title 2, Chapter 2, MCA the more stringent 
provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.111), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 1856, § 5, 4-22-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.03.580. - Board of ethics. 
A. ?There is created a board of ethics consisting of three members who shall serve without 
compensation unless the city commission provides otherwise. Members of the board of ethics shall 
not be elected officials of the city, full-time appointed city officials whether exempt or nonexempt, or 
city employees, nor shall they be currently serving on any other city board or commission. 
B. ?Members of the board shall be residents of the city. 
C. ?Board members shall be appointed by the city commission. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be 
made by the appointing authority who appointed the member who formerly held the position which is 
vacant. 
D. ?The board shall select its own presiding officer from among its members. 
E. ?Board members shall serve staggered terms of two years. A member shall hold office until a 
member's successor is appointed. At initial appointment of the members of the board, one of the 
initial members shall be appointed for a term of three years and thereafter for a term of one year. 
F. ?The city commission shall provide such staff support for the board as the city commission determines 
to be necessary for the board to fulfill its duties. The city attorney is designated to be the legal 
advisor for the board, except that the city attorney is not authorized to represent the board in any 
legal action if doing so would create a conflict which would prevent the city attorney from also 
representing the mayor, the city manager, or the city commission. The city clerk shall serve as 
recording secretary to the board and shall provide such administrative services to the board as may 
be necessary. Neither the city attorney nor the city clerk shall be eligible for appointment as board 
members. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.120), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.120), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 
1775, § 7(2.01.120), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.590. - Reporting improper governmental action/rights/limitations/protected conduct. 
A. ?General. 
1. ?The provisions of this section are intended to work in harmony with the City of Bozeman 
Employee Handbook and provide remedies in addition to those listed in the employee 
handbook. Under no circumstances shall the provisions of this division be taken as 
authorization for any official or member of the board of ethics to take or order disciplinary action 
be taken against a city employee for whom that official does not have authority to discipline or 
take action against pursuant to the city Charter or law. 
2. ?Nothing herein shall be deemed to reduce or interfere with the rights of an employee, official, or 
member of the public under state or federal law regarding actions that may constitute an 
improper governmental action. 
B. ?Right. Every city employee, official, or member of the public shall have the right to report, in good 
faith and in accordance with this division, to a city official, employee, another government official, or 
member of the board of ethics pursuant to the procedures of this division, or to any member of the 
public, information concerning improper governmental action. 
C. ?Limitations. 
1. ?This section does not authorize a city employee, official, or member of the public to report 
information that is subject to an applicable privilege against disclosure at law, unless waived, or 
to make a disclosure where prohibited by law. The purpose of this section is to protect and 
encourage employees, officials, and members of the public who know or in good faith believe 
improper governmental action has occurred to report those actions in good faith and in 
accordance with this division. 
2. ?An employee or official reporting of the employee or official's own improper action does not 
grant the employee or official immunity from discipline (including but not limited to termination or 
removal from office) insofar as the employee or official's improper action would be cause for 
discipline or removal from office. 
3. ?This section does not grant an employee or official immunity from discipline (including but not 
limited to termination or removal from office) insofar as the employee's or official's reporting of 
alleged improper governmental action is found to have not been made in good faith or is found 
to have been made in an attempt to harass, intimidate or retaliate against the person who is the 
subject of the original allegation of improper governmental action. 
D. ?Employee/official protection and protected conduct. The following conduct by employees, an official, 
or a member of the public is protected under this section if carried out in good faith: 
1. ?Reporting sexual harassment or workplace violence pursuant to the city's policies; 
2. ?Reporting any violations of title 2, chapter 2, of Montana Code Annotated, Standards of Conduct 
(MCA 2-2-101 et seq.) or title 49, of Montana Code Annotated, Human Rights (MCA 49-1-101 et 
seq.); 
3. ?Reporting any violation of the state's or city's criminal laws; 
4. ?Reporting violations of an employee's or official's fiduciary duties; 
5. ?Reporting any other improper governmental action as defined in this division; 
6. ?Cooperating in an investigation under this division, the city Charter, the city's personnel policies, 
title 49, MCA, or federal law, conducted by a duly authorized city employee or official or a duly 
authorized agent of the state or federal government; or 
7. ?Testifying in proceedings or prosecution arising out of an improper governmental action. 
(Ord. No. 1775, § 7(2.01.120), 12-28-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.600. - Duties and powers of the board. 
A. ?The board shall, in addition to its other duties: 
1. ?Adopt written rules governing its procedures and providing for the holding of regular and special 
meetings, which rules shall be subject to the approval of the city commission; a copy of the 
rules shall be filed with the city clerk; and 
2. ?Administer oaths; 
3. ?Conduct hearings as needed to hear and decide specific cases in which a violation of this 
division or a violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1, of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et 
seq.) is alleged, whether such cases arise from a complaint or are brought on the board's own 
motion; and 
4. ?No later than December of each year, submit an annual report to the city commission 
concerning its action in the preceding year; the report shall contain: 
a. ?A summary of its decisions and opinions, both open and confidential; the board shall make 
any alterations in the summaries necessary to prevent disclosure of any confidential 
information pertaining to any individual or to any organization if the disclosure could lead to 
the disclosure of the identity of a person who is entitled to confidentiality; and 
b. ?Recommend any legislative or administrative actions regarding the city's policies and 
practices which the board believes would or could enhance the ethical environment in 
which public servants work; and 
5. ?Establish a process for systematically and regularly evaluating all significant aspects of the 
administration and implementation of this division, which shall include an annual review of the 
full scope of operations of the board and its procedures, and which shall ensure that the both 
the public and all public servants are provided a reasonable opportunity, and are encouraged to 
participate in the process; and 
6. ?Prescribe and make available forms for use under this division; and 
7. ?When it deems it appropriate, request the city attorney for assistance in compelling the 
production of documents and witnesses to assist the board in the conduct of any investigation; 
8. ?When circumstances make it necessary to do so, retain outside legal counsel and other experts 
as needed after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney (unless the need to retain 
outside counsel is caused by a conflict involving the city attorney's office), and upon approval by 
the city commission of a contract for services approved as to form by the city attorney; and 
9. ?Serve as legal custodian of the board's records, and accept, file, maintain and administer, in 
accordance with all applicable laws, any information related to the purposes of this division; and 
10. ?Make financial disclosure statements filed with the board available for public inspection and 
copying facilities available at a charge which is the minimum amount permitted under applicable 
law. All open opinions of the board shall be filed with the city clerk and are open to public 
inspection. To the extent permitted by law, confidential opinions and any records obtained or 
filed in connection with requests for confidential opinions, whether the records are written, tape 
recorded, videotaped, or otherwise recorded shall be kept confidential; and confidential advisory 
opinions rendered shall be closed in whole to public inspection. Confidential opinions and 
summaries of them or open references to them shall be drafted in such a way as not to reveal 
confidential information; 
11. ?Compile and maintain an index to all financial disclosure statements currently on file with the 
board to facilitate public access to such statements; and 
12. ?Develop a plan for implementation of a program to educate public servants who are subject to 
this division and the public about their rights, duties and responsibilities hereunder; and 
13. ?Within one year from the date of the first meeting of the board, submit to the city commission 
for its approval and promulgation, an ethics handbook for the use of all public servants and the 
public; the human resources department shall document that each city officer and employee 
receives a copy of the handbook and acknowledges receipt of the handbook in writing; and 
14. ?In coordination with the city attorney, city manager, and other appropriate city personnel, 
arrange for the conduct of annual training and education, which shall serve as an orientation for 
new board members and an opportunity for experienced members to explore specific issues in 
depth. 
a. ?Attendance at this training shall be made a condition of service as a member of the board, 
and, before taking office, board members shall commit themselves to attend it. 
b. ?The city clerk shall forward to the commission annually a list of officials who fail to take the 
training required under this section and the Charter. The commission may remove an 
official for failing to take the required training. 
B. ?The board may: 
1. ?Conduct hearings as it determines necessary or appropriate 
a. ?To ascertain public opinions and to gather information from the general public, employees, 
or others regarding any aspect of the city's ethics policies or practices; and 
b. ?For any other purpose for which the board is authorized to conduct hearings; and 
2. ?Respond, as it deems appropriate, to requests for confidential advisory opinions; the board may 
decline to render an opinion in response to any request for an advisory opinion; 
3. ?Render and publish formal opinions on any matter within the scope of the board's authority 
which it may deem appropriate; the board may initiate opinions on its own motion or upon 
request; any formal opinion shall be in writing; and 
4. ?Prepare and publish special reports, technical studies, and recommendations to further the 
purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.130), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.130), 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 
1775, § 8(2.01.130), 12-28-2009; Ord. No. 1833, § 2, 8-6-2012) 


Sec. 2.03.610. - Who may request board action. 
A. ?Any person may file a complaint with the board, and any public servant, prospective public servant 
or former public servant, either personally or on behalf of an organization or governmental body, may 
request of the board an ethics opinion, whether a formal opinion or a confidential advisory opinion, 
regarding the propriety of any matter or matters to which the person is or may become a party; and 
any decision maker, with the consent of a prospective appointee, may request of the board an ethics 
opinion regarding the propriety of any matter to which the public servant, prospective public servant 
or former public servant is or may become a party. 
B. ?Any request for board action shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the person making the 
request. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.140), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.140), 4-20-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.620. - Limitations on board's power. 
    The board does not have the authority to reverse or otherwise modify a prior action of the mayor, city 
commission, or an officer or employee of the city. If the board finds a prior action of the mayor, the city 
commission, officer or employee to have been ethically improper, the board may advise the appropriate 
party that the action should be reconsidered. Upon such advice by the board, the action shall be 
reconsidered by the appropriate person or public body. If the board determines an existing city contract to 
be ethically improper, after such determination and advice from the board, the city may void or seek 
termination of the contract if legally permissible. The board may refer a matter to the city attorney for 
review and consideration for appropriate action. Upon completion of review and consideration, the city 
attorney's office shall report its findings to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.150), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.150), 4-20-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.630. - City attorney opinions. 
A. ?At the request of a person, the city attorney may render an informal or formal advisory opinion with 
respect to the prospective conduct of such person. An informal advisory opinion need not be written, 
and may be provided directly to the requestor of such opinion. A request for a formal advisory 
opinion must be in writing and include all the information and documents related to the request. The 
request for either an informal or formal advisory opinion must state all the material facts so the city 
attorney may render a complete and correct opinion. The city attorney's formal advisory opinion must 
be in writing. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit a request for an opinion by any 
public servant from the city attorney regarding a potential conflict of interest. Neither a request for an 
informal or formal advisory opinion, nor the making of a statement concerning a potential conflict of 
interest made by a member of the city commission in the course of abstaining from voting or making 
a motion of self-recusal, shall create a presumption or inference that a public servant actually has a 
personal interest in the matter about which the opinion was requested; if the city attorney elects to 
render an opinion, the city attorney shall, within a reasonable time, submit a written summary of the 
opinion to the ethics board for the board's information; if the city attorney declines to render an 
opinion, nothing shall preclude the person requesting the opinion from requesting the ethics board 
for an opinion. 
B. ?Any formal advisory opinion issued pursuant to this section may be relied upon by the person 
directly involved in the specific transaction or activity to which such advisory opinion has been 
issued, and any person directly involved in any specific transaction or activity which is 
indistinguishable in all its material aspects from the transaction or activity with respect to which such 
advisory opinion was rendered. 
C. ?Any person who relies upon a formal advisory opinion pursuant to this section, and who acts in good 
faith in accordance with the provisions and findings of such opinion, shall not, as a result to such act, 
be subject to prosecution under this division or, in the case where the opinion is exculpatory, be 
subject to any administrative adverse action or civil action based upon legal authority cited in that 
opinion. 
D. ?The city attorney's client is the City of Bozeman and not the individual requesting the opinion. No 
request for an opinion from the city attorney shall constitute the establishment of an attorney-client 
relationship with the individual requesting the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.160), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1759, § 1(2.01.160), 4-20-2009) 


Sec. 2.03.640. - Procedures for hearing complaints. 
A. ?Any person may file a written complaint, signed and sworn, with the city clerk alleging a violation of 
this division or a violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et 
seq.). 
B. ?A complaint shall specify the provisions of this division or provisions of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of 
Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et seq.) alleged to have been violated and facts alleged to 
constitute the violation. 
C. ?Upon receipt of such a complaint, but in any event not later than three working days after receipt, the 
city clerk shall acknowledge receipt to the complainant, and forward the complaint simultaneously to 
the board, the person who is complained against and the city attorney. 
D. ?The city attorney shall provide the board with a preliminary written analysis of the complaint no later 
than 30 days from the date the complaint is filed with the city clerk. 
E. ?During any investigation and during any hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation 
of this division or a violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et 
seq.) has occurred: 
1. ?The person under investigation or the accused may be represented by counsel of the person's 
own choosing; and 
2. ?The accused or the accused's representative, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
a. ?Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against the accused; 
b. ?Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with 
the matter heard; 
c. ?Bring witnesses; 
d. ?Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
e. ?Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross 
examine adverse witnesses; and 
f. ?Exercise, to the extent the board, in its discretion, determines to be just and reasonable, 
any pretrial discovery procedure usually available in civil actions. 
F. ?The following principles shall apply to evidence in connection with hearings conducted by the board: 
1. ?The board shall not be bound to adhere to statutory Rules of Evidence, but shall be 
fundamentally fair in its administration of evidence; and 
2. ?During any hearing conducted by the board to determine whether a violation of this division has 
occurred, all evidence including certified copies of records which the board considers shall be 
fully offered and made a part of the record in the proceedings; and 
3. ?The accused or any other person under investigation shall be afforded adequate opportunity to 
rebut or offer countervailing evidence; and 
4. ?The board shall inform the accused or the accused's counsel of exculpatory evidence in its 
possession; and 
5. ?The standard of evidence in hearings conducted under this division shall be clear and 
convincing evidence admitted at the hearing. 
G. ?The board, in addition to its other duties and powers, may: 
1. ?Appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings under this division; 
2. ?With the approval of the city commission, retain outside legal counsel and other experts as 
needed with respect to hearings in accordance with its policies. The selection of a hearing 
officer and outside counsel and other experts and any contract for such persons shall be made 
after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney and upon approval by the city 
commission of a contract for services approved as to form by the city attorney; 
3. ?Order testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual who is designated by the board 
and, in such instances, to compel testimony and the production of evidence to the extent it is 
otherwise lawfully authorized to do so; 
4. ?Require any person to submit in writing such reports and answers to questions relevant to the 
proceedings conducted under this division as the board may prescribe, such submission to be 
made within such period and under oath or otherwise as the board may determine; and 
5. ?Request and obtain from the department of revenue copies of state income tax returns and 
access to other appropriate information as permitted under state law regarding all persons who 
are the subject of such investigation. 
H. ?The person complained against shall have 20 days from the day after the city clerk serves the 
complaint on the person to submit a written response to the complaint prior to the board deciding 
whether to hold a hearing. Service may be by certified mail, return receipt at the last known address 
in city records or personal service. 
I. ?If the complaint is dismissed, the complainant shall have one opportunity within 15 days of the 
dismissal to amend the complaint and to refile it with the board. 
J. ?Any person whose name is mentioned or who is otherwise identified during a hearing being 
conducted by the board and who, in the opinion of the board, may be adversely affected thereby, 
may, upon request of the person or a representative of the person, or upon the request of any 
member of the board, appear at the hearing to testify on such person's own behalf or have a 
representative appear to so testify, and the board may permit any other person to appear and to 
testify at a hearing. 
K. ?Upon request of the accused, on its own motion, or upon request of the city attorney, the board shall 
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of necessary witnesses. 
L. ?At the next regular meeting, or within 30 days, whichever is sooner, following receipt of the city 
attorney's analysis, the board shall review and consider the complaint and the city attorney's 
analysis, and, if a hearing is to be held, shall set a date certain for the hearing to take place within 30 
days, unless the accused petitions for and the board consents to a later date. 
M. ?As soon as practicable after giving due consideration to a complaint, or, if a hearing was held, after 
the hearing, the board shall take any action or combination of actions which it deems appropriate 
and which it is lawfully empowered to take, including but not limited to the following: 
1. ?Dismiss the complaint based on any of the following grounds: 
a. ?The complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this division or a 
violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et seq.); or 
b. ?The board has no jurisdiction over the matter; or 
c. ?Failure of the complainant to cooperate in the board's review and consideration of the 
complaint; or 
d. ?The complaint is defective in a manner which results in the board being unable to make 
any sound determination; and 
2. ?Determine that no violation of this division or a violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana 
Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et seq.) has occurred; or 
3. ?Determine that the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this division or a 
violation of title 2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et seq.), and that 
the board will conduct a hearing, in which case the board shall promptly send written notice of 
such determination to the accused and to the party who made the complaint; or 
4. ?Determine that further information must be obtained in order for the board to determine whether 
the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of the division or a violation of title 
2, chapter 2, part 1 of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-2-101 et seq.); and 
a. ?Conduct its own investigation with respect to any alleged violation; or 
b. ?Schedule the complaint for further review and consideration at a future time certain, in 
which case the board shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the 
accused and to the party who made the complaint; or 
c. ?Refer the complaint to any appropriate authorities for criminal investigation; or 
d. ?Refer the complaint, if it appears to be substantiated, to the county attorney or city attorney 
for prosecution; or 
e. ?Refer the complaint, along with the board's findings and conclusions, to any appropriate 
administrative authority for disciplinary action or other suitable remedial action; the board, 
although it has no independent administrative authority, may make any recommendation to 
any city administrator at any level of supervision, if the board finds that the 
recommendation will advance the objectives of this division; whether to implement the 
recommendation may be decided by whatever decision maker is authorized under the 
circumstances; if it is determined that misconduct or malfeasance has occurred, the board 
shall refer the matter to the city manager, city attorney or to the city commission, as 
circumstances warrant. 
5. ?After it has made its final determination, the board shall issue its written findings of fact and 
conclusions, and may issue any additional reports, opinions and recommendations as it deems 
advisable under the circumstances. All such reports shall be in compliance with all state and city 
laws governing confidentiality, open government, and torts. All such reports shall be reviewed 
by the city attorney prior to their issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.170), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.650. - Those subject to removal only by city commission. 
    If findings relative to an elected or appointed official are filed by the board with the city commission, 
the city commission may take action to remove the official in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.180), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.660. - Ex parte communications. 
A. ?After a complaint has been filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the board, no 
member of the board may communicate directly or indirectly with any party or other person about 
any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except that: 
1. ?The members of the board may obtain legal advice from the city attorney (or retained counsel) 
and may discuss the complaint with their staff; and 
2. ?The members of the board may discuss the complaint at a lawfully conducted meeting. 
B. ?If any person attempts to communicate with a board member regarding the pending complaint, the 
board member shall report the substance of the communication to the board on the public record at 
the next regular meeting of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.190), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.670. - Confidentiality of board information. 
    No member of the board nor any public servant who has access to any confidential information 
related to the functions or activities of the board shall divulge that information to any person who is not 
authorized to have it. The identity of a person who requests a confidential advisory ethics opinion is 
confidential, as is information describing or pertaining to any organization mentioned in the request for an 
opinion if the disclosure of the information could lead to the disclosure of the identity of the person 
requesting the confidential advisory opinion. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.200), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.680. - Waiver of confidentiality. 
    A person who makes or purports to make public the substance of or any portion of an advisory 
opinion requested by or on behalf of that person is deemed to have waived the confidentiality of the 
request for an advisory opinion and of any records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with 
the request for an advisory opinion. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.210), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.03.690. - Statute of limitations. 
    No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than one year after a violation of this 
division is alleged to have occurred, and a complaint alleging a violation must be filed within one year 
from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2(2.01.220), 11-26-2007) 


ARTICLE 4. - DEPARTMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Officers and employees, MCA 7-4-101 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2.04.010. - Administrative departments established. 
A. ?The following administrative departments of the city are established: 
1. ?Department of administrative services; 
2. ?Department of fire; 
3. ?Department of human resources; 
4. ?Department of information technology; 
5. ?Department of law; 
6. ?Department of parks and recreation; 
7. ?Department of community development; 
8. ?Department of police; and 
9. ?Department of public works. 
B. ?The commission may by ordinance establish, alter, or abolish city departments, officers, or agencies 
and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies. The city manager may, by 
administrative order, transfer or add functions to the departments, to include organizing or 
reorganizing all divisions thereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 2.12.010; Ord. No. 1643, § 2, 7-18-2005) 


Secs. 2.04.020—2.04.140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1850, adopted Jan. 28, 2013, specified that the department and the director of 
finance be changed to the department and the director of administrative services. All references 
throughout the Code shall be interpreted as such. 
State Law reference— Financial administration and taxation, MCA 7-6-101 et seq.; debt management, 
MCA 7-7-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.04.150. - Director of administrative services; appointment; powers and duties. 
A. ?The director of administrative services shall be the head of the department of administrative 
services, and shall work under the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters; except 
that as custodian of all the public moneys which may come into the director's hands, the director of 
administrative services shall be governed by the laws of the state relating to city treasurers and 
funds of municipalities, and shall be responsible for the safekeeping of all public moneys and the 
deposit of the same as required by law. The director of administrative services shall be custodian of 
all public moneys for the city and all other public moneys for the city and all other public moneys 
coming into the director's hands. The director of administrative services shall keep and preserve 
such money in the place determined by ordinance or by the provisions of any law applicable thereto. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the director of administrative services shall collect, receive and 
disburse all other public moneys coming into the director's hands, in pursuance of such regulations 
as may be prescribed by the authorities having lawful control of such funds. The director of 
administrative services shall keep and have the supervision of all accounts of the city, and shall be 
the collector of all moneys paid to the city. 
B. ?The director of administrative services shall: 
1. ?Mail notices of all special assessments for public improvements to property owners, and 
perform all duties in connection with special assessments for improvements prescribed by law 
for city treasurers; 
2. ?Have charge of the collection of such assessments as are payable directly to the city and the 
preparation of the lists and the certification thereof of all unpaid assessments to the county 
treasurer for collection; 
3. ?Issue all licenses and collect all fees therefor; 
4. ?Be the collector of water rents and all other moneys owing to the city on account of the city 
waterworks system. The director of administrative services shall be responsible for the 
safekeeping of all funds on account of the city waterworks system. 
C. ?The director of administrative services shall have all the authority and shall be charged with all the 
duties prescribed by all of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to the powers and 
duties of city treasurers of municipalities, except that the director of administrative services shall not 
have charge of the purchasing of supplies for or selling property belonging to the city. 
D. ?The director of administrative services shall be appointed by the city manager. Before entering upon 
the duties of the director of administrative services's office, the director of administrative services 
shall take and subscribe to the oath of office, and said oath shall be filed with the clerk thereof. The 
director shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2.32.010; Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 11, 5-29-2001) 


Sec. 2.04.160. - City manager duties. 
    Under the department of administrative services, the duties of the city manager shall include the 
purchase, storage and distribution of supplies needed by the various departments, and the city manager 
shall have charge, under the supervision of the city commission, of selling all real and personal property 
of the city not needed or suitable for public use or that the city manager may have condemned as 
useless. The city manager shall have charge of such storerooms and storehouses as the city may 
possess in which shall be stored all supplies and materials purchased by the city and not delivered to the 
various departments. The city manager shall inspect all supplies delivered to determine quality and 
quantity in conformity with specifications. 
(Code 1982, § 2.32.020) 


Sec. 2.04.170. - Fiscal year; revenue and expenditure estimates. 
A. ?The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1. The city manager shall submit to the commission an 
estimate of the expenditures and revenues of the city departments for the ensuing year. Thereafter, 
and upon receipt of such estimate, the commission shall prepare and pass an appropriation 
resolution. 
B. ?Upon request of the city manager, the commission may transfer any part of an unencumbered 
balance of an appropriation to a purpose or object for which the appropriation for the current year 
has provided insufficient funds, or may authorize a transfer to be made between items appropriated 
to the same office or department. 
C. ?At the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the 
respective funds from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriation. 
(Code 1982, § 2.32.030; Ord. No. 1537, § 12, 5-29-2001) 


Secs. 2.04.180—2.04.290. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE 


Sec. 2.04.300. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall be the head of the fire department, and shall work under the supervision and 
control of the city manager in all matters. The fire chief shall be the executive head of the fire department. 
Whenever state law, contracts or interlocal agreements require the fire chief to perform any service or 
carry out any function, the fire chief shall have the responsibility to perform the service or carry out the 
function. The fire chief shall also be the chief administrative authority in all matters affecting the inspection 
and regulation of, the erection, maintenance, repair and occupancy of buildings including the inspection of 
plumbing and electrical wiring in buildings, and shall have charge of the enforcement of all ordinances of 
the city regulating such matters, and shall see that the laws of the state in respect thereto are enforced 
within the city. The fire chief shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1640, § 2, 6-6-2005) 


Secs. 2.04.310—2.04.440. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 


Secs. 2.04.450—2.04.590. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - RESERVED 


Secs. 2.04.600—2.04.740. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Office of city attorney, MCA 7-4-4601 et seq. 


Sec. 2.04.750. - City attorney—Appointment. 
    The head of the department of law shall be an attorney at law, who has been admitted to practice in 
the state, and shall be known as the city attorney. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of and 
attorney and counsel for the city and for all the officers and departments thereof in matters relating to their 
official duties. The city attorney shall perform duties and have the authority conferred upon city attorneys 
by law. 
(Code 1982, § 2.16.010(A); Ord. No. 1537, § 9, 5-29-2001) 


Sec. 2.04.760. - Same—Authority as head of department. 
    The city attorney shall be appointed by the city manager subject to confirmation by the city 
commission. Before entering upon the duties of the city attorney's office, the city attorney shall take and 
subscribed to the oath of office, and said oath shall be filed with the clerk thereof. The city attorney shall 
receive such salary as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2.16.010(B); Ord. No. 1537, § 9, 5-29-2001) 


Secs. 2.04.770—2.04.890. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION (RESERVED) 


Secs. 2.04.900—2.04.1040. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 8. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (RESERVED)[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1863, adopted March 18, 2013, specified that the department and the director 
of planning be changed to the department and the director of community development. All references 
throughout the Code shall be interpreted as such. 


Secs. 2.04.1050—2.04.1190. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 9. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE 


Sec. 2.04.1200. - Powers and duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be the head of the police department, and shall work under the supervision 
and control of the city manager in all matters. The chief of police shall be the executive head of the police 
department. Whenever state law, contracts or interlocal agreements require the chief of police to perform 
any service or carry out any function, the chief of police shall have the responsibility to perform the 
service or carry out the function. The chief of police shall also be charged with the enforcement of all laws 
and ordinances relating to weights and measures. The chief of police shall receive such salary as shall be 
fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2.40.010; Ord. No. 1537, § 14, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 6-6-2005) 


Secs. 2.04.1210—2.04.1340. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 10. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1851, adopted Jan. 28, 2013, specified that the department and the director of 
public services be changed to the department and the director of public works. All references throughout 
the Code shall be interpreted as such. 


Sec. 2.04.1350. - Director designated; powers and duties. 
    The director of public works shall be the head of the department of public works and shall work under 
the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. The director shall discharge all of the duties 
prescribed by law for that officer, and as such shall manage and have charge of the construction, 
improvements, repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, viaducts and other 
public highways, and of all sewers and sewerage disposal plants, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, 
streams and watercourses. The director shall manage and have charge of the waterworks system owned 
by the city, and improvements thereon, and shall have charge of the enforcement of all obligations of 
privately owned or operated public utilities enforceable by the city. The director shall have charge and 
supervision of the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates for public 
work; and charge of the cleaning, sprinkling and lighting of streets and public places; and of the collection 
and disposal of waste; and charge and supervision of the preservation of papers, plans, tools and 
appliances belonging to the city and pertaining to the department of public works. The director shall 
receive such salary as may be fixed by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2.44.010; Ord. No. 1537, § 15, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1643, § 4, 7-18-2005) 


Sec. 2.04.1360. - Sewer connection requirements; director powers and duties. 
    The director of public works shall have authority to compel the making of sewer connections 
whenever, in view of a contemplated street improvement which has been ordered by the commission, or 
as a sanitary regulation, a sewer connection should in the director's judgment be constructed. The 
director shall cause written notice requiring such construction to be given to the owner of each lot or 
parcel of land for which such connection is to be made. Such notice shall be served by the director of 
public service or some person designated by the director in the manner provided for the service of 
summons in civil actions. Nonresidents of the city, or persons who cannot be found, may be served by 
one publication of such notice in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. It shall state the time 
within which such connections shall be constructed, and if they are not constructed within the time 
specified, they may be constructed by the city and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of five percent, 
assessed against the lots and lands for which such connections are made. Such assessments shall be 
certified and collected as other assessments for street improvements. 
(Code 1982, § 2.44.020; Ord. No. 1537, § 16, 5-29-2001) 


Sec. 2.04.1370. - Engineer and other department personnel. 
    In the department of public works there may be an engineer, who may be referred to as the city 
engineer, and there shall be such officers and employees as the city manager may determine, all of 
whom shall work under the direction and supervision of the director of public service. Before entering 
upon the duties of the engineer's office, the engineer shall take and subscribe to the oath of office , and 
such oath shall be filed with the clerk thereof. The engineer and all of the officers and employees in the 
department of public works shall receive such salary or compensation as may be fixed by the city 
manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2.44.030; Ord. No. 1537, § 17, 5-29-2001) 


ARTICLE 5. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 2.05.010—2.05.140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - RECREATION AND PARKS ADVISORY BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.150. - Recreation and parks advisory board creation, membership and meetings. 
A. ?The city commission shall appoint a recreation and parks advisory board, hereinafter referred to as 
the "board," which shall consist of up to 14 members, representing as many facets of recreational 
programs as possible and selected as follows: 
1. ?Seven of the members shall be city residents appointed by the city commission; 
2. ?Two of the members shall be recommended by the county board of commissioners, with final 
appointment to be made by the city commission; 
3. ?Up to three additional at-large members may be appointed by the city commission, with city 
residency being a consideration, but not a mandatory requirement; and 
4. ?Up to two student members, one from Montana State University, the other from an area 
secondary school, including home schooled students, may be appointed by the city 
commission, with city residency being a consideration, but not a mandatory requirement. If no 
students apply for these positions by October of a given year, then interested residents may 
apply for and be appointed for one year terms. Student one year terms shall begin in September 
and end in August of each year. 
B. ?All members shall be appointed for terms of three years, except student members who shall be 
appointed for a term of one year. A majority of the members on the board, regardless of its size, shall 
be residents of the city. 
C. ?The board shall hold an annual meeting in January, at which meeting it shall elect one of its 
members as chair of the board to serve as such for the ensuing year; and it shall hold such other 
meeting as may be required to transact business which may come before it. A majority of the voting 
members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of conducting business. Regular 
meetings will be held on such dates as may be set by the board, and special meetings may be held 
on any date at the request of a majority of the members of the board, the city manager or the city 
commission. All meetings shall be open to the public. Reasonable public notice shall be given prior 
to all regular and special meetings. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.030; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1507, § 1, 
2000; Ord. No. 1993 , § 1, 1-4-2018) 


Sec. 2.05.160. - Board, ex officio member. 
    The city manager shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the board. It shall be the city 
manager's duty to keep the board informed as to city policies, the city budget, and to make available to 
them any information which the city manager deems pertinent to the recreation and parks advisory board. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.050; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1312, § 3, 1990) 


Sec. 2.05.170. - Board secretary. 
    The board shall select a secretary, who shall attend all meetings of the board and keep correct 
minutes of all proceedings of the board in a book to be provided for that purpose, to be called the "record 
of the recreation and parks advisory board of the City of Bozeman" and shall perform such other duties 
necessarily implied by the activities and duties of the board. The secretary may be an employee of the 
city approved by the city manager or a board member. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.060; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1312, § 4, 1990) 


Sec. 2.05.180. - Board recommendations to city manager. 
A. ?The board shall make recommendations to the city manager on the following subjects: 
1. ?The number and nature of duties of department of parks and recreation employees and/or 
assistants; 
2. ?Recreation program offerings; 
3. ?Rules and regulations for the management of playgrounds, recreation centers and other 
recreation places and activities; 
4. ?Fees to be charged for activities and use of recreation property; 
5. ?Annually review with administration each year a proposed budget covering the recreational 
activities to be offered for the ensuing fiscal year; and 
6. ?Other recommendations as requested. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.070; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1643, § 3, 7-18-2005) 


Sec. 2.05.190. - Board recommendations to city commission. 
A. ?The board shall make recommendations to the city commission on policy and procedural matters in 
the field of public recreation. Subject to the approval of the city manager, the board shall make 
recommendations on the following subjects: 
1. ?Equipment, operation and supervision of playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming pools and 
indoor recreation facilities, on or in any public grounds or buildings, either within or without the 
city, which the city commission may from time to time provide, acquire, authorize, offer, 
designate or set apart for such use; 
2. ?The organization and conduct of play and recreation activities on the grounds and in the 
buildings under the control of the school district or the county, upon approval of the respective 
entity; 
3. ?The use of any grounds, places, buildings or facilities which may be offered, either temporarily 
or permanently, by individuals or corporations for playground or recreational purposes; 
4. ?On park land or cash-in-lieu proposals by developers through the planning process; and 
5. ?Other recommendations as requested. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.080; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985) 


Sec. 2.05.200. - Board; donations. 
    When approved by the city commission, the board may, on behalf of the city, receive donations, 
legacies or bequests for the improvement or maintenance of playgrounds, recreation centers or other 
recreational facilities; and all moneys that may be derived from such donations, legacies or bequests shall 
be deposited with the director of administrative services of the city to the credit of the recreation trust 
fund; and the same may be drawn therefrom and paid out upon approval of the city commission in the 
same manner as provided in payment of moneys legally appropriated for the acquisition, support and 
improvement for playgrounds, recreation centers and other recreation places; and the moneys so derived 
from such donations, legacies or bequests shall be used solely for such playground or recreation uses. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.090; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985) 


Sec. 2.05.210. - Recreation fees. 
    Fees charged by the division for activities and use of recreation property shall be deposited with the 
director of administrative services. 
(Code 1982, § 2.36.110; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 1985) 


Secs. 2.05.220—2.05.340. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Libraries, MCA 22-1-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.05.350. - Appointment; composition and organization. 
    The board of trustees of the Bozeman Public Library shall be composed of five persons, and shall be 
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the commission, and shall serve without pay. The 
trustees shall hold their office for the term of five years, and one trustee shall be appointed annually at the 
beginning of each fiscal year for the term of five years, and until such trustee's successor is appointed 
and qualifies. Trustees shall serve no more than two full terms in succession. The powers and duties of 
the board shall be those prescribed by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2.56.010(A); Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1163, 1984) 


Sec. 2.05.360. - Powers and duties. 
    The trustees of the library board shall perfect their own organization, and select such officers for 
such board as they may deem advisable. The chair and vice-chair of the board shall be one of their 
number. They shall have power to select librarians and other employees as they may determine . They 
shall have power to receive books from all sources for the use and benefit of the library and to purchase 
books therefor with any money available for that purpose, and power to prescribe all rules and regulations 
for the use of books and the preservation of the same. The board shall keep a record of its transactions, 
and shall make a report to the city commission at the close of each calendar year, covering the business 
transacted by it during the year. 
(Code 1982, § 2.56.010(B); Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1163, 1984) 


Secs. 2.05.370—2.05.490. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - CITY PLANNING BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.500. - Established; powers and duties. 
    Pursuant to and under the provisions of title 76, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-1-101 et seq.), 
the city commission of the city does create and establish a city planning board to be known as the 
"Bozeman Planning Board" as provided in said title, and does by this division adopt all of the sections of 
the laws of the state aforementioned that specifically pertain to a city planning board, granting and 
delegating to the city planning board all of the rights, privileges, powers, duties and responsibilities 
thereto appertaining. 
(Code 1982, § 2.66.010; Ord. No. 1508, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1494, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 2.05.510. - Jurisdiction. 
    The planning board shall have such jurisdiction as provided by state law. 
(Code 1982, § 2.66.020; Ord. No. 1508 § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1494 § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 2.05.520. - Composition. 
A. ?The planning board shall consist of nine members, appointed to two-year terms to expire on January 
31, as follows: 
1. ?One member appointed by the city commission from its own membership. The term of the 
appointed member shall be coextensive with the term of office to which such member has been 
elected or appointed unless the commission, on its first regular meeting of each year, appoints 
another to serve as its representative or unless the appointee's commission term is terminated; 
2. ?Three members appointed by the city commission, one of whom, at the commission's discretion, 
may be an employee of the city or hold public office in the city or the county. The appointments 
shall be for two-year terms, with those terms to expire on January 31 of odd-numbered years; 
3. ?One member appointed by the mayor, upon designation by the county board of commissioners, 
who may be a member of the board of county commissioners or an office holder or employee of 
the county. This appointment shall expire on January 31 of odd-numbered years; 
4. ?Four citizen members appointed by the mayor, who shall be resident freeholders within the city 
limits, and who shall be qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to the 
development of the city. These appointments shall be coterminous with the term of the mayor. 
B. ?The city clerk shall certify the members appointed by the city commission. The certificates shall be 
sent to and become a part of the records of the planning board. The mayor shall make similar 
certification for the appointment of citizen members. 
(Code 1982, § 2.66.030; Ord. No. 1494, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1508, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1686, § 1, 
1-8-2007) 


Secs. 2.05.530—2.05.650. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - CEMETERY BOARD[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Cemetery services, MCA 7-35-2131 et seq.; cemetery associations, MCA 35-20-
101 et seq.; mausoleum-columbarium authorities, MCA 35-21-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.05.660. - Composition. 
    There is created a cemetery board consisting of seven members to be appointed by the city 
commission for three-year staggered terms. Should a vacancy occur on the board, the city commission 
shall appoint a new member to complete the term of appointment so vacated. A majority of the board 
members shall be residents of the city and all members shall serve without remuneration. Whenever 
practicable, one of the members of the board shall be a representative of an active, recognized veterans 
group. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.030(A); Ord. No. 1200, 1986; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1643, § 5, 
7-18-2005; Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 4-7-2008) 


Sec. 2.05.670. - Organization. 
    The cemetery board, as herein created, shall serve as an advisory board to both the city commission 
and city administration and, as such, shall be charged with making such investigation and 
recommendations as requested or deemed necessary for the operation of the cemetery and as required 
in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.030(B); Ord. No. 1200, 1986; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1643, § 5, 
7-18-2005; Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 4-7-2008) 


Sec. 2.05.680. - Power and duties. 
    The members of the cemetery board shall perfect their own organization and select such officers for 
the board as they deem advisable. They shall cause to be kept correct minutes of all proceedings of the 
board and the same shall be available for public review in the office of the clerk of the commission. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.030(C); Ord. No. 1200, 1986; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1643, § 5, 
7-18-2005; Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 4-7-2008) 


Secs. 2.05.690—2.05.840. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY BOARD[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Antiquities, MCA 22-3-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.05.850. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for an appointed citizen board for the city 
charged with establishing a local historic preservation program, integrating historic preservation into local, 
state and federal planning and decision-making processes, identifying, evaluating and protecting historic 
resources within Bozeman, and educating the general public about historic preservation. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.010; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 1998) 


Sec. 2.05.860. - Object. 
    This division is designed as a measure to establish a local historic preservation program designed to 
promote and protect historic and prehistoric sites, structures, objects, buildings and historic districts by 
addressing historic preservation issues at the local level and integrating them into local, state and federal 
planning and decision-making processes. The historic preservation program will include the identification 
and evaluation of historic resources through regularly enacted cultural resource surveys. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.020; Ord. No. 1180, § 2, 1985; Ord. No. 1927 , § 1, 4-11-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.870. - Scope. 
    The historic preservation advisory board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city commission, 
city planning board, zoning commission and other staff members or boards seeking advice on historic 
preservation issues. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.030; Ord. No. 1180, § 3, 1985; Ord. No. 1454, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 2.05.880. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Historic preservation advisory board" means the board created by this division and appointed 
by the local government of the city which is responsible for creating and administering a historic 
preservation program. 
2. ?"Historic preservation officer" hereinafter called "preservation officer" means the official 
appointed by the local government who is charged with the responsibility of acting as staff 
liaison to the historic preservation advisory board. 
(Code 1982, § § 2.80.040; Ord. No. 1180, § 4, 1985; Ord. No. 1454, § 3, 1998; Ord. No. 1927 , § 
2, 4-11-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.890. - Establishment and quorum. 
A. ?In order to carry out the purpose of this division, an historic preservation advisory board is created. 
All historic preservation advisory board members shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or 
knowledge in historic preservation. Information on the credentials of the historic preservation 
advisory board members must be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and available during 
regular office hours for inspection by the public. This historic preservation advisory board shall 
consist of up to seven members, as follows: 
1. ?At least three members shall meet the Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualification 
Standards in the disciplines of history, planning, archaeology, architecture, architectural history, 
historic archaeology, or other historic preservation-related disciplines such as cultural 
geography or cultural anthropology. 
2. ?At least one member shall be an architect holding state or NCARB registration. Retired 
professionals shall be given consideration equal to that of practicing professionals. Residency 
within the city shall not be a prerequisite for membership as a professional representative. 
3. ?At least one member shall live in or own property in a Bozeman historic district, on file at the city 
planning office. A member may be chosen from a locally or nationally designed district. 
4. ?At least four members shall be at-large representatives who reside or own property within the 
city limits. 
5. ?Quorum. A quorum shall be comprised of a minimum of 50 percent of the appointed members, 
of which at least one shall be a professional member. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.050; Ord. No. 1180, § 5, 1985; Ord. No. 1252, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 
1989; Ord. No. 1454, § 4, 1998; Ord. No. 1927 , § 3, 4-11-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.900. - Appointment and term vacancy. 
A. ?All appointments to the historic preservation advisory board shall be made in accordance with the 
procedures adopted by the city commission for appointments to all advisory commissions and 
boards. 
B. ?Terms of office for the historic preservation advisory board members shall be staggered and two 
years in duration. 
C. ?Vacancies on the board should be filled by appointment in accordance with the procedures adopted 
by the city commission for appointments to all advisory commissions and boards. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.060; Ord. No. 1180, § 6, 1985; Ord. No. 1252, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 1454, § 5, 
1998) 


Sec. 2.05.910. - Staff. 
A. ?The preservation officer for Bozeman shall act as staff liaison to the historic preservation advisory 
board. The preservation officer shall be employed by the appropriate city department. A member of 
the historic preservation advisory board may be invited to participate in the city's process for 
selection and hiring of a preservation office when the position is vacant. 
B. ?The preservation officer shall satisfy the Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualification 
Standards. 
C. ?Duties of the preservation officer include coordinating the local historic preservation programs, 
helping in the development of local surveys, projects and historic preservation planning documents, 
advising and providing assistance to the local historic preservation advisory board, government 
agencies and the public, and ensuring to the extent practicable, that the duties and responsibilities 
delegated by this division are carried out. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.070; Ord. No. 1180, § 7, 1985; Ord. No. 1454, § 6, 1998; Ord. No. 1927 , § 4, 
4-11-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.920. - Meetings; notice of meetings. 
A. ?The historic preservation advisory board shall conduct a minimum of one regularly scheduled 
meeting each month. The chairperson may cancel any meeting or schedule special meetings when 
such meetings are necessary to carry out the provisions of this division, in accordance with city 
advisory board noticing requirements. Regularly scheduled meetings shall be held at such place, day 
and hour as may from time to time be fixed by the board. The presiding officer, a majority of the 
board or the staff liaison may call special meetings of the board, upon at least 48 hours notice to 
each member personally served on each member through email or left at the member's usual place 
of residence and also notice to the public by, at a minimum, posting the agenda on the city's website 
and posting board. 
B. ?All meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with the Montana State Open Meeting Law. 
C. ?The historic preservation advisory board shall establish its own bylaws conforming to the guidelines 
set forth in the "Certified Local Government Program in Montana" and by the City of Bozeman. All 
written or taped minutes, reports and case decisions are available to the public. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.080; Ord. No. 1180, § 8, 1985; Ord. No. 1454, § 7, 1998; Ord. No. 1927 , § 5, 
4-11-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.930. - Powers and duties. 
A. ?The historic preservation advisory board shall have the powers and duties to: 
1. ?Advocate for the maintenance and updating of the survey and inventory of historic and 
prehistoric properties. The board will make an annual recommendation prioritizing areas or sites 
within the city limits for cultural resource survey work. 
2. ?Use the National Register of Historic Places criteria for designation of properties as a historic 
district or site and shall apply these criteria for local designation of historic and prehistoric 
properties; 
3. ?Review and comment on: 
a. ?Planning and zoning programs undertaken by the city, state and federal agencies which 
relate to historic resources. This review and comment shall be scheduled and occur within 
time lines established for whatever action is being taken; 
b. ?Environmental assessments, environmental impact statements and other similar 
documents pertaining to historic districts, landmark sites, or landmark properties within the 
city. To facilitate interagency cooperation, a copy of comments by the historic preservation 
advisory board provided to state or federal agencies may be sent to the state historic 
preservation office. Transmittal of comments shall be through the historic preservation 
officer; 
c. ?Make recommendations to the appropriate advisory body or decision-making body 
concerning any changes or modifications to the zoning regulations and zoning district 
boundaries. Transmittal of comments shall be through the historic preservation officer; 
d. ?Upon request of the reviewing authority make recommendations to the review authority 
regarding zoning applications pertaining to historic properties and which require public 
notice. 
e. ?Proposals to nominate properties to the National Register of Historic Places according to 
the Montana State Regulations for Certified Local Governments, Section VI(B). This 
includes reviewing and commenting on any national register nominations on property 
within the city; 
4. ?Render advice and guidance upon request of the property owner as to the restoration, 
alteration, decoration, landscaping or maintenance of potentially historic buildings or structures. 
The historic preservation advisory board may create voluntary design guidelines which will be 
made available to the public for assistance in preservation projects; 
5. ?Participate in, promote and conduct public information, educational and interpretive programs 
pertaining to historic preservation; 
6. ?Review and process applications for tax abatement pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 424 of 
the Laws of 1989 of the State of Montana as codified by MCA 15-24-1601 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 2.80.090; Ord. No. 1180, § 9, 1985; Ord. No. 1296, § 2, 1989; Ord. No. 1454, § 8, 
1998; Ord. No. 1927 , § 6, 4-11-2016) 


Secs. 2.05.940—2.05.1090. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS 


Sec. 2.05.1100. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and cited as the Neighborhood Recognition Ordinance (NRO) of the 
City of Bozeman (City), except when cited herein, where it shall be referred to as "this division". 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.010), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1110. - Intent and purpose. 
A. ?The city commission finds that there is a need to create and maintain effective channels of 
communication with the citizens of Bozeman on matters affecting the livability of their neighborhoods 
and the community in general. It is the intent of the city commission, through the recognition of 
neighborhood associations, to foster partnerships of open communication between the city and its 
neighborhoods; to enhance the environment in which citizens are afforded an opportunity to 
participate in local governmental decisions; to foster cooperation and consensus among diverse 
interests; to assist the city and neighborhood residents in developing solutions to mutual problems; 
and to develop in the citizens a sense of personal pride and responsibility for their neighborhood. 
B. ?The city Charter requires that minimum recognition requirements for neighborhood associations be 
established by ordinance (Charter section 4.06, part B). 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.020), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1120. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"City agency" means and includes all departments, bureaus, offices, boards, councils, liaisons, 
task forces and commissions of the City of Bozeman. 
2. ?"City liaison" means the designee of the city manager responsible for administration and 
enforcement of the responsibilities of the City of Bozeman as defined by this division in section 
2.05.1220. 
3. ?"InterNeighborhood Council (INC)" means the council composed of delegates selected by each 
recognized neighborhood association. 
4. ?"Minimum standards" means standards contained within this division used to assess the 
eligibility of neighborhood associations to be recognized by the City of Bozeman and to 
participate on the INC. 
5. ?"Neighborhood" means a geographically contiguous self-selected community. 
6. ?"Recognized neighborhood association" means an organization formed by residents for the 
purpose of maintaining and/or improving the livability and quality of their neighborhood, formally 
recognized by the INC and therefore the City of Bozeman and subject to this division. 
7. ?"Non-recognized neighborhood association" means an organization formed by residents for the 
purpose of maintaining and/or improving the livability and quality of their neighborhood. A non-
recognized neighborhood association is one which has not met the minimum standards for 
recognition as set forth in this division or has lost its recognized status for failing to comply with 
the minimum standards as set forth in this division. A non-recognized neighborhood association 
has no representation on the INC. 
8. ?"Neighborhood group" means a loosely organized, non-recognized group of residents formed 
for the purpose of maintaining and/or improving the livability and quality of their neighborhood 
and that demonstrates an interest in forming a recognized neighborhood association. A 
neighborhood group has no representation on the INC. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.030), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1130. - Authority. 
A. ?Residents, property owners, and representatives of businesses and nonprofit organizations of any 
city area not recognized previously may form a recognized neighborhood association. Associations 
seeking formal recognition by the city may make a written request to the city liaison for formal 
recognition as a neighborhood association under the provisions of this division. Upon receipt of 
application materials from a non-recognized neighborhood association or neighborhood group, the 
city liaison shall issue a report and recommendation to the INC. Recognition of a non-recognized 
neighborhood association or neighborhood group shall be made by a majority vote of the INC. 
B. ?Prior to requesting recognition, a non-recognized neighborhood association or neighborhood group 
shall hold one or more adequately noticed public meetings for the purpose of gathering information, 
approving bylaws, establishing boundaries, electing officers and determining a name for the 
association. Adequate notice constitutes mailing, emailing, faxing and/or hand-delivering notices to 
all eligible for membership, as set forth in section 2.05.1150, within the proposed boundaries of the 
non-recognized neighborhood association or neighborhood group and/or posting of notices in 
prominent locations throughout the neighborhood. Notices shall be mailed, emailed, faxed, delivered 
and/or posted at least seven business days prior to the meeting date. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.040), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1140. - Bylaws. 
A. ?In order to be recognized, each neighborhood association shall adopt bylaws which will at a 
minimum include: 
1. ?Statement of organizational purpose; 
2. ?Method for election of officers and description of their terms; 
3. ?Stated duties and responsibilities for officers; 
4. ?Delineation of clear geographic boundaries; 
5. ?Procedures for defining eligibility for neighborhood association membership as set forth in 
section 2.05.1150; 
6. ?Stipulation for one annual meeting; and 
7. ?Defined means of communicating with residents in the neighborhood association. 
B. ?The initial bylaws shall be provided to the city liaison as part of the official recognition process by the 
INC, in accordance with this division, and shall be signed by the city liaison and a delegate of the 
INC, and filed with the city. Any bylaw changes must also be filed in writing with the city liaison within 
60 days of the revision. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.050), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1150. - Membership. 
A. ?The membership of recognized neighborhood associations shall be open to all residents, property 
owners, business licensees, and representatives of nonprofit organizations within the defined 
neighborhood boundaries. 
B. ?All eligible for membership in recognized neighborhood associations may actively participate in 
neighborhood events, activities and meetings exercising voting rights pursuant to neighborhood 
association bylaws, without regard to race, national origin, religion, economic status, sex or physical 
ability. 
C. ?A recognized neighborhood association will be responsible for maintaining sign-in sheets and other 
records as required by the neighborhood association bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.060), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1160. - Boundaries. 
A. ?Boundaries of recognized neighborhood associations will be defined by the association membership, 
with assistance from city liaison and INC, and may not overlap other recognized neighborhood 
association boundaries. A boundary description shall be included in neighborhood association 
bylaws. 
B. ?A newly-forming non-recognized neighborhood association or neighborhood group may file, with the 
city liaison's office, proposed boundaries while working towards meeting the minimum standards of 
this division. The city liaison shall be available to provide assistance to newly-forming, non-
recognized neighborhood associations or neighborhood groups in reviewing and establishing 
proposed boundaries. If a neighborhood meeting is not noticed and conducted within six months of 
filing application materials with the city liaison, or bylaws are not filed with the city liaison within 12 
months of filing application materials, the proposed boundaries will no longer be considered valid. 
C. ?The city liaison shall be notified in writing and within a reasonable time period of the intent of any 
recognized neighborhood association considering any boundary modifications. Boundary 
modifications may occur after residents in the affected area are given notice and the opportunity to 
vote as prescribed by the recognized neighborhood association's bylaws and provided that any 
modifications do not overlap with an adjacent recognized neighborhood association. The INC and 
relevant city departments will be made aware of neighborhood boundary changes by the city liaison. 
D. ?Boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association may extend beyond the city limits at the 
discretion of the respective neighborhood association. Services to non-city residents within a 
recognized neighborhood association may be limited. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.070), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1170. - Funding. 
    Membership fees shall be voluntary and shall not bar any resident from neighborhood association 
membership or voting privileges. Voluntary dues, contributions, contracts, grants or subscriptions may be 
used by a recognized neighborhood association as provided for in the neighborhood association's bylaws, 
and may be subject to any applicable public funding requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.080), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1180. - Functions and responsibilities of recognized neighborhood associations. 
A. ?All recognized neighborhood associations must meet and continue to maintain conformity with the 
minimum standards as established by this division in order to benefit from official recognition by the 
city and be eligible to elect members to the INC. Failure to meet and continue to maintain conformity 
with the minimum standards as established by this division may result in the association's loss of 
official recognition by the city. 
B. ?Recognized neighborhood associations are autonomous organizations. Although the city may 
provide limited forms of financial aid to officially recognized neighborhood associations, recognized 
neighborhood associations are not considered agencies of the city. Responsibilities of a recognized 
neighborhood association include: 
1. ?Becoming a self-sustaining organization that will further the purpose and intent of this division. 
2. ?Making a good faith effort to recruit a diverse and representative group of residents, property 
owners, business and nonprofit representatives to participate in and perpetuate the governance 
and operation of the neighborhood association. 
3. ?Providing effective community participation in government by defining, articulating and 
addressing neighborhood problems and concerns; by advising, consulting and cooperating with 
the various city departments, boards, councils and task forces; and by notifying and relaying 
information to residents, property owners, business and nonprofit representatives and the city 
liaison regarding matters that affect their respective neighborhoods. 
4. ?Providing community input on the efficiency and efficacy of the city's delivery of services. 
5. ?Making recommendations concerning particular actions, policies, plans, programs, projects, and 
other matters of the city commission and to any city department or agency where the livability of 
the neighborhood is affected, including, but not limited to, land use, housing, community 
facilities, human services, social and recreational programs, open space and parks, traffic and 
transportation, environmental quality, and public safety. 
6. ?Establishing and following clear processes for reporting the association's position on matters 
affecting their respective neighborhoods to the city. 
7. ?Assisting city staff in determining priority needs affecting the quality of life for the neighborhood 
and the overall community; 
8. ?Undertaking and managing projects to benefit the recognized neighborhood association as may 
be agreed upon by the recognized neighborhood association membership or contracted with the 
city and/or other public agencies. 
9. ?Maintaining current board rosters and providing the city liaison with the names, addresses, 
email addresses and phone numbers of each of the officers on their board who will receive all 
notices and other mailings from the city. 
10. ?Electing or appointing, in accordance with recognized neighborhood association bylaws, an 
INC delegate and an alternate. 
11. ?Submission, by each recognized neighborhood association, of an annual report to the city 
liaison. The report shall be submitted no later than June 30 of each year. This provision does 
not pertain to recognized neighborhood associations in existence less than six months prior to 
the June 30 deadline. Each report shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
a. ?Names, addresses, email addresses and telephone numbers of contact persons and 
officers elected and/or appointed at the annual election; 
b. ?Dates of neighborhood meetings held during the previous calendar year; 
c. ?Any changes to the approved bylaws, including changes in neighborhood boundaries; 
d. ?A completed annual neighborhood survey form provided by the city; and 
e. ?Minutes from the organization's annual meeting. 
C. ?The requested information will aid in maintaining updated listings of recognized neighborhood 
associations. 
D. ?Additionally, an annual report affords the city the opportunity to review annual changes in recognized 
neighborhood associations that may threaten their recognized status as defined in this division. If a 
recognized neighborhood association does not return the requested information, the city liaison will 
advise the INC. The INC will determine whether the city will continue to formally recognize the 
neighborhood association. 
E. ?If any recognized neighborhood association's annual report is lacking any of the minimum 
requirements, the INC will review, comment, and re-evaluate the recognized status of the 
neighborhood association. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.090), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1190. - Accountability. 
A. ?Recognized neighborhood associations shall be accountable to the membership of the 
neighborhood which they represent. 
B. ?They shall be responsible for notifying the membership about meetings, elections, and other 
association events. 
C. ?All meetings of a recognized neighborhood association shall be open to the public; subject to the 
state's open meeting laws. 
D. ?A recognized neighborhood association shall make a good faith effort to seek the views of the 
people affected by proposed policies or actions and shall consider all proposed options before 
adopting any final recommendations or actions. 
E. ?INC delegates will serve as liaison between city staff and the recognized neighborhood association, 
and shall be selected by the neighborhood association membership in accordance with 
neighborhood association bylaws. 
F. ?All recognized neighborhood associations shall establish procedures, through the adoption of 
bylaws, which shall at a minimum provide that the general membership of such associations have 
the ability to register support or opposition to any issue, action or proposed action by the city 
including, but not limited to, holding of a special meeting, if necessary, to address such issue or 
action. When a recognized neighborhood association presents its official position on an issue, action 
or proposed action to the city, it shall identify how the general neighborhood association membership 
was contacted, and the vote tally for and against the position asserted by the association. 
1. ?The recognized neighborhood association shall establish and follow a clear method for reporting 
to the city actions which accurately reflect the neighborhood's position. When a recognized 
neighborhood association presents its official position on an issue to the city, it shall be 
prepared to identify whether the decision was reached by the board, a poll of the general 
membership, or by a vote at a general membership meeting, and the vote for and against the 
position. 
2. ?The consensus view of a dissenting minority or minorities on any issue considered shall be 
recorded and transmitted along with any recommendations made by a recognized 
neighborhood association to the city. 
G. ?Nothing in this division shall be considered as a limitation of any citizen's rights to participate directly 
in the decision-making process of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.100), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1200. - Meetings. 
A. ?Recognized neighborhood associations shall hold, at a minimum, an annual meeting. Recognized 
neighborhood associations shall set forth meeting requirements in their bylaws. 
B. ?Recognized neighborhood associations shall hold meetings for all members within their boundaries. 
These meetings shall be open to the public, subject to the state's open meeting laws. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.110), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1210. - InterNeighborhood Council (INC). 
A. ?The INC is a representative organization to which the city may provide limited forms of financial aid. 
The INC is an advisory board to the city commission. 
B. ?The INC shall be composed of one delegate selected by each recognized neighborhood association. 
1. ?A vacancy on the council shall be filled only by the affected recognized neighborhood 
association. 
2. ?Each recognized neighborhood association shall also select one alternate to represent the 
association in the event the selected delegate is unable to participate in the INC. 
3. ?A delegate to the INC unable to attend an INC meeting may provide written authorization for 
another delegate to vote on the delegate's behalf on any matter that may come before the INC 
at that meeting. The written proxy authorization shall state the name of the authorized delegate 
and be signed and dated by the absent delegate. A proxy vote will be fully documented in the 
minutes of the meeting. 
C. ?The INC shall provide a forum for recognized neighborhood associations to come together, share 
information and make recommendations to the city. The INC shall also provide a forum for non-
recognized neighborhood associations, neighborhood groups and city agencies to communicate with 
recognized and non-recognized neighborhood organizations and groups. 
D. ?The INC shall establish and follow a clear method for reporting to the city, actions which accurately 
reflect neighborhood positions. When the INC presents its official position on an issue to the city, it 
shall be prepared to identify whether the decision was reached by consensus or majority vote of the 
INC, a poll of the general membership of each recognized neighborhood association, or by a vote at 
recognized neighborhood association general membership meetings. In each instance, INC shall 
also identify the vote totals for and against the position. 
E. ?The INC shall meet on a regular basis to address city-wide concerns and foster dialogue between 
neighborhoods. 
F. ?The INC shall adopt and maintain bylaws to govern the conduct of their business. These bylaws 
shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of the INC memberships and subsequently ratified by city 
commission. The bylaws shall contain, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1. ?Mission and/or vision; 
2. ?Authorization; 
3. ?Officer elections, terms and vacancies; 
4. ?Voting procedures; 
5. ?Attendance policy; 
6. ?Conflict of interest; and 
7. ?City liaison duties. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.120), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1220. - Responsibilities of the city. 
A. ?The city liaison shall: 
1. ?Provide notice to INC delegates regarding all applications received by the department of 
community development where notification guidelines require that notice be posted on site, 
published in the local newspaper or mailed first class. Notification to the INC delegates shall be 
sent via telephone, mail, email, or facsimile concerning all public hearings associated with the 
application except those that have been postponed to a date certain announced at a prior 
hearing. 
2. ?Provide notice to INC delegates regarding any proposed change to city property which requires 
public notification, including but not limited to change in use, sale, bids and/or leases. 
3. ?Respond within ten working days, or a minimum of five days prior to any related public hearing, 
whichever is sooner, when contacted by an elected officer of a recognized neighborhood 
association or the INC with a request for information regarding any city project. 
4. ?Review recognition requests from non-recognized neighborhood associations and/or 
neighborhood groups and provide a checklist of minimum requirements for recognition, a copy 
of this division and an updated City of Bozeman Neighborhood Boundaries map and assist non-
recognized neighborhood associations and/or neighborhood groups in determining whether 
compliance with the requirements for recognition have been satisfied. 
5. ?Forward a notice of noncompliance to any recognized neighborhood association failing to 
comply with any requirements or provisions set forth in this division. 
a. ?A recognized neighborhood association shall have 90 days from the date of the notice to 
come into compliance with the minimum standards established by this division and provide 
satisfactory evidence of such compliance to the city liaison. 
b. ?Should a recognized neighborhood association fail to provide such evidence, the INC shall 
remove said association from the list of recognized neighborhood associations immediately 
upon the expiration of the 90-day review period. A recognized neighborhood association 
may request one 90 day extension in order to obtain compliant status and provide 
satisfactory evidence of such compliance to the city liaison. Extension requests should be 
forwarded to the city liaison within 30 days of the expiration of the original 90-day term. 
c. ?The INC shall vote on a request from the recognized neighborhood association for an 
extension of time to provide evidence of compliance with minimum standards at the earliest 
possible meeting date and notify the association of any decision within seven days. If a 
request for an extension of time is denied, the terms of the original 90-day compliance 
period shall be enforced. Should the request for an extension be granted, the extension will 
commence on the day following the expiration of the original 90-day term. 
d. ?After expiration of the 90-day review period and extensions, if any, the INC will be entitled 
to revoke the recognized status of a neighborhood association should said association fail 
to provide evidence that the minimum standards for recognition established by this division 
have been satisfied. Said association, under non-recognized status, shall forfeit a delegate 
to the INC and be removed from all official city mailing lists and will lose the opportunity to 
receive services rendered to recognized neighborhood associations until such time as said 
neighborhood association re-activates its recognized status by providing evidence that the 
minimum standards of neighborhood recognition established by this division have been 
satisfied. 
6. ?Provide each recognized neighborhood association with a list of current city departments, their 
respective department heads, including corresponding telephone numbers and provide such 
information on the city's official internet website. 
7. ?Publish a neighborhoods newsletter at least quarterly, so that each recognized neighborhood 
association may communicate pertinent information and increase communication between 
recognized neighborhood associations, their memberships and the city. 
8. ?Create and maintain an updated neighborhood directory, which lists the contact information of 
the recognized neighborhood association's elected officers and/or other recognized 
neighborhood association's designated officers. 
9. ?Provide support services to recognized neighborhood associations, including assistance with 
general communications, newsletters, grant writing, activity planning, public relations, outreach 
efforts, general information and referral, and other technical assistance which may include 
instructions on the use of electronic notification systems. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.130), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1230. - Responsibilities of individuals or entities submitting an application to the department 
of community development. 
A. ?In order for the city liaison to effectively perform their duties executing the intent and purpose of this 
division, as defined in section 2.05.1110, the following shall be performed: 
1. ?As part of any application to the department of community development, the applicant shall 
provide written notice via certified mail, email, facsimile transmission, and/or personal delivery 
to the city liaison if notification guidelines require that notice be posted on site, published in the 
local newspaper or mailed first class. 
2. ?Such notice shall contain a complete set of application materials as submitted to the department 
of community development. 
B. ?Failure to provide proof of such mailing via certified mail, email and/or facsimile transmission report 
to the most recent city liaison address, email address and/or fax number of record, or an affidavit 
attesting hand delivery, shall result in an incomplete application. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.140), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1240. - Administration and enforcement. 
A. ?The city liaison shall administer and enforce the responsibilities of the city as defined by this division 
in section 2.05.1220. The city liaison may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as 
the city manager may supervise and those assistants shall have essentially the same responsibilities 
as directed by the city manager. The city liaison may consult with other persons having expertise in 
relevant subject areas inasmuch as their opinion is necessary for the administration of this division. 
B. ?In the event that the city liaison finds, or is notified, that requirements or provisions of this division 
are being violated by a recognized neighborhood association, the city liaison shall conduct a fact-
finding study and attempt to determine the nature of the violation, if any. Once determined, the city 
liaison shall make initial findings regarding the alleged violation and report those findings and 
supporting evidence to the INC for review. Upon review, the INC may issue a notice of 
noncompliance and may take the action set forth in section 2.05.1220.A.5. 
C. ?In the event that the city liaison finds, or is notified, that requirements or provisions of this division 
have been violated by the INC, the city liaison shall conduct a fact-finding study and attempt to 
determine the nature of the violation, if any. Once determined, the city liaison shall make initial 
findings regarding the alleged violation and report those findings and supporting evidence to the city 
commission for review. Upon review, the city commission may issue a notice of noncompliance and 
require compliance within a reasonable amount of time. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.150), 12-10-2007) 


Sec. 2.05.1250. - Review authority. 
A. ?The city commission reserves the right to review and require revisions to any and all sections set 
forth in this division. 
B. ?Upon review, the INC shall have the authority to affirm, modify or reverse initial administrative 
findings made by the city liaison. 
C. ?Upon review, the city commission shall have the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the findings of 
the INC. The affirmation, modification or reversal of an INC decision by the city commission shall be 
final and binding and shall be set forth in the form of a commission resolution. 
D. ?Notice of the INC review, including date, time and location shall be delivered via certified mail to the 
recognized neighborhood association's officers or board of directors on file with the city. 
E. ?The INC review shall be open to the public and shall allow for testimony on all relevant aspects of 
the alleged violation, proposed action and applicable policies and standards. 
F. ?The INC may establish time limits on testimony or other additional rules regarding the conduct of any 
hearing. 
G. ?Notice of the INC's decision or recommendation shall be delivered via certified mail to the address of 
the recognized neighborhood association's officers or board of directors on file with the city. 
H. ?Decisions of the INC may be appealed by a recognized neighborhood association and shall be 
submitted to the city commission for review. Any appeal of an INC review decision shall be in writing 
and set forth the specific provisions of the INC review decision being appealed. Written appeals must 
be received by the city liaison within 14 days of the date of reception of the notice of decision of the 
INC. Any INC decision not appealed to the city commission within the required timeframe shall be 
considered final and binding. 
I. ?In the event of appeal of an INC review decision, the city liaison shall forward the appeal, INC's 
written decision and the record of the proceedings of the INC hearing to the city commission within 
14 days of receipt of the written appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal documents the commission shall 
conduct a review within a reasonable amount of time. 
(Ord. No. 1728, § 1(2.82.160), 12-10-2007) 


Secs. 2.05.1260—2.05.1390. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 8. - BEAUTIFICATION ADVISORY BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.1400. - Creation. 
    The city commission shall appoint a Bozeman beautification advisory board, hereinafter referred to 
as the "board," and designate the board to act as the advisory board to the city commission on matters 
relating to beautification projects in the Bozeman area. 
(Code 1982, § 2.84.010; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.1410. - Membership; meetings. 
A. ?The board shall consist of up to nine members to be appointed by the city commission. Members of 
this board shall serve three-year staggered terms. Each member may be reappointed without any 
limitation on the number of reappointments. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original 
appointments for the balance of the term remaining. In addition to the appointed membership, a 
member of the department of community development shall serve as an ex-officio, nonvoting 
member. 
B. ?Persons of legal age may be appointed to the board. A majority of the board shall be residents of the 
city. Nonresident members of the board shall have some interest in the city by virtue of working in 
the city, owning property in the city, or entering the city frequently for any lawful purpose. 
C. ?The city shall pay only the expenses of the board which have been authorized by vote of the city 
commission prior to such expense being incurred. Members shall serve without compensation for 
their time and services. 
D. ?Meetings of the board shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of 
the city and the adopted bylaws of the board. 
(Code 1982, § 2.84.020; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.1420. - Duties and responsibilities. 
A. ?The board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
1. ?To identify, investigate and recommend community beautification projects and programs to the 
city commission, and to assist in their implementation once approved; 
2. ?In coordination with the appropriate city staff persons, to investigate and pursue grants and 
other possible funding sources for beautification projects and forward recommendations to city 
staff and the city commission; and 
3. ?To advise the city commission concerning actions related to the beautification of city-owned 
properties and facilities. 
4. ?The board may have such other duties and responsibilities as the city commission, from time to 
time, may direct. 
(Code 1982, § 2.84.030; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.1430. - Authority. 
    The actions of the board shall be advisory only and shall not constitute policy of the city and shall not 
be binding upon the city commission or upon the city. The city may adopt all or any part of any 
recommendation of the board, with or without any changes made by the city commission, as city policy. 
(Code 1982, § 2.84.040; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 1993) 


Secs. 2.05.1440—2.05.1590. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 9. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL 


Sec. 2.05.1600. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for an economic development council consisting 
of business leaders, economic development leaders, and others; to advise the city commission on 
economic development issues and to review the implementation of the City of Bozeman Economic 
Development Plan as adopted by Resolution No. 4195. 
(Ord. No. 1784, § 2(2.86.010), 4-26-2010) 


Sec. 2.05.1610. - Creation; powers, duties and authority; membership. 
A. ?Creation; powers, duties and authority. The city commission creates the economic development 
council (EDC) and authorizes the EDC to exercise any of the following powers and duties: 
1. ?Advise the city commission on economic development issues. 
2. ?Review the implementation of the City of Bozeman Economic Development Plan and provide 
related recommendations. 
3. ?Adopt bylaws, subject to the approval of the city commission, for the operation of the board. 
4. ?The council may have such other duties and responsibilities as the city commission, from time 
to time, may direct. 
5. ?The actions of the council shall be advisory only and shall not constitute policy of the city and 
shall not be binding upon the city commission or upon the city. The city may adopt all or any 
part of any recommendation of the council, with or without any changes made by the city 
commission as city policy. 
B. ?Members; appointments and terms. 
1. ?All appointments to the EDC shall be made by the city commission. 
2. ?The majority of councilmembers shall be business leaders and economic development leaders. 
3. ?Membership. 
a. ?There shall be seven members of the economic development council and there shall 
always be at least five but not more than seven members of the EDC, amendable from 
time to time by duly approved resolution of the city commission. The terms of the initial 
seven members shall be as follows. 
b. ?One member to serve for one year, two members to serve for two years, two members to 
serve for three years and two to serve for terms of four years from the date of their 
appointment. After initial terms, councilmembers shall serve three year staggered terms. 
Each member may be reappointed without any limitation on the number of reappointments. 
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments for the balance of 
the term remaining. 
4. ?The city commission shall affirm one city commissioner to act as liaison between the council 
and commission. 
5. ?A councilmember shall receive no compensation for the councilmember's service. 
Councilmembers shall be entitled to previously authorized expenses, including travel expenses, 
incurred during the discharge of duties. 
6. ?Persons of legal age may be appointed to the council. A majority of the council shall be 
residents of the city. Nonresident members of the council shall have some interest in the city by 
virtue of working in the city or owning property in the city. 
7. ?A councilmember may be removed by a majority vote of the city commission for any reason. 
C. ?Office of agency; staff support. The council shall maintain its records in the office of the city staff 
person designated to assist the council. The staff person so designated shall attend most meetings 
of the council and will be responsible to assist the council in the scheduling of meetings, preparation 
and distribution of agendas and meeting minutes and perform other supportive functions that may be 
considered reasonable in the execution of the duties of the council. The staff person may also serve 
as the liaison between the council, the city manager and the city commission. 
D. ?Meetings; election of officers. 
1. ?The economic development council shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its 
powers and duties as provided in this section. 
2. ?The economic development council shall adopt bylaws enabling it to elect officers, set officer 
terms, and establish regular meeting times. 
E. ?Duration. The economic development council shall remain in effect as long as necessary to achieve 
the goal of the council. 
F. ?Ethics provisions. All council activities and members are subject to all other provisions of this Code, 
including article 3, division 4 of this chapter, pertaining to the code of ethics. 
G. ?State law applicable. All meetings of the council shall be subject to the state's open meeting laws 
and may not be held with less than 48 hours' notice. All written and electronic information shall be 
considered a public record and subject to disclosure pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 1784, § 2(2.86.020), 4-26-2010) 


Secs. 2.05.1620—2.05.1740. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 10. - URBAN RENEWAL, TAX INCREMENT, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT BOARDS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2 and 3, adopted June 3, 2013 , amended Div. 10 in its entirety, in 
effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as set out herein. The former Div. 10, §§ 2.05.1750—
2.05.1800, pertained to the tax increment financing industrial district board and derived from §§ 
2.88.010—2.88.060 of the 1982 Code; Ord. No. 1337, § 1, 1991; and Ord. No. 1339, § 1, 1991. 
State Law reference— Urban Renewal Law, MCA 7-15-4201 et seq. 


Sec. 2.05.1750. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for the authority of the city commission to create 
advisory boards comprised of citizens of Bozeman, Montana to assist in the administration and 
implementation of urban renewal, tax increment financing, and other districts created pursuant to Title 7, 
Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA, which may be granted authority to use tax increment financing. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1760. - Creation; powers and duties. 
    The city commission may by resolution or ordinance create an urban renewal board or economic 
development district board to exercise any of the powers authorized pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 
42 and 43, MCA which are specifically authorized for that board by the city commission. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1770. - Members; appointment and terms. 
A. ?All appointments to a board created pursuant to this division will be made by the city commission. 
B. ?A board created pursuant to this division shall consist of at least five and not more than seven 
members with the initial terms as follows: one member appointed for one year, one for two years, 
two for three years, and the remainder for four years. Each appointment thereafter shall be for four 
years. 
C. ?The city commission may determine in the resolution or ordinance creating the board that some 
positions must be filled by persons with specific backgrounds, expertise, or experiences, while other 
positions may be at large. 
D. ?Each board member shall hold office until the board member's successor has been appointed and 
has qualified. 
E. ?A board member shall receive no compensation for the board member's services, but shall be 
entitled to previously authorized expenses, including travelling expenses, incurred in the discharge of 
the board member's duties. 
F. ?Any persons may be appointed as board members if they are residents of, property owners within, or 
gainfully employed by a business or firm located within the city. The city commission may give 
preference to residents, business owners or employees, or property owners of the district. A majority 
of members must reside or own real property within the city. 
G. ?A board member may be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty or misconduct in office, or as 
provided for by law. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1780. - Meetings; elections of officers; records; ethics. 
A. ?A board created pursuant to this division shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its 
powers and duties as provided for by resolution or ordinance of the city commission. 
B. ?A board created pursuant to this division shall adopt bylaws enabling it to elect officers, set officer 
terms and establish regular meeting times. All bylaws must be approved by the city commission. 
C. ?All meetings of the board are subject to the open meetings provisions of Montana law and all 
proceedings of the board shall be subject to the public records requirements of Montana law. 
D. ?Board members are subject to the state and city's code of ethics and must attend annual ethics 
training. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1790. - Annual reports. 
    A board created pursuant to this division shall file with the city commission, on a date as determined 
by the director of administrative services, a report of its activities for the preceding calendar year and shall 
publish notice of said report in compliance with MCA 7-15-4237. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1800. - Reserved. 


Sec. 2.05.1810. - North Park urban renewal board. 
    There hereby exists a North Park urban renewal district board created pursuant to Ordinance 1979 
for the implementation and administration of the North Park urban renewal district. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ; Ord. No. 1979 , § 13, 10-9-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1979 , § 13, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, amended § 2.05.1810 title to read as 
set out herein. The former § 2.05.1810 title pertained to North Park industrial district board. 


Sec. 2.05.1820. - Downtown Area urban renewal district board. 
    There hereby exists a downtown area urban renewal district board created pursuant to Ordinance 
1409 for the implementation and administration of the downtown urban renewal district. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1830. - Bozeman Midtown urban renewal board. 
    There hereby exists a North Seventh Avenue urban renewal district board created pursuant to 
Ordinance 1685 for the implementation and administration of the North Seventh Avenue urban renewal 
district. The North Seventh Avenue urban renewal district board is hereby renamed the Bozeman 
Midtown urban renewal district board pursuant to Ordinance 1925 for the implementation and 
administration of the Bozeman Midtown urban renewal district. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ; Ord. No. 1925, § 12, 11-16-2015 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1840. - Northeast urban renewal board. 
    There hereby exists a northeast urban renewal district board created pursuant to Ordinance 1655 for 
the implementation and administration of the northeast avenue urban renewal district. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.05.1850. - South Bozeman technology district board. 
    There hereby exists a South Bozeman technology district board created pursuant to Resolution 4439 
for the implementation and administration of the South Bozeman Technology District. 
( Ord. No. 1861, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Secs. 2.05.1860—2.05.1940. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 11. - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS BOARDS OF TRUSTEES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Business improvement districts, MCA 7-12-1101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.05.1950. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for boards of trustees for the several business 
improvement districts within the City of Bozeman created pursuant to title 7, chapter 12, part 11, Montana 
Code Annotated (MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). The boards of trustees for each business improvement district 
shall have the powers enumerated herein with respect to the program for each business improvement 
district as described in article 6, division 8 of this chapter. Each board of trustees is a public body and 
shall comply with all laws of the state regarding notice and opportunity to be heard, open meetings, public 
participation, and maintenance of public records. 
(Ord. No. 1765, § 2(2.90.010), 8-10-2009) 


Sec. 2.05.1960. - Bozeman Tourism Business Improvement District Board. 
A. ?Creation; powers and duties. The city commission creates the Bozeman Tourism Business 
Improvement District (BTBID) board of trustees and authorizes the BTBID board of trustees to 
exercise any of the following business improvement district powers, in conjunction with 
administration of the BTBID created pursuant to article 6, division 8 of this chapter: 
1. ?Sue and be sued; 
2. ?Enter into contracts to carry out the function of the BTBID; 
3. ?Hire and terminate personnel needed for its purposes; 
4. ?Provide adequate liability insurance for the affairs of the BTBID; 
5. ?Promote private investment and business expansion in the BTBID; 
6. ?Provide for the management and administration of the affairs of the BTBID; 
7. ?Promote business activity by advertising, decorating, marketing, and promoting and managing 
events and other actions designed for the general promotion of business activities in the BTBID; 
8. ?Perform such other functions as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this division and to 
further the objectives of the BTBID; 
9. ?Adopt bylaws, subject to the approval of the city commission, for the operation of the board and 
develop procedures for the collection and maintenance of BTBID records and the protection of 
district members' trade secrets to the extent allowable by state law; and 
10. ?Authorize the acquisition and disposal of real property upon the consent of the city 
commission. 
B. ?Members; appointments and terms. 
1. ?All appointments to the BTBID shall be made by the city commission. 
2. ?Upon creation, there shall be seven members of the board of trustees and there shall always be 
at least five but not more than seven members of the board of trustees for the BTBID, 
amendable from time to time by duly adopted resolution of the city commission. The terms of 
the initial seven members shall be as follows: three members to serve for terms of one, two, and 
three years, respectively, from the date of their appointments; two must be designated to serve 
for terms of four years from the date of their appointments. For a seven-member board of 
trustees, there must be two additional appointments for terms of two years and three years, 
respectively. 
3. ?Each board member shall hold office until the board member's successor has been appointed 
and has qualified. 
4. ?A board member shall receive no compensation for the board member's service. Board 
members shall be entitled to previously authorized expenses, including travelling expenses, 
incurred in the discharge of the board member's duties. 
5. ?Any persons may be appointed as board members but only if they are owners of real property 
subject to the jurisdiction of the BTBID or a formally appointed representative of a real property 
owner. 
6. ?A board member may be removed by the city commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or 
misconduct, in office. 
C. ?Director. The director of BTBID board of trustees shall be the duly appointed executive director of 
the Bozeman Convention and Visitors Bureau and shall serve in an advisory and administrative role 
for the board of trustees in the administration of the affairs of the BTBID. 
D. ?Meeting; election of officers. 
1. ?The BTBID board of trustees shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its powers 
and duties provided for in subsection A of this section and article 6, division 8 of this chapter. 
2. ?The BTBID board of trustees shall adopt bylaws enabling it to elect officers, set officer terms, 
and establish regular meeting times. 
E. ?Annual budget, work plan, and report/recommendation on levy. 
1. ?Each year, at a date and in a format established by the city director of administrative services, 
the board of trustees shall submit to the city commission a report of its activities for the 
preceding year. The report shall contain an audit of the district's finances. In addition, the board 
shall, at the same time, submit to the city commission, a work plan and budget for the ensuing 
fiscal year pursuant to the requirements of title 7, chapter 12, part 11, Montana Code Annotated 
(MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). The city commission shall have final authority to approve the work 
plan and budget. 
2. ?At the time the board of trustees submits a report, annual budget, and work plan, the board shall 
also submit a recommendation to the city commission on a method of levying an assessment on 
the property within the BTBID pursuant to the requirements of title 7, chapter 12, part 11, 
Montana Code Annotated (MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). If the method of assessment is to be 
different than that described in section 2.06.1460.F, the commission must adopt an ordinance 
amending said section. 
3. ?The work plan and budget shall comply with the provisions and procedures of section 
2.06.1460.G. 
F. ?Duration. The board of trustees for the BTBID shall remain in effect as long as the BTBID remains in 
effect. 
G. ?Ethics provisions. All board activities and members are subject to all other provisions of this Code, 
including article 3, division 4, pertaining to code of ethics. 
H. ?Liability/property insurance required. The board of trustees shall obtain liability insurance coverage, 
at the sole expense of the BTBID, insuring the BTBID, the board of trustees, and the City of 
Bozeman against legal liability for personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than 
the liability and property exposure limits established for governmental entities in title 2, chapter 9, 
part 1, of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-9-101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1765, § 2(2.90.020), 8-10-2009) 


Sec. 2.05.1970. - Bozeman Downtown Business Improvement District Board. 
A. ?Creation; powers and duties. The city commission creates the Bozeman Downtown Business 
Improvement District (BDBID) board of trustees and authorizes the BDBID Board of Trustees to 
exercise any of the following business improvement district powers, in conjunction with 
administration of the BDBID created pursuant to article 6, division 8 of this chapter: 
1. ?Sue and be sued; 
2. ?Enter into contracts to carry out the function of the BDBID; 
3. ?Hire and terminate personnel needed for its purposes; 
4. ?Provide adequate liability insurance for the affairs of the BDBID; 
5. ?Promote private investment and business expansion in the BDBID; 
6. ?Provide for the management and administration of the affairs of the BDBID; 
7. ?Promote business activity by advertising, decorating, marketing, and promoting and managing 
events and other actions designed for the general promotion of business activities in the BDBID; 
8. ?Perform such other functions as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this division and to 
further the objectives of the BDBID; 
9. ?Adopt bylaws, subject to the approval of the city commission, for the operation of the board and 
develop procedures for the collection and maintenance of BDBID records and the protection of 
district members' privacy and trade secrets to the extent allowable by state law; and 
10. ?Authorize the acquisition and disposal of real property upon the consent of the city 
commission. 
B. ?Members; appointments and terms. 
1. ?All appointments to the BDBID shall be made by the city commission. 
2. ?Upon creation, there shall be seven members of the board of trustees and there shall always be 
at least five but not more than seven members of the board of trustees for the BDBID, 
amendable from time to time by duly adopted resolution of the city commission. The terms of 
the initial seven members shall be as follows: three members to serve for terms of one, two, and 
three years, respectively, from the date of their appointments; two must be designated to serve 
for terms of four years from the date of their appointments. For a seven-member board of 
trustees, there must be two additional appointments for terms of two years and three years, 
respectively. 
3. ?Notwithstanding subsection B.2 of this section, the existing terms of all current board of trustee 
positions shall continue uninterrupted. 
4. ?Each board member shall hold office until the board member's successor has been appointed 
and has qualified. 
5. ?A board member shall receive no compensation for the board member's service. Board 
members shall be entitled to previously authorized expenses, including traveling expenses, 
incurred in the discharge of the board member's duties. 
6. ?Any persons may be appointed as board members but only if they are owners of real property 
subject to the jurisdiction of the BDBID or a formally appointed representative of a real property 
owner. 
7. ?A board member may be removed by the city commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or 
misconduct, in office. 
C. ?Meeting; election of officers. 
1. ?The BDBID board of trustees shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its powers 
and duties provided for in subsection A of this section and article 6, division 8 of this chapter. 
2. ?The BDBID board of trustees shall adopt bylaws enabling it to elect officers, set officer terms, 
and establish regular meeting times. 
D. ?Annual budget, work plan/recommendation on assessment/financial report. 
1. ?The board of trustees shall annually complete a financial report in compliance with the 
requirements of title 2, chapter 7, part 5, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-7-501 et seq.) and 
provide a copy to the city commission. 
2. ?Each year, at a date and in a format established by the director of administrative services, the 
board of trustees shall submit to the city commission a work plan and budget for the ensuing 
fiscal year pursuant to the requirements of title 7, chapter 12, part 11, Montana Code Annotated 
(MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). The city commission shall have final authority to approve the work 
plan and budget. 
3. ?At the time the board of trustees submits an annual budget and work plan, the board shall also 
submit a recommendation to the city commission on a method of levying an assessment on the 
property within the BTBID pursuant to the requirements of title 7, chapter 12, part 11, Montana 
Code Annotated (MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). If the method of assessment is to be different than 
that described in section 2.06.1460.F, the commission must adopt an ordinance amending said 
section. 
4. ?The work plan and budget shall comply with the provisions and procedures of section 
2.06.1460.G. 
E. ?Duration. The board of trustees for the BDBID shall remain in effect as long as the BDBID remains in 
effect. 
F. ?Ethics provisions. All board activities and members are subject to all other provisions of this Code, 
including article 3, division 4 of this chapter, pertaining to the code of ethics. 
G. ?Liability/property insurance required. The board of trustees shall obtain liability insurance coverage, 
at the sole expense of the BDBID, insuring the BDBID, the board of trustees, and the city against 
legal liability for personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than the liability and 
property exposure limits established for governmental entities in title 2, chapter 9, part 1, Montana 
Code Annotated (MCA 2-9-101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1790, § 1(2.90.030), 7-12-2010) 


Secs. 2.05.1980—2.05.2090. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 12. - TREE ADVISORY BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.2100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for an advisory board of citizens of Bozeman, 
Montana to assist or advise in the promotion of urban forestry; the education of the general public toward 
the value, benefits and necessity of urban trees; the promotion of and use of professionally recognized 
arboricultural practices; the recommendation of programs and policies dealing with planting, maintenance 
and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants and other tree-related matters; and the development and 
periodic review of the master street tree plan. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.010; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.2110. - Definitions. 
A. ?For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have 
the meaning given herein. 
1. ?"Public way" means all city property deeded or recorded as streets, roads, boulevards, alleys, 
sidewalks and parking strips. 
2. ?"Public area" means Sunset Hills Cemetery, public ways, city parks and all other lands owned, 
leased, managed or occupied by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.020; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.2120. - Creation. 
A. ?The city commission creates the Bozeman Tree Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as "BTAB." 
BTAB shall act as an advisory board to the city commission. BTAB shall have the following duties 
and responsibilities: 
1. ?Give guidance and advice to the city in determining the needs of the city's tree program; 
2. ?Consider and recommend for adoption to the city commission, an arboricultural specifications 
manual and revision as necessary; 
3. ?Make recommendations as to the type and kind of trees to be planted upon the city streets and 
public areas; 
4. ?Assist in conducting studies and other preliminary plans and work necessary to prepare for the 
establishment of the master street tree plan and recommend an urban forestry plan and the 
master street tree plan to the city commission for its acceptance; 
5. ?Periodically review master street tree plan and recommend changes to the city commission; 
6. ?Work with other appropriate boards to update the city of Bozeman street tree and park tree 
inventory; and 
7. ?Perform such duties and responsibilities as the city commission from time to time may direct. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.030; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.2130. - Membership. 
A. ?BTAB shall consist of five voting members, to be appointed by the city commission. Members shall 
serve two years each, provided that the members initially appointed shall be appointed two for one 
year and three for two years so they will serve staggered terms. 
B. ?Whenever possible, two of the members shall be from the following disciplines: real estate, 
commercial lending, civil or environmental engineering, or landscape architecture or construction. 
C. ?Each member shall hold office until the member's successor has been appointed and has qualified, 
except as provided in subsection F. of this section. 
D. ?A member shall receive no compensation for the member's services but shall be entitled to 
previously authorized expenses, including traveling expenses incurred in the discharge of the 
member's duties. 
E. ?Members shall be residents of the city, own property within the city, or be gainfully employed within 
the city. 
F. ?A member will be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty, misconduct in office or three 
unauthorized absences from regularly scheduled board meetings. 
G. ?The city manager shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the board. The city manager shall 
keep the board informed as to city policies and city budget affecting BTAB, and make available to 
them any information which the city manager deems pertinent. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.040; Ord. No. 1364 § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.2140. - Meetings. 
A. ?BTAB shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its duties and responsibilities but not 
less often than quarterly. 
B. ?Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the city of 
Bozeman and the adopted and approved bylaws of BTAB. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.050; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 2.05.2150. - Annual reports. 
    BTAB shall file with the city commission, on or before March 31 of each year, a report of its activities 
for the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1982, § 2.92.060; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 1993) 


Secs. 2.05.2160—2.05.2290. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 13. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1864, § 3, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed Div. 13, §§ 2.05.2300—
2.05.2330, which pertained to the senior citizens' advisory board and derived from §§ 2.96.010—2.96.040 
of the 1982 Code; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 2000; and Ord. No. 1748, § 1(2.96.010), adopted Oct. 6, 2008. 


Secs. 2.05.2300—2.05.2490. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 14. - BICYCLE ADVISORY BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.2500. - Creation. 
    The city commission shall appoint a Bozeman Area Bicycle Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to 
as "board," and designate the board to act as the advisory board to the city commission on matters 
relating to enhanced bicycle circulation, community-wide bicycle education and safety programs, and 
other matters relating to bicycling in the Bozeman area. 
(Ord. No. 1594, § 1(2.98.010), 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 1795, § 1(2.78.010), 12-13-2010) 


Sec. 2.05.2510. - Membership. 
A. ?The bicycle advisory board shall consist of up to 11 voting members and one non-voting liaison to be 
appointed by the city commission. One member shall be a student of Montana State University. One 
member representing the county may be recommended by the county commission and appointed by 
the city commission. One additional non-voting liaison shall be a student of Bozeman High School. 
Members of this board shall serve two-year staggered terms. Each member may be reappointed 
without any limitation on the number of reappointments. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner 
as original appointments for the balance of the term remaining. 
B. ?With the exception of the non-voting high school liaison, only persons of legal age may be appointed 
to the board. High school representatives under age 18 must provide a signed consent from a legal 
guardian stating they may participate in board activities. A majority of the board shall be residents of 
the city. Nonresident members of the board shall have some interest in the city by virtue of working 
in the city, owning property in the city, or entering the city frequently for any lawful purpose. In 
addition, the members should be knowledgeable of bicycling and/or traffic safety in the Bozeman 
area. 
C. ?The city shall pay only the expenses of the board which have been authorized by vote of the city 
commission prior to said expense being incurred. Members shall serve without compensation for 
their time and services. 
(Ord. No. 1594, § 1(2.98.020), 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 1795, § 1(2.78.020), 12-13-2010) 


Sec. 2.05.2520. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the bicycle advisory board shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable rules and 
regulations of the city and the adopted bylaws of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1594, § 1(2.98.030), 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 1795, § 1(2.78.030), 12-13-2010) 


Sec. 2.05.2530. - Duties and responsibilities. 
A. ?The bicycle advisory board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
1. ?The board shall provide advice and recommendations to the city commission on matters before 
the city commission which may have an impact on bicycling, insofar as it may relate to usage of 
public streets and other public ways by bicycles. 
2. ?The board shall provide advice and recommendations to the city commission regarding bicycling 
issues pertaining to the Parks, Open Space and Trails Master Plan and the Greater Bozeman 
Area Transportation Plan. 
3. ?The board may organize, sponsor or participate in events with the aim to increase cycling 
participation, promote safety and educate the community. 
4. ?The board may have such other duties and responsibilities as the city commission may, from 
time to time, direct. 
(Ord. No. 1594, § 1(2.98.040), 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 1795, § 1(2.78.040), 12-13-2010) 


Sec. 2.05.2540. - Authority. 
    The actions of the bicycle advisory board shall be advisory only and shall not constitute policy of the 
city and shall not be binding upon the city commission or upon the city. The city may adopt all or any part 
of any recommendation of the board, with or without any changes made by the city commission, as city 
policy. 
(Ord. No. 1594, § 1(2.98.050), 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 1795, § 1(2.78.050), 12-13-2010) 


Secs. 2.05.2550—2.05.2690. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 15. - ZONING COMMISSION 


Sec. 2.05.2700. - Established—Powers and duties. 
    Pursuant to and under the provisions of MCA tit. 76, the city commission does create and establish a 
municipal zoning commission as provided in the title, and does by this chapter adopt all of the sections of 
the laws of the state previously mentioned that specifically pertain to a municipal zoning commission, 
granting and delegating to the zoning commission all of the rights, privileges, powers, duties and 
responsibilities thereto appertaining. 
(Ord. No. 1804, § 1, 7-11-2011) 


Sec. 2.05.2710. - Jurisdiction. 
    The zoning commission shall have such jurisdiction as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1804, § 1, 7-11-2011) 


Sec. 2.05.2720. - Composition. 
A. ?The zoning commission shall consist of five members, appointed to two-year terms to expire as 
follows: 
1. ?Two members appointed by the city commission. The appointments shall be for two-year terms, 
with those terms to expire on February 28 of even-numbered years. 
2. ?Three members appointed by the city commission. The appointments shall be for two-year 
terms, with those terms to expire on February 28 of odd-numbered years. 
3. ?Alternates. The city commission may designate up to two members of the city planning board 
who, only in the event that the zoning commission does not have an available quorum, may act 
as an alternate member to enable the zoning commission to conduct business. 
4. ?The city clerk shall certify the members appointed by the city commission. The certificates shall 
be sent to and become a part of the records of the zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1804, § 1, 7-11-2011) 


DIVISION 16. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 


Sec. 2.05.2800. - Established—Powers and duties. 
A. ?Pursuant to and under the provisions of Title 76, Chapter 2, Part 3, Montana Code Annotated, the 
city commission may create and establish by resolution a municipal board of adjustment (BOA) as 
provided in the title, and does by this chapter adopt all of the sections of the laws of Montana 
previously mentioned that specifically pertain to a municipal BOA. The city commission may choose 
to retain to itself the role and responsibilities of the BOA. 
B. ?If the city commission chooses to establish a BOA separate from the city commission by appointing 
members, the city commission shall by resolution grant and delegate to the board of adjustment 
those of the rights, privileges, powers, duties and responsibilities as they deem appropriate while 
retaining to itself those privileges, powers, duties and responsibilities not so delegated. 
C. ?The city commission may by resolution dissolve a previously constituted BOA and by such resolution 
shall reclaim to itself all authority and responsibility of the board and any applications which may be 
in review process at that time for which a public hearing or public meeting before the BOA has been 
advertised. A resolution to form or dissolve a BOA shall not be passed until after the city commission 
shall hold a public hearing on the resolution after giving public notice meeting the requirements of 
MCA 7-1-4127. Adoption of a resolution establishing or dissolving a BOA shall have such an 
effective date as will not interfere with the consideration of a development application for which a 
public hearing has been noticed. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 9-10-2012) 


Sec. 2.05.2810. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board of adjustment shall have such jurisdiction as provided by state law and delegated by the 
city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 9-10-2012) 


Sec. 2.05.2820. - Composition. 
A. ?When a separate board is appointed it shall consist of seven members. The term of appointment is 
for three years, with staggered terms. Members shall be appointed by the city commission. A 
member may be removed per MCA 76-2-322. 
B. ?In selecting the members, the city commission shall give preference to residents of the city. 
However, where a qualified resident is not available to serve, the city commission may appoint up to 
one nonresident member who practices professionally, owns property or owns a business within the 
city. 
1. ?Preference should be given to applicants who have prior experience with local government, who 
will uphold the intent and purpose of the city's land use regulations, and who will honor the 
purpose of a board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 9-10-2012) 


Sec. 2.05.2830. - Procedures. 
    The BOA will be convened as necessary to review applications and conduct such other business as 
may be delegated by the city commission or necessary to the proper function of the board. To accomplish 
this purpose, certain procedures shall be adopted which may include, without limitation, a regularly 
scheduled meeting attended by members of the BOA. A record of the reviews and decisions shall be 
made. These records shall be preserved as part of the official proceedings for each development 
proposal. The BOA shall generally follow "Robert's Rules of Order" and may prepare and adopt 
supplemental procedural rules, upon the approval of the city commission, that will ensure the 
accomplishment of the stated purpose and promote the efficiency and effectiveness of the review 
process. The concurring vote of four members of the BOA is required to approve or approve with 
conditions any application or other action. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 9-10-2012) 


DIVISION 17. - WETLANDS REVIEW BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.2900. - Established—Powers and duties. 
A. ?The city commission may establish by resolution a wetlands review board (WRB). 
B. ?If established, the WRB shall act as an advisory body to the review authority for proposals that 
include alteration of wetlands including sketch and site plans, conditional use permits, planned unit 
developments, subdivisions, divisions of land and other actions as requested by the review authority. 
C. ?The city commission may by resolution dissolve a previously constituted WRB and in doing so 
assign all authority and responsibility of the WRB and any pending applications to the review 
authority. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 1945 , § 2, 4-25-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.2910. - Composition. 
A. ?If established, the WRB shall consist of six members appointed to staggered terms of two years. 
Members shall be degreed in their respective disciplines and/or otherwise licensed or certified by 
their respective professional authorities. Members shall have experience in at least one of the 
following wetland and/or stream specializations: ecology, soils, botany, and/or hydrology. 
B. ?In selecting the members, the city commission shall give preference to residents of the city. 
However, where a qualified resident is not available to serve, the city commission may appoint a 
member who practices professionally, owns property or owns a business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 1945 , § 3, 4-25-2016) 


Sec. 2.05.2920. - Procedures. 
    If established, the WRB will be convened as determined by the planning director to review proposals 
that involve regulated activities that may impact regulated wetlands. Written meeting reviews setting forth 
decisions and findings shall be made. These records shall be preserved as part of the official proceedings 
for each development proposal. The WRB shall generally follow "Robert's Rules of Order" and may 
prepare and adopt supplemental procedural rules, upon the approval of the city commission, that will 
ensure the accomplishment of the stated purpose and promote the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
wetland review process. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 1945 , § 4, 4-25-2016) 


DIVISION 18. - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 


Sec. 2.05.3000. - Established—Powers and duties. 
A. ?The design review board (DRB) is established to evaluate aesthetic considerations of larger and 
more complex proposals which are likely to produce significant community impact and to provide 
recommendations regarding such proposals to the review authority, subject to the provisions of 
chapter 38. 
B. ?The DRB shall act as an advisory body to the review authority for: 
1. ?Development applications meeting one or more of the thresholds of section 38.230.040.C.; 
2. ?Planned unit developments; and 
3. ?Appeals from ADR decisions. 
C. ?The DRB may develop, and after adoption by the city commission, apply specific guidelines related 
to such concerns as architectural appearance, landscape design and signage for the construction 
and/or alteration of structures, sites or areas; 
D. ?When proposals for reuse, change in use or further development of a site are located in the 
neighborhood conservation overlay district, review by the DRB may be required to determine 
whether resubmittal as a new application is necessary in accordance with section 38.230.160.; 
E. ?The DRB may be requested to review the following development projects within the neighborhood 
conservation overlay district: new construction, alterations to existing structures, movement of 
structures into or out of the neighborhood conservation overlay district, or demolition of structures by 
any means or process in accordance with 38.340.A. 
F. ?The DRB must review any tax abatement or other incentive programs being considered by the city 
commission that are designed to stimulate preservation and rehabilitation of structures and 
properties with the neighborhood conservation district, and to review any proposed action or 
development utilizing these abatement or incentive programs in accordance with section 38.340.020. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 1998 , § 2, 4-23-2018) 


Sec. 2.05.3010. - Composition. 
A. ?The DRB shall consist of six professional and two nonprofessional members. Professional members 
shall be degreed in their respective disciplines and/or otherwise licensed or certified by their 
respective professional authorities. An appointment to a term of service on the DRB is for two years. 
The professional contingent shall consist of three architects and at least one architectural historian, 
and at least one landscape architect or landscape designer. At least one of the professional 
members shall have demonstrated expertise in urban design. Nonprofessional members shall be 
individuals with an interest in, or knowledge of, urban design or historic preservation. No member of 
the DRB shall serve concurrently as a member of the planning board or zoning commission. A 
quorum of the DRB shall be four voting members and one of the members constituting the quorum 
must be an architect. In the event a quorum of the DRB may not otherwise be attained, the ADR staff 
may serve as alternates to prevent delay in project reviews. 
B. ?In selecting the members, the city commission shall give preference to residents of the city. 
However, where a qualified professional resident is not available to serve, the city commission may 
appoint a professional member who practices professionally, owns property or owns a business 
within the city. Where a nonprofessional resident is not available to serve, the city commission may 
appoint a nonprofessional member who works, owns property or owns a business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012) 


Sec. 2.05.3020. - Procedures. 
    To implement the purpose of the DRB, certain procedures shall be adopted to include, but not be 
limited to, a regularly scheduled weekly or biweekly meeting attended by members of the DRB. Written 
meeting reviews setting forth decisions and findings shall be made. These records shall be preserved as 
part of the official proceedings for each developmental proposal. Lastly, the DRB shall generally follow 
"Robert's Rules of Order" and may prepare and adopt supplemental procedural rules, subject to the 
approval of the city commission, that will ensure the accomplishment of the stated purpose and promote 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the design review process. 
(Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 9-24-2012) 


Secs. 2.05.3030—2.05.3090. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 19. - TRAILS, OPEN SPACE, AND PARKS COMMITTEE 


Sec. 2.05.3100. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for a parks, trails and open space bond review 
committee consisting of citizens, community leaders, and experienced professionals; to advise the city 
commission on parks, trails and open space development possibilities and to assist in the implementation 
of the City of Bozeman 2012 Parks, Trails, and Open Space Bond as adopted by Resolution No. 4386 
and approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 1857, § 2, 3-18-2013) 


Sec. 2.05.3110. - Creation; powers, duties and authority; membership. 
A. ?Creation; powers, duties and authority. The city commission creates the trails, open space, and 
parks (TOP) committee and authorizes the TOP to exercise the following powers and duties: 
1. ?Assist the city commission in the establishment of procedures and guidelines for the evaluation 
of projects for which funds are proposed to be expended. 
2. ?Review and make recommendations to the city commission on proposals for use of parks, trails, 
and open space bond funds. 
3. ?Adopt bylaws for the operation of the committee, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
4. ?The TOP may have such other duties and responsibilities as directed by the city commission. 
B. ?Actions advisory only. The actions of the TOP shall be advisory only and shall not constitute policy of 
the city and shall not be binding upon the city commission or upon the city. The commission may 
adopt all or any part of any recommendation of the TOP, with or without any changes made by the 
city commission as city policy. 
C. ?Members; appointments and terms. 
1. ?All appointments to the TOP shall be made by the city commission. 
2. ?One voting member shall be a member of the recreation and parks advisory board (RPAB). The 
RPAB may make a recommendation on appointment of its member to TOP. 
3. ?The director of the Bozeman parks and recreation department shall serve as an ex-officio 
member of the TOP. 
4. ?There shall be five members of the TOP committee. The terms of the initial five members shall 
be as follows: 
One member to serve for one (year, two members to serve for two years, and two members to 
serve for three years from the date of their appointment. After initial terms, TOP members shall 
serve three-year staggered terms. Each member may be reappointed with a three-term 
limitation on the number of reappointments. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as 
original appointments for the balance of the term remaining. 
5. ?The city commission shall affirm one commissioner to act as liaison between the TOP and city 
commission. 
6. ?A TOP member shall receive no compensation for the member's service. TOP members shall 
be entitled to previously authorized expenses, including travel expenses, incurred during the 
discharge of duties. 
7. ?TOP members shall reside within the city limits of Bozeman and shall have expertise in such 
areas as finance, real estate, landscape architecture, public health, planning, or law. 
8. ?A TOP member may be removed by a majority vote of the commission at any time for any 
reason. 
D. ?Office of agency; staff support. The TOP shall maintain its records in the office of the city staff 
person designated by the city manager to assist the TOP. The staff person so designated shall 
attend most meetings of the TOP and will be responsible to assist the TOP in the scheduling of 
meetings, preparation and distribution of agendas and meeting minutes and perform other supportive 
functions that may be considered reasonable in the execution of the duties of the TOP. The staff 
person may also serve as the liaison between the committee, the city manager and the city 
commission. 
E. ?Meetings; election of officers. 
1. ?The TOP shall hold meetings as it deems necessary to execute its powers and duties as 
provided in this section. 
2. ?The TOP shall adopt bylaws enabling it to elect officers, set officer terms, and establish regular 
meeting times. 
F. ?Duration. The TOP shall remain in effect as long as necessary to achieve the goals of the committee. 
G. ?Ethics provisions. All TOP activities and members are subject to all other provisions of this Code, 
including article 3, division 4 of this chapter, pertaining to the code of ethics. 
H. ?State law applicable. All meetings of the TOP shall be subject to the state's open meeting laws and 
may not be held with less than 48-hour notice. All written and electronic communication and 
information shall be considered a public record and subject to disclosure pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 1857, § 2, 3-18-2013) 


ARTICLE 6. - FINANCE[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— Financial administration and taxation, MCA 7-6-101 et seq.; debt management, 
MCA 7-7-101 et seq.; taxation, MCA 15-1-101 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2.06.010. - Transfer of funds; when authorized. 
    The commission shall have power to transfer funds or moneys collected under the general levy, or 
for fees, licenses or fines, from any fund into which they may have been paid, to any other fund; provided, 
however, there shall be a surplus in the fund from which such transfer is made. 
(Code 1982, § 3.08.010) 


Secs. 2.06.020—2.06.140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 


Sec. 2.06.150. - Budget administration and oversight. 
A. ?Responsibilities of the city commission. 
1. ?To amend the budget, as necessary. 
2. ?To review budget status reports, as presented. 
3. ?To review accounts payable listings, as presented. 
B. ?Responsibilities of the city manager. 
1. ?To execute the budget that has been adopted by the commission, in accordance with section 
2.06.160. 
2. ?To propose and schedule budget amendments, as necessary. 
3. ?To report to the commission on the financial condition of the city and the status of the budget, 
according to the methods described in section 2.06.170. 
(Ord. No. 1729, § 1(3.30.010), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.06.160. - Budget operating guidelines. 
A. ?Once the approved budget has been adopted, the city manager has the authority to administer all 
city accounts, in accordance with the approved budget. Within the any fund, the city manager may 
re-allocate appropriation authority among line items as long as the total appropriation amount is not 
increased. 
B. ?In addition, the city commission hereby delegates appropriation and budget amendment authority to 
the city manager for the expenditures from the following funds: debt service funds; fee-based 
budgets; trust funds; federal, state and private grants accepted and approved by the city 
commission; special assessments; moneys borrowed during the year; proceeds from sale of land; 
and funds for gifts or donations. 
C. ?Through the annual appropriation resolution each year, the city commission will authorize and re-
appropriate the unexpended balance of capital improvement program items and building repair and 
maintenance items previously budgeted which have not been completed. 
(Ord. No. 1729, § 1(3.30.020), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.06.170. - Budget status reporting. 
A. ?The city manager will compile the following reports and make them available to the commission, city 
departments and the public: 
1. ?Weekly accounts payable listings by account. 
2. ?Monthly budget-to-actual expenditure report. 
3. ?Quarterly summary of revenues and expenditures report. 
(Ord. No. 1729, § 1(3.30.030), 11-26-2007) 


Sec. 2.06.180. - Minimum level of budgeted general fund unreserved fund balance. 
    The city manager will recommend and the commission will adopt an approved budget that results in 
a year-end general fund unreserved fund balance that of no less than 16 2/3 percent of estimated general 
fund revenues. If the commission desires to adopt or amend the budget in a way that decreases the 
general fund unreserved fund balance to a level below 16 2/3 percent of estimated general fund 
revenues, they may do so after holding a separate public hearing to state why it is in the best interest of 
the city to do so. At no time may a budget be adopted or amended that results in a year-end general fund 
unreserved fund balance of less than five percent of estimated general fund revenues. This limit does not 
apply in case of an emergency, pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 1729, § 1(3.30.040), 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 1787, § 1(3.30.040), 5-17-2010) 


Secs. 2.06.190—2.06.340. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - TAX ABATEMENT 


Sec. 2.06.350. - Intent. 
    The intent and purpose of the tax abatement certificate of appropriateness is to encourage the 
appropriate rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation of historic properties which otherwise would not 
have been so carefully preserved. It is recognized that a grant of tax abatement is a discretionary act by 
the city commission. Tax abatement is to reward extraordinary efforts in preservation and not minimal 
compliance with mandatory standards. 
(Ord. No. 1744, § 1(3.30.010), 10-6-2008) 


Sec. 2.06.360. - Authority. 
A. ?Pursuant to MCA 15-24-1601 through 15-24-1608, the city commission by this division approves the 
tax benefits as set forth in said statutes for those improvements made by restoration, rehabilitation, 
or expansion of certified historic commercial or residential properties or qualifying new construction 
within an historic district which meets the design criteria during the construction period, not to exceed 
12 months, and for up to five years following completion of the construction, in those situations 
where such improvements preserve certified historic commercial or residential properties, or 
encourage appropriate new construction meeting the design criteria to be architecturally compatible 
within the historic districts. 
B. ?The tax abatement is limited to 100 percent of the increase in taxable value caused by the 
rehabilitation, restoration, expansion or new construction and applies to only those properties which 
do not receive any other tax exemption or special evaluation provided by state law during the period 
of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1744, § 1(3.30.020), 10-6-2008) 


Sec. 2.06.370. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Construction period" as used herein shall mean a period of time from the date of issuance of 
the required building permit until the project is substantially completed or a period of 12 months 
from the date of issuance of said building permit, whichever period is shorter. 
2. ?"Qualifying new construction" as used herein shall mean construction which satisfies the 
requirements of section 2.06.390.A.3. 
(Ord. No. 1744, § 1(3.30.030), 10-6-2008) 


Sec. 2.06.380. - Procedures. 
A. ?The owner of the property must comply with the provisions and standards of this section and section 
2.06.390, and chapter 38, article XVI, in order to be considered for tax abatement. Failure to 
demonstrate successful compliance with the requirements disqualifies a property from being 
awarded tax abatement, but does not prohibit development with a certificate of appropriateness 
otherwise approved under chapter 38, article XVI: 
1. ?The owner of the property is solely responsible for supplying to the Bozeman Historic 
Preservation Advisory Commission and the city commission all information and documents 
necessary to evaluate the project. If sufficient information and documentation is not supplied by 
the owner for consideration to make an informed decision, the application will be denied. 
2. ?The city commission hereby designates the Bozeman Historic Preservation Advisory Board as 
its local review board and hereby directs said board to establish an application and review 
process to certify eligible properties as specified in MCA 15-24-1604 and which must include, 
but is not limited to, the design review criteria based on the Secretary of Interior's Standards for 
Rehabilitation of Historic Properties or other standards approved by the State Historic 
Preservation Office. The established review process shall be integrated with the certificate of 
appropriateness review authorized in chapter 38, article XVI. 
3. ?The local review board shall recommend approval or denial of any application for the tax 
abatement and report its recommendation to the city commission which shall then either 
approve or deny said recommendation by resolution. 
4. ?All taxes, assessments and SID obligations on any property proposed for tax abatement must 
be current before any tax abatement will be considered. 
5. ?Following certification, and during the period of tax abatement, if the property is altered in any 
way that adversely affects those elements that qualify it as historically contributing, the property 
must be disqualified from receiving the tax abatement. If the historic property which has 
received a tax abatement under this part is disqualified, the owner is liable for back taxes, 
interest and a penalty. These costs must be extended against the property in the next general 
real property tax roll, to be collected and distributed in the same manner as the currently 
assessed real property tax. The back taxes, interest and penalty must equal the sum of the 
following: 
a. ?The difference in the total real property taxes due during the years the tax abatement was 
in effect and the total of real property taxes which would have been due had the special 
assessments not been in effect for those years; 
b. ?Interest on the amount calculated in section 2.06.380.A.5.a at the rate for delinquent 
property taxes provided for in MCA 15-16-102; plus 
c. ?A penalty of 15 percent on the sum of section 2.06.380.A.5.a. Back taxes, interest or 
penalty may not be imposed on a property transferred to an ownership that makes the 
property exempt from property taxation or if the property is destroyed by fire or force 
majeure. 
(Ord. No. 1744, § 1(3.30.040), 10-6-2008) 


Sec. 2.06.390. - Standards. 
A. ?To be approved as a tax abatement COA the following requirements shall be met: 
1. ?The property must meet one or more of the following criteria: 
a. ?The property is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). 
b. ?The property is at least 50 years of age and located in an established NRHP historic 
district. 
c. ?The property is determined by a qualified professional to be eligible for individual listing in 
the NRHP. If this criterion is selected, the applicant must complete the necessary steps to 
list the property on the NRHP prior to the final approval of any abatement. 
2. ?Alterations to the properties or structures without city approval and consistent with the 
requirements of this division nullifies the tax abatement qualification. 
3. ?All standard COA requirements per chapter 38, article XVI, or its successors, apply as well 
these further tax abatement COA requirements: 
a. ?Additions to existing structures: 
(1) ?Additions which increase the size of the footprint are limited to no more than a ten 
percent increase of the structure's footprint. 
(2) ?Additions must not exceed the height of the existing roofline. 
(3) ?Additions are limited to secondary facades and evaluated in the context of the facade 
on which the addition is applied. 
(4) ?Due to the limited size of the addition, no specific similarity or differentiation of 
material is required as referenced in Secretary of the Interior Standards 9 and 10. 
b. ?Roof: 
(1) ?Shape and material of the existing roof must be preserved unless it can be 
demonstrated that a different material is more historically appropriate for the structure. 
(2) ?Dormers will be considered on a case by case basis and must meet the Secretary of 
the Interior's Standards and UDO standards for dormers. Dormers shall be limited to 
not more than one-half the length of the existing roofline. If new dormers are added 
they must match existing historic dormers in shape, style and materials. 
c. ?Materials: 
(1) ?Windows: Window matching is fundamental to the historic integrity of the building: 
(a) ?Rehabilitation of viable windows is required through repair, restoration and 
reconstruction. 
(b) ?Window replacement requires a professional assessment of the existing 
windows. 
(c) ?Window replacement must be historically appropriate and match historic 
materials. 
(d) ?If storm windows are applied they shall be historically appropriate. 
(2) ?Siding: 
(a) ?If historic siding is intact, it shall be preserved and restored. 
(b) ?If historic siding is missing, new siding should follow the Department of the 
Interior's guidelines for reconstruction. 
(3) ?Foundation: 
(a) ?Repair and stabilization of existing foundation materials is encouraged and a 
primary goal. 
(b) ?Foundation replacement is allowed to the extent that the overall height increase 
of the house does not exceed 18 inches. 
(c) ?Foundation replacement requires a professional assessment of the existing 
foundation. 
(d) ?If replaced, the exterior of the new foundation shall match the historic foundation 
in appearance. 
(4) ?Roof: 
(a) ?If historic roof material is intact it shall be preserved and restored. 
(b) ?If historic roof material is missing, the new roof should follow the Department of 
the Interior's guidelines for restoration. 
d. ?Accessory building: The same parameters apply to accessory buildings as for primary 
structures on the property. Demolition of viable accessory buildings within five years of 
receiving the tax abatement nullifies tax benefits. 
(Ord. No. 1744, § 1(3.30.050), 10-6-2008) 


Secs. 2.06.400—2.06.550. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION OF TAXES 


Sec. 2.06.560. - Tax collection by county; when authorized. 
    All taxes levied by the city of Bozeman for general, municipal and administrative purposes shall be 
collected by the county treasurer, as provided by MCA 7-6-4413. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.010) 


Sec. 2.06.570. - Annual city tax levy determination. 
    The city commission must, on or before the second Monday in August of each year, by resolution, 
determine the amount of the city taxes for all purposes to be levied and assessed on the taxable property 
in the city for the current fiscal year, and the clerk of the commission must duly certify to the county clerk 
a copy of such resolution, and the county treasurer must collect such taxes, as provided by MCA 7-6-
4413. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.020) 


Sec. 2.06.580. - Monthly settlement and collection from county treasurer. 
    The director of administrative services shall, immediately after the first of every month, settle with 
and collect from the county treasurer all taxes for general, municipal and administrative purposes 
collected by the county treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.030) 


Sec. 2.06.590. - Annual tax reports to commission; contents. 
A. ?On or before January 1 of each and every year, the director of administrative services shall make a 
report to the commission showing: 
1. ?Total assessable value of property within the city; 
2. ?Taxable value of property within the city; 
3. ?Rate of taxation for the city for general, municipal and administrative purposes; 
4. ?Total amount of taxes due the city for the preceding year; 
5. ?Amount collected; 
6. ?Amount delinquent. 
B. ?On or before August 1 of each and every year, the director of administrative services shall make a 
like report to the commission of the city. 
C. ?The reports so made shall likewise contain a statement showing taxes delinquent and due and 
owing to the city for prior years. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.040) 


Sec. 2.06.600. - Special assessments—Collection procedure. 
    All special assessments, of whatever kind and character, heretofore levied, or which may be 
hereafter levied, by the commission of the city to defray the cost of any special improvements in the city, 
or special assessments heretofore levied or hereafter levied for special purposes, as provided by law and 
this Code, shall be collected by the city, by and through its director of administrative services. The director 
of administrative services shall make these collections in the same manner and at the same time as 
general taxes are collected by the county treasurer. The director of administrative services shall make 
proper distribution to the various funds for which such collections are made of all money collected. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.050) 


Sec. 2.06.610. - Same—Procedure for levy. 
    Within two days after the passage and adoption of any resolution of the city commission levying and 
assessing any special improvement assessment, the city clerk shall deliver the original or certified copy of 
such resolution of such levy and assessment to the director of administrative services, and the director of 
administrative services shall thereupon enter and spread the assessments so made in the special 
improvement assessment book, against the property against which the assessment is a lien. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.060) 


Sec. 2.06.620. - Same—Payable when; delinquency penalty. 
    All special assessments, or installments of special assessments, heretofore or hereafter levied and 
assessed for any purpose whatsoever, duly and regularly levied by resolution according to law, shall be 
payable on or before 6:00 p.m. on November 30 of each year, and in the event the same are not paid on 
or before said date, the same shall become delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of five percent, 
and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date of delinquency. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.070) 


Sec. 2.06.630. - Same—Form of notice and receipt. 
    The director of administrative services shall prepare and adopt, subject to the approval of the city 
manager, a form of notice and receipt for special assessments. Such notice and receipt shall conform 
substantially to the form used by the county treasurer. The original shall constitute the receipt to the 
taxpayer; the duplicate, the notice to the taxpayer; and the triplicate, the permanent record in the office of 
the director of administrative services. The notice herein specified shall contain an itemized statement of 
the amount of taxes due the current year, and the amount due and delinquent for other years (if any). The 
director of administrative services shall mail, on or before October 25 of each year, postage prepaid, the 
aforesaid notice to the last known address of each taxpayer. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.080) 


Sec. 2.06.640. - Same—Notice of payment deadlines and delinquency conditions. 
A. ?On or before October 25 of each year, the director of administrative services shall publish a notice 
specifying: 
1. ?That all special taxes, special assessments, or installments of special assessments, made for 
special improvements or special services of any nature, duly and regularly levied by resolution 
of the city commission, according to law, shall by payable before 6:00 p.m., on November 30 
next thereafter, and in the event the same are not paid on or before said date, the amount of 
such taxes and assessments shall become delinquent, and all delinquent taxes shall bear 
interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time they are first delinquent until paid. A 
penalty of five percent shall be added to all delinquent taxes; 
2. ?The time and place at which payment of such taxes may be made; 
3. ?That in the event that any installment of an assessment which has been made payable in 
installments shall be allowed by a taxpayer to become delinquent, the city commission may 
declare all unpaid installments of such assessment delinquent, also. 
B. ?Provided that any failure to give any of these notices will not affect the legality of the tax, nor relieve 
the taxpayer from any of the taxpayer's liability. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.090) 


Sec. 2.06.650. - Same—Delinquency report. 
A. ?Immediately after November 30, and before December 7 of each and every year, the director of 
administrative services shall make to, and file with, the city commission a report showing the 
delinquencies for that year, and setting forth: 
1. ?The name of the owner; 
2. ?The description of the lot or parcel of property; 
3. ?The amount of delinquent assessments for the current year; 
4. ?The number and amount of unpaid installments of such delinquent special assessments; 
5. ?The amount due and delinquent for other years, if any. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.100) 


Sec. 2.06.660. - Delinquent assessments—Declaration by resolution; conditions. 
    When the payment of any one installment of any special assessment becomes delinquent, all 
payments of subsequent installments shall, at the option of the commission of the city, by appropriation 
resolution duly adopted, become delinquent. The commission shall thereupon, at its option, by 
appropriation resolution duly adopted, declare all such unpaid special assessments, or installment of such 
special assessments, and all subsequent installments of such special assessments, due, payable and 
delinquent. The whole property may be sold the same as other property is sold for taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.110) 


Sec. 2.06.670. - Same—Certificates to county clerk and county treasurer. 
A. ?Before December 10 (or before June 10, if the December certification has been omitted or 
incompletely or improperly made), the director of administrative services shall certify all delinquent 
taxes and assessments to the county clerk and to the county treasurer for collection as provided by 
law. 
B. ?Such certificate shall contain: 
1. ?The description of each lot or parcel of land on which any tax or assessment has become 
delinquent, and against which it is a lien; 
2. ?The name and address of the person to whom assessed; 
3. ?The date when the same became delinquent; 
4. ?The amount of the delinquent tax or assessment; 
5. ?The penalty to be added thereto; 
6. ?The total amount of such delinquent tax or assessment with penalty added; and 
7. ?If any special assessment is payable in installments, and any installment thereof becomes 
delinquent, the amount of such delinquent installment shall be included in such certificate, 
provided that in the event the city commission shall by resolution declare the whole of the 
assessment remaining unpaid to be delinquent, then the whole of the assessment remaining 
unpaid shall be included in such certificate. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.120) 


Sec. 2.06.680. - Same—Notice publication required. 
A. ?Within ten days of the time of filing the certificates required in section 2.06.670, the director of 
administrative services shall publish, in not less than one issue of the daily newspaper of largest 
circulation in the city, a notice specifying: 
1. ?That the director of administrative services has certified to the county treasurer a complete 
delinquent list of all persons and property in the city, against which delinquent taxes are a lien 
and that the county treasurer will sell such property at a later date at public auction unless prior 
to such auction all delinquent taxes, together with interest, penalties and costs thereon due, are 
paid; 
2. ?That a complete delinquent list of all persons and property in the city now owing taxes is on file 
in the office of the county treasurer and in the office of the director of administrative services 
and is subject to public inspection and examination; 
3. ?That the date of the sale shall be as determined by the county treasurer; 
4. ?That delinquent assessments may be reinstated by complying with the provisions of MCA 7-12-
4184. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.130) 


Sec. 2.06.690. - Same—Payment procedure. 
    All delinquent assessments certified to the county clerk shall be paid to and collected, with penalty 
and interest, by the county treasurer, and that the county treasurer shall account therefor and pay the 
same to the director of administrative services, as provided by MCA 7-12-4184. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.140) 


Sec. 2.06.700. - Delinquent tax sales; director of administrative services authority and duties. 
    At the time and place that property in the county upon which delinquent taxes are a lien is sold, at 
public auction, as provided by MCA 15-17-122, the director of administrative services shall attend each 
delinquent tax sale, and shall then and there take such proceedings as the commission or city manager 
may direct, to protect the interests of the city in and to any property sold for delinquent taxes, and in 
which the city may have an interest by reason of delinquent special assessments which are a lien 
thereon, and the city may at such delinquent tax sale purchase, and may, under and by virtue of the 
provisions of MCA 7-12-4227 and 7-12-4228, bid in said property, and have certificate of sale issued to 
the city; or the city may, at any time subsequent to said delinquent tax sales, or either of them, acquire 
any of the property struck off to the county at said delinquent tax sales, as provided by said MCA chs. 7-
12 and 15-17 hereinbefore referred to, and under such terms and conditions as the commission may 
authorize and direct; that any properties so acquired shall be paid for from the revolving fund, if and when 
such revolving fund is provided by the commission of the city, as provided by MCA ch. 7-12. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.150) 


Sec. 2.06.710. - Reinstating special assessments. 
    When any special assessment, or installment or installments of special assessments, have become 
delinquent, and are so declared by appropriate resolution of the city commission, and have been certified 
to the county clerk and county treasurer for collection, as provided in this division, the commission may 
nevertheless, at its option, upon the payment to the director of administrative services of the assessment, 
or installment or installments of special assessments, with penalty and interest, up to date, by appropriate 
resolution, be withdrawn from the county treasurer, and cancelled from the treasurer's records, and 
reinstated in the office of the director of administrative services on the director's special improvement 
assessment book. Such withdrawal and reinstatement may be had and made at any time before or after 
the sale of the property for delinquent taxes, and before tax deed therefor has been executed. When the 
commission shall have passed a resolution as contemplated in this division, and when a taxpayer shall 
have complied with all the conditions therein specified, the director of administrative services shall file 
with the county clerk and the county treasurer a certified copy of such resolution, which shall be the 
county treasurer's authority to cancel and withdraw such delinquent special assessments as may be 
therein specified. The director of administrative services shall then reinstate such assessments or 
installments on the director's special improvement assessment book, as the director of administrative 
services is directed in the resolution of the commission to reinstate. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.160) 


Sec. 2.06.720. - Special improvement districts; annual reports. 
A. ?On January 1 of each year, or at such time as the commission may direct, the director of 
administrative services shall make a written report to the commission showing the status of the 
assessments and bonds outstanding against the several special improvement districts, setting forth 
the following: 
1. ?Amount of special assessment levied against each district; 
2. ?Amount of bonds or warrants issued in payment of the cost of the improvement; 
3. ?Bonds or warrants which have been paid; 
4. ?Bonds or warrants outstanding; 
5. ?Special improvement assessments outstanding but not delinquent; 
6. ?Delinquent special assessments, if any, and the property against which such delinquent special 
assessments are a lien. 
(Code 1982, § 3.04.170) 


Secs. 2.06.730—2.06.840. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF CITY PROPERTY 


Sec. 2.06.850. - Authorization for city to obtain property. 
    The city commission has jurisdiction and power, under such limitations and restrictions as are 
prescribed by law, to purchase, receive by donation or exchange, or lease any real or personal property 
necessary for the use of the city and to preserve, take care of, manage, and control the same. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.010), 1-17-2006) 


Sec. 2.06.860. - Appraisal required for certain purchases of real property or conservation easements. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, the city may not purchase real property in an amount in excess of 
$200,000.00 or a conservation easement using public funds in an amount in excess of $40,000.00 unless 
the value of the property or conservation easement has been previously estimated by a disinterested 
certified general real estate appraiser selected by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.020), 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 1683, § 1, 11-27-2006) 


Sec. 2.06.870. - Authorization to sell and exchange city property. 
A. ?The city commission has the power to sell, trade, or exchange any real or personal property, 
however acquired, belonging to the city that is not necessary to the conduct of city business or the 
preservation of its property. 
B. ?Whenever the city purchases equipment, as provided in MCA 7-5-4301 through 7-5-4310, city 
equipment that is not necessary to the conduct of the city business may be traded in as part of the 
purchase price or may be sold at public auction, as provided in MCA 7-5-4310, in the discretion of 
the city manager. 
C. ?Any sale, trade, or exchange of real or personal property must be accomplished under the 
provisions of this division. In an exchange of real property, the properties must be appraised, and an 
exchange of city property may not be made unless property received in exchange for the city 
property is of an equivalent value. If the properties are not of equivalent values, the exchange may 
be completed if a cash payment is made in addition to the delivery of title for property having the 
lesser value. 
D. ?If the city owns property containing a historically significant building or monument, the city may sell 
or give the property to nonprofit organizations or groups that agree to restore or preserve the 
property. The contract for the transfer of the property must contain a provision that: 
1. ?Requires the property to be preserved in its present or restored state upon any subsequent 
transfer; and 
2. ?Provides for the reversion of the property to the city for noncompliance with conditions attached 
to the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.030), 1-17-2006) 


Sec. 2.06.880. - Requirements for certain sales. 
    When the city commission, after public hearing, has determined by a two-thirds vote of all the 
members that any real property owned by the city is not needed for public use, or that the public interest 
may be furthered, the city may sell such property by bid, auction with reserve, or negotiated sale or 
exchange, subject, where appropriate, to a minimum price established through an appraisal that certifies 
the value of such property. Notice of sale, exchange, or auction shall be published as provided in MCA 7-
1-4127. The city may terminate the sale procedures used at any time and may reinitiate the same or 
different procedures at a later date. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.040), 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 8-27-2007) 


Sec. 2.06.890. - Terms of sale. 
A. ?Except as provided in section 2.06.870.D, a sale under this division must be for cash or on terms 
that the city commission may approve, provided that at least 20 percent of the purchase price is paid 
in cash. All deferred payments on the purchase price of any property sold must bear interest at a 
market rate, payable annually, and may be extended over a period of not more than five years. 
B. ?Subject to section 2.06.870.D, a sale may not be made for less than 90 percent of the appraised 
value. 
C. ?Subject to section 2.06.870.D, the title to any property sold may not pass from the city until the 
purchaser or the purchaser's assigns have paid the full amount of the purchase price into the city 
treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.050), 1-17-2006) 


Sec. 2.06.900. - Appraisal required for certain sales. 
    Unless otherwise provided, no sale of real property shall be made of any property unless it has been 
appraised within one year prior to the date of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.060), 1-17-2006) 


Sec. 2.06.910. Use of proceeds of property disposition. 
    The funds derived from property disposed of in accordance with this division, in the discretion of the 
city commission, may be credited to any account that is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(2.05.070), 1-17-2006) 


Secs. 2.06.920—2.06.1040. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT REVOLVING FUND[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference— Special improvement districts, MCA 7-12-4101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.06.1050. - Established; name and purpose. 
    In order to secure the prompt payment of any special improvement district bonds and/or warrants 
issued in payment of improvements made in any special improvement district or districts created after 
February 25, 1929, and the interest thereon, as it becomes due, there is created and established a fund 
to be known and designated as "special improvement district revolving fund." 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.010) 


Sec. 2.06.1060. - Sources of funds. 
A. ?For the purpose of providing funds for the special improvement district revolving fund, the 
commission: 
1. ?Transfer from general fund. May, in its discretion, from time to time, transfer to the special 
improvement district revolving fund from the general fund of the city such amount or amounts as 
may be deemed necessary, which amount or amounts so transferred shall be deemed and 
considered and shall be loans from such general fund to the special improvement district 
revolving fund; and 
2. ?Tax levy. Shall, in addition to such transfers from the general fund, or in lieu thereof, levy and 
collect for the special improvement district revolving fund such a tax, hereby declared to be for a 
public purpose, on all the taxable property of the city, as shall be necessary to meet the 
financial requirements of the fund, such levy, together with such transfer, not to exceed in any 
one year five percent of the principal amount of the then-outstanding special improvement 
district bonds and/or warrants. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.020) 


Sec. 2.06.1070. - Loans from revolving fund to special improvement district fund; conditions. 
    Whenever any special improvement district bond or warrant, or interest thereon, issued for 
improvements made in special improvement districts created after February 25, 1929, shall be or shall 
become due and payable, and there shall then be either no money or not sufficient money in the 
appropriate special improvement district fund with which to pay the same, an amount sufficient to make 
up the deficiency may, by order of the commission, be loaned by the special improvement district 
revolving fund to such special improvement district fund, and thereupon such bond or warrant or such 
interest thereon, whether it be for principal or for interest, or for both, as the commission may in its 
discretion elect or determine, shall be paid from the money so loaned, or from the money so loaned when 
added to the insufficient amount, as the case may require. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.030) 


Sec. 2.06.1080. - Liens imposed for amounts loaned. 
    Whenever any loan is made to any special improvement district fund from the special improvement 
district revolving fund, the special improvement district revolving fund shall have a lien therefor on all 
unpaid assessments and/or installments of assessments on such district, whether delinquent or not, and 
on all moneys thereafter coming into such special improvement district fund to the amount of such loan, 
together with interest thereon from the time it was made at the rate or percentage borne by the bond or 
warrant for payment of which, or of interest thereon, such loan was made. Whenever there shall be 
moneys in such special improvement district fund which are not required for the payment of any bond or 
warrant of such special improvement district, or of interest thereon, so much of such moneys as may be 
necessary to pay such loan shall, by order of the commission, be transferred to the special improvement 
district revolving fund, and after all the bonds and warrants issued on any special improvement district 
have been fully paid, all moneys remaining in such special improvement district fund shall, by order of the 
commission, be transferred to and become a part of the special improvement district revolving fund. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.040) 


Sec. 2.06.1090. - Use of surplus in fund. 
A. ?Whenever there is, in the special improvement district revolving fund, an amount in excess of the 
amount which the commission deems necessary for the payment or redemption of maturing bonds or 
warrants, or interest thereon, the commission may: 
1. ?Transfer to general fund. By a vote of all its members, at a meeting called for that purpose, 
order such excess, or any part thereof, transferred to the general fund of the city; or 
2. ?Purchase of property for delinquent taxes. Use such excess, or any part thereof, for the purpose 
of purchase of property at sales for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, or which may 
have been struck off or sold to the county for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, and 
against which property there then are any unpaid assessments for special improvements on 
account whereof there are outstanding special improvement district bonds or warrants of the 
city; and 
3. ?Disposition of property. Sell any tax certificates issued on any such sale or sales. After acquiring 
title to such property, the commission may lease such property or sell the same at public or 
private sale and make conveyance thereof, or otherwise dispose thereof, as the interest of the 
city may require; and all proceeds from such sale of tax certificates, or from such leasing, sale 
or other disposition of the property, shall belong to and be paid into the special improvement 
district revolving fund, and be subject to transfer, in whole or in part, to the general fund by the 
vote of all the members of the commission at a meeting called for that purpose, as hereinbefore 
provided. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.050) 


Sec. 2.06.1100. - Levy of tax; method and effect. 
    The special tax to be levied, as herein provided in section 2.06.1060.A.2, shall be in addition to the 
tax for general, municipal and administrative purposes, and the levy shall be made by the commission at 
the time and by the resolution passed and adopted by the commission as provided by section 2.06.570. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.060) 


Sec. 2.06.1110. - Statutory authority for division provisions. 
    This division is passed pursuant to the power and authority vested in the commission by chapter 24, 
Laws of Montana, 21st Session, 1929, entitled: 
"An Act Relating to Special Improvement Districts in Cities and Towns; Authorizing the Creation, 
Maintenance and Use of a Special Improvement District Revolving Fund in any City or Town for the 
Purpose of Securing Prompt Payment of Special Improvement District Bonds and Warrants and 
Interest Thereon, and Requiring Levy of Taxes When Necessary for the Financial Requirements of 
Such Fund," 
and the interpretation thereof by the Supreme Court of the state in the case of Stanley v. Jeffries , 86 
Mont. 114. The statute is now codified as MCA 7-12-4221 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 3.16.070) 


Secs. 2.06.1120—2.06.1240. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - URBAN RENEWAL, TAX INCREMENT, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2 and 3, adopted June 3, 2013, amended Div. 7 in its entirety to read 
as set out herein. The former Div. 7, §§ 2.06.1250—2.06.1310, pertained to the tax increment financing 
industrial district program and derived from §§ 3.20.010—3.20.070 of the 1982 Code; and Ord. No. 1336, 
§ 1, 1991. 
State Law reference— Urban Renewal Law, MCA 7-15-4201 et seq. 


Sec. 2.06.1250. - Urban renewal, tax increment, and economic development districts; creation. 
A. ?The city commission may, from time to time, create by ordinance an urban renewal, tax increment 
financing, or economic development district pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA, 
following a public hearing on the proposed district. In order for land to be included in the proposed 
district, in addition to the requirements of Montana law, it must: 
1. ?Consist of an area with an accurately described boundary; 
2. ?Not be contained within the boundaries of another tax increment financing, urban renewal, or 
other economic development district with a tax increment provision; 
3. ?Be zoned in accordance for the purposes for which the district will be created and be in 
compliance with the Bozeman Community Plan; and 
4. ?Be determined to be in compliance with all other legal requirements. 
B. ?The district must have as its purpose only those authorized by law. 
C. ?Notice of the public hearing on the creation of a proposed district shall be given in accordance with 
the provisions of MCA 7-15-4215. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1260. - Costs which may be paid from tax increments. 
    The district's tax increment may be used to pay for the costs incurred by an authorized urban 
renewal, tax increment, economic development or authorized infrastructure development project (in that 
district) as provided by Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA and as authorized by ordinance of the 
city commission. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1270. - Use of tax increments for bond payments. 
    The tax increments received may be pledged for the payment of the principal of premiums, if any, 
and interest on bonds which the city may issue for the purpose of providing funds to pay for costs accrued 
pursuant to section 2.06.1260. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1280. - Contents of ordinance. 
A. ?Each ordinance creating an urban renewal, tax increment financing, or economic development 
district shall: 
1. ?Designate each district by number; 
2. ?Set forth a legal description of and map showing the boundaries of the district; 
3. ?Include a plan that describes the district or development project and contains provisions for 
undertaking and implementing the district or project; and 
4. ?Establish the base year for the calculation of tax increment within the district. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1290. - Termination of tax increment financing provisions. 
    An urban renewal or economic development district's tax increment financing provisions shall 
terminate pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1300. - Administration. 
    The urban renewal, tax increment financing, or economic development district programs created 
pursuant to this division shall be administered by the city commission. The commission shall be advised 
on matters pertaining to the program by a district board created pursuant to article 5, division 10 of this 
chapter and may delegate specific authority to such board pursuant to ordinance or resolution. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1310. - North Park urban renewal district. 
    There hereby exists a North Park urban renewal district created pursuant to Ordinance 1979 . The 
Mandeville Farm Tax Increment Financing Industrial District created pursuant to Ordinance 1684, also 
known as the North Park economic development district is terminated pursuant to Ordinance 1979 . 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ; Ord. No. 1979 , § 14, 10-9-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1979 , § 14, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, amended § 2.06.1310 title to read as 
set out herein. The former § 2.06.1310 title pertained to North Park economic development 
district. 


Sec. 2.06.1320. - Downtown Area urban renewal district. 
    There hereby exists a downtown area urban renewal district created pursuant to Ordinance 1409. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1330. - Bozeman Midtown urban renewal district. 
    There hereby exists a North Seventh Avenue urban renewal district created pursuant to Ordinance 
1685. The North Seventh Avenue urban renewal district is hereby expanded and renamed the Bozeman 
Midtown urban renewal district pursuant to Ordinance 1925. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ; Ord. No. 1925, § 13, 11-16-2015 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1340. - Northeast urban renewal district. 
    There hereby exists a northeast urban renewal district created pursuant to Ordinance 1655. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1350. - South Bozeman technology district. 
    There hereby exists a South Bozeman technology district created pursuant to Ordinance 1844. 
( Ord. No. 1862, §§ 2, 3, 6-3-2013 ) 


Secs. 2.06.1360—2.06.1440. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 8. - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT PROGRAMS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Business improvement districts, MCA 7-12-1101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.06.1450. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for the specific program components of each of 
the several business improvement districts within the City of Bozeman created pursuant to title 7, chapter 
12, part 11, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 7-12-1101 et seq.). The districts shall be administered as 
provided by the boards of trustees for each district created pursuant to article 5, division 11 of this 
chapter. The purpose of a business improvement district is to serve a public use, promote the health, 
safety, prosperity, security, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the district and of the people of this 
state and be of specific benefit to the property within the boundaries of each district. 
(Ord. No. 1765, § 4(3.22.010), 8-10-2009) 


Sec. 2.06.1460. - Bozeman Tourism Business Improvement District program. 
A. ?Creation of district. The city commission creates and establishes the Bozeman Tourism Business 
Improvement District (BTBID). 
B. ?Specific purpose of district. In addition to the purposes enumerated in section 2.06.1450, the 
purposes of the BTBID are to aid in tourism, promotion, and marketing within the BTBID. 
C. ?District to be administered by board of trustees. Pursuant to section 2.05.1960, the affairs of the 
BTBID are to be administered by the BTBID board of trustees. 
D. ?Limits and boundaries of district. 
1. ?The outer limits of the BTBID within which properties used for the purpose of providing overnight 
stays at lodging facilities are be subject to the jurisdiction of the district shall mirror the city's 
corporate limits. As the corporate boundaries of the city change by reason of annexation or 
otherwise, the outer limits of the area within which a property shall be included in the BTBID 
shall be similarly changed. 
2. ?Within the limits described in subsection D.1 of this section, it is acknowledged that not all 
properties or facilities are to be subject to the jurisdiction of the BTBID; rather, specific non-
contiguous properties used for the purpose of providing overnight stays at lodging facilities, as 
described herein, shall be the only properties or facilities that comprise the BTBID. The 
properties and facilities that shall be subject to the BTBID assessments are only those that are 
being used for the identified purpose of providing ten or more rooms for temporary overnight 
accommodations, lodging, dwelling, or sleeping facilities for transient guests and, as such, shall 
include all hotels, motels, inns, bed and breakfast establishments, hostels, and other similar 
uses, structures, or portions thereof with ten or more rooms. 
3. ?Any facility meeting the requirements of subsection D.2 of this section that begins service within 
the city limits after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be 
subject to the requirements of this division. In such a case, the facility will automatically become 
subject to the jurisdiction of the BTBID and subject to the assessments described in subsection 
G of this section. This provision shall also apply to any property or portion thereof annexed into 
the City of Bozeman after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived 
whether such property or portion thereof contains an existing facility meeting the requirements 
of subsection D.2 of this section or whether a facility meeting the requirements of subsection 
D.2 of this section is developed on the property after annexation. 
E. ?General character of the services to be performed. The services to be performed by the BTBID shall 
include the funding of all uses and projects for tourism promotion within the city as specified in the 
BTBID annual work plan and budget, as required by section 2.05.1960.E, and as approved by the 
city commission. The services shall be designed to, among others, benefit local tourism and lodging 
businesses within the city and shall include the marketing of Bozeman at convention and trade 
shows, the marketing of Bozeman to the travel industry generally, and the marketing of Bozeman as 
a viable location for major sporting events. 
F. ?Assessments. Finding the benefits derived by each property or facility are proportional, the city 
commission shall annually assess the entire cost of the BTBID against the BTBID in the amount of 
$2.00 per occupied room night. The properties to be assessed shall be those meeting the 
requirements of subsection D.2 of this section. The assessments described herein shall be subject to 
the provisions of division 4 of this article. Certain occupied room nights are exempt from 
assessments under this division. These include: 
1. ?Occupied room nights at facilities that are otherwise exempt from paying a lodging facility use 
tax pursuant to MCA 15-65-101 through 15-65-136; and 
2. ?Complimentary occupied room nights provided by a facility for no compensation. 
G. ?Work plan and budget. The board of trustees for the BTBID, in consultation with the Bozeman 
Convention and Visitors Bureau, shall annually prepare a work plan, audit, and budget and submit 
the same to the city commission. The commission shall provide notice work plan and budget have 
been submitted and shall hold a public hearing on objections to the work plan and budget and may 
modify the work plan and budget as it considers necessary and appropriate. Upon approval of the 
work plan and budget the commission shall levy the assessments as described in subsection F of 
this section. 
H. ?Records/trade secrets. Pursuant to state law, the public shall have reasonable access to the records 
of the BTBID. To ensure there is sufficient protection of the trade secrets of any facility subject to this 
division, the board of trustees shall adopt procedures for creation and maintenance of records of the 
BTBID and procedures for balancing the right of the public to access to said records with the interest 
of the member entities' right to maintain the confidentiality of any valid trade secrets. These 
procedures shall be approved by the city attorney and incorporated into the bylaws. 
I. ?Duration of district. The BTBID shall remain in effect for ten years from the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this section is derived unless otherwise extended or modified by the city 
commission. 
(Ord. No. 1765, § 4(3.22.020), 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 1887, § 1, 5-
19-2014, eff. 7-1-2014 ) 


Sec. 2.06.1470. - Bozeman Downtown Business Improvement District program. 
A. ?Creation of district. The city commission creates and establishes the Bozeman Downtown Business 
Improvement District (BDBID). 
B. ?District to be administered by board of trustees. Pursuant to section 2.05.1970, the affairs of the 
BDBID are to be administered by the BDBID board of trustees. 
C. ?Limits and boundaries of district. The properties of the BDBID shall include those within the 
boundaries as described in section 3 of Resolution No. 4263, adopted June 21, 2010. 
D. ?General character of the services to be performed. The services to be performed by the BDBID shall 
include the funding of all uses and projects within the BDBID as specified in the annual work plan 
and budget, as required by section 2.05.1970.D, and as approved by the city commission. 
E. ?Assessments. Each lot or parcel of land, including the improvements on the lot or parcel, shall be 
assessed for that part of the whole cost of the district that its taxable valuation bears to the total 
taxable valuation of the property of the BDBID and shall be as follows: 
1. ?For the first three fiscal years (2011-2013) of the BDBID, the total property owner assessment 
shall not exceed $114,000.00; 
2. ?For the fourth through seventh fiscal years (2014-2017), the assessment shall not exceed 
$120,000.00; and 
3. ?For the eighth through tenth years (2018-2020), the assessment shall not exceed $126,000.00. 
These assessment limitations may be exceeded with a favorable vote or petition by the owners of more 
than 60 percent of the area of the property in the BDBID. 
F. ?Work plan, budget and financial report. 
1. ?The board of trustees shall prepare a financial report in compliance with title 2, chapter 7, part 5, 
of Montana Code Annotated (MCA 2-7-501 et seq.). 
2. ?The board of trustees for the BDBID shall annually prepare a work plan, and budget and submit 
the same to the city commission. The commission shall provide notice work plan and budget 
have been submitted and shall hold a public hearing on objections to the work plan and budget 
and may modify the work plan and budget as it considers necessary and appropriate. Upon 
approval of the work plan and budget the commission shall levy the assessments as described 
in subsection E of this section. 
G. ?Records/trade secrets/privacy. Pursuant to state law, the public shall have reasonable access to the 
records of the BDBID. To ensure there is sufficient protection of the trade secrets or privacy of any 
property owner subject to this division, the board of trustees shall adopt procedures for creation and 
maintenance of records of the BDBID and procedures for balancing the right of the public to access 
to said records with the interest of the property owner's right to privacy or to maintain the 
confidentiality of any valid trade secrets. These procedures shall be approved by the city attorney 
and incorporated into the bylaws. 
H. ?Duration of district. The BDBID shall remain in effect for ten years from the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this section is derived unless otherwise extended or modified by the city 
commission. 
(Ord. No. 1790, § 2(3.22.030), 7-12-2010) 


Secs. 2.06.1480—2.06.1590. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 9. - IMPACT FEES[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference— Impact fees to fund capital improvements, MCA 7-6-1601 et seq. 


Sec. 2.06.1600. - Legislative findings. 
A. ?The city commission finds that: 
1. ?The protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city requires that 
the street, fire protection, water, and wastewater systems of the city be expanded and improved 
to accommodate continuing growth within the city and within those areas directly served by its 
fire department and within those areas connected to its water and wastewater systems. 
2. ?New residential and nonresidential development imposes increased and excessive demands 
upon existing city facilities. 
3. ?New development often overburdens existing public facilities, and the tax revenues generated 
from new development often do not generate sufficient funds to provide public facilities to serve 
the new development. 
4. ?New development is expected to continue and will place ever-increasing demands on the city to 
provide public facilities to serve new development. 
5. ?The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would enable the city to impose a 
proportionate share of the costs of required improvements to the city's transportation, fire 
protection, water, and wastewater systems on those developments that create the need for 
them. 
6. ?All types of development that are not explicitly exempted from the provisions of this division will 
generate demand for city's transportation, fire protection, water, and wastewater services or 
facilities that will require improvements to city facilities and equipment. 
7. ?The city's adopted impact fee studies set forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for 
determining the impacts of various types of development on the city's street, fire protection, 
water and wastewater systems and for determining the cost of acquiring land and the cost of 
acquiring or constructing facilities and equipment necessary to meet the demands for such 
services created by new development. 
8. ?The city establishes as city standards the assumptions and service standards referenced in the 
impact fee studies and other duly adopted documents as part of its current plans for the 
transportation system and for the city's fire protection, water, and wastewater systems. 
9. ?The documentation required by MCA 7-6-1602, is collectively contained in the city's facility 
plans, impact fee studies, development regulations, financial records, capital improvements 
program, design and specification manual, and other city documents. 
10. ?The development impact fees described in this division are reasonably related to the service 
demands and needs of new development and are based on the impact fee studies and 
documentation cited in subsection 7 of this section and do not exceed the costs of acquiring 
additional land and the costs of acquiring or constructing additional facilities or equipment 
required to serve the new developments that will pay the fees. 
11. ?All transportation improvements upon which the transportation impact fees are based and 
upon which transportation impact fee revenues will be spent, based on the limitations set forth 
in this division will benefit all new development in the city; and it is, therefore, appropriate to 
treat the entire city as a single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending 
the transportation impact fees, while recognizing differences in the demand for service based 
upon the identified factors set forth in the transportation impact fee study. 
12. ?All of the fire protection improvements listed in the fire impact fee study will benefit all new 
development that receives fire protection service directly from the city fire department; and it is, 
therefore, appropriate to treat the entire city and all properties served directly by the city fire 
department as a single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending the fire 
protection impact fees. 
13. ?All of the water system improvements listed in the water impact fee study will benefit all new 
development that connects to the city water system; and it is, therefore, appropriate to treat the 
entire city and all properties connected to the city water system as a single service area for 
purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending the water impact fees. 
14. ?All of the wastewater system improvements listed in the wastewater impact fee study will 
benefit all new development that connects to the city wastewater system; and it is, therefore, 
appropriate to treat the entire city and all properties connected to the city wastewater system as 
a single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending the wastewater 
impact fees. 
15. ?There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between the development impacts 
created by each type of development covered by this division and the development impact fees 
that such development will be required to pay. 
16. ?The city's facility planning, capital improvement program, development review, and bidding 
processes create a public process by which, on a specific and detailed basis, the capacity 
expanding components of construction can be identified and funded distinctly from those 
components which are not capacity expanding by providing for evaluation by the city and the 
impact fee advisory committee of future needs related to growth, identification of applicable 
funding sources, and monitoring of construction and payments. 
17. ?To meet the needs of new development the city may construct capacity expanding capital 
improvements prior to development of adjacent properties. This may include the construction of 
capacity expanding infrastructure of a nature and in a location that may require such 
improvements to be deemed project related improvements at the time of the development of 
such adjacent properties. The city commission finds that under certain conditions it is fair and 
reasonable that the costs of a project related improvement that have been paid by the city prior 
to development of certain properties should be reimbursed at the time of development of those 
properties. 
18. ?This division creates a system by which development impact fees paid by new developments 
will be used to expand or improve the city transportation, fire protection, water, and wastewater 
systems in ways that benefit the development that paid each fee within a reasonable period of 
time after the fee is paid. 
19. ?This division creates a system under which development impact fees shall not be used to cure 
existing deficiencies in public facilities or to pay maintenance or operations costs associated 
with providing public facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.010; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1471, § 1, 
1998; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.010), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.010), 1-14-2008; Ord. 
No. 1746, § 1, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1936 , § 2, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1610. - Authority and applicability. 
A. ?This division is enacted pursuant to the city's self-government powers, the authority granted to the 
city by the Montana State Constitution, MCA 7-6-1601 through 7-6-1604, and MCA 7-1-4123, 7-1-
4124, 7-3-4313, 7-7-4404, 7-7-4424, 7-13-4304, and 69-7-101. 
B. ?The provisions of this division shall apply to all of the territory within the limits of the city. 
C. ?The provisions of this division related to the fire protection impact fees shall also apply to all 
properties located outside the city that are served directly by the city fire department. 
D. ?The provisions of this division related to water impact fees shall also apply to all properties located 
outside the city that are connected to the city water system. 
E. ?The provisions of this division related to wastewater impact fees shall also apply to all properties 
located outside the city that are connected to the city wastewater system. 
F. ?The provisions of this division related to the establishment of transportation, fire/EMS, water, and 
sewer reimbursement districts applies to properties located outside the city that are deemed to 
benefit from capacity expansion. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.020; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.020), 8-6-2007; Ord. 
No. 1730, § 1(3.24.020), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1936 , § 3, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1620. - Intent. 
A. ?This division is adopted to help implement the growth policy of the city, the city's most recently 
adopted long range transportation plan, the most recently adopted water facility plan, the most 
recently adopted wastewater facility plan, and the most recently adopted fire protection/EMS master 
plan. 
B. ?The intent of this division is to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost 
of improvements to the city transportation, fire protection, water, and wastewater systems; to ensure 
that such proportionate share does not exceed the cost of the transportation, fire protection, water, 
and wastewater facilities and equipment required to serve such new developments; and to ensure 
that funds collected from new developments are actually used to construct improvements to the city 
transportation, fire protection, water, and wastewater systems that reasonably relate to the benefits 
accruing to such new developments. 
C. ?It is the further intent of this division that new development pay for its proportionate share of public 
facilities through the imposition of development impact fees that will be used to finance, defray, or 
reimburse all or a portion of the costs incurred by the city to construct improvements to the city 
transportation, fire protection, water, and wastewater systems that serve or benefit such new 
development. 
D. ?It is not the intent of this division to collect any money from any new development in excess of the 
actual amount necessary to offset new demands for transportation, fire protection, water, or 
wastewater improvements generated by that new development. 
E. ?It is not the intent of this division that any moneys collected from any development impact fee and 
deposited in an impact fee fund ever be co-mingled with moneys from a different impact fee fund or 
ever be used for a type of facility or equipment different from that for which the fee was paid. 
F. ?Any funds paid pursuant to a reimbursement district established in this division do not replace or 
reduce any impact fees imposed upon development. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.030; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1471, § 2, 1998; Ord. No. 1707, § 
1(3.24.030), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.030), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1746, § 2, 8-4-2008; 
Ord. No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1936 , § 4, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1630. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Capacity expanding capital improvements" means improvements that increase the functional 
capacity of the city's water system, wastewater system, fire protection and emergency medical 
service system, or transportation system. This term may include capital improvements that if 
constructed in advance of development may meet the definition of "project related 
improvements" when development of adjacent property occurs. 
2. ?"Central Business District" (CBD) means land uses established within the B-3, "Central 
Business District," zoning district. 
3. ?"Development" means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any 
change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, which creates 
additional demand for public services. 
4. ?"Development impact fees" means the transportation impact fee, fire protection impact fee, 
water impact fee, and wastewater impact fee established by this division. 
5. ?"Development impact fees review committee" means the committee composed of the impact fee 
coordinator, the building official, the director of public service, the fire chief, and the director of 
community development, or their designees appointed to serve in the member's place at a 
meeting. 
6. ?"Encumber" means to legally obligate by contract, or otherwise commit to use by appropriation 
or other official act of the city. 
7. ?"Impact fee capital improvement program" means the capital improvements program for the 
transportation system, the city fire protection system, and the city water and wastewater 
systems, which shall assign moneys from each impact fee fund to specific projects and related 
expenses for improvements to the type of facilities or services for which the fees in that fund 
were paid, and shall not include improvements needed to correct existing deficiencies or 
operations or maintenance costs. 
8. ?"Impact fee coordinator" means the director of the city's department of community development. 
9. ?"Impact fee funds" means the transportation impact fee fund, fire protection impact fee fund, 
water impact fee fund, and wastewater impact fee fund established by this division. 
10. ?"Impact fee studies" means the studies most recently adopted by resolution of the city 
commission for each impact fee which set forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for 
determining the impacts of various types of development on the city's street, fire protection and 
emergency medical services, water and wastewater systems or other services or facilities for 
which an impact fee may be charged and for determining the cost of acquiring land and the cost 
of acquiring or constructing facilities and equipment necessary to meet the demands for such 
services created by new development. 
11. ?"Improvement" means planning, land acquisition, engineering design, construction inspection, 
on-site construction, off-site construction, equipment purchases, and financing costs associated 
with new or expanded facilities, buildings, and equipment that expand the capacity of a facility 
or service system and that have an average useful life of at least ten years. The term 
"improvement" does not include maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand 
capacity. 
12. ?"Independent fee calculation study" means a study prepared by an applicant for a building 
permit or water or wastewater connection permit calculating the cost of expansions or 
improvements to the city's transportation, fire protection, water, or wastewater systems required 
to serve the applicant's proposed development; that is performed on an average cost (not 
marginal cost) methodology; uses the service units and unit construction costs stated in the 
impact fee studies; and is performed in compliance with any criteria for such studies established 
by this division or by the city. 
13. ?"Initiation of construction" means the date of the preconstruction meeting with the city 
engineer, or the date of the first visible change in the physical condition of the improved site 
caused by the first person furnishing services or materials to effect construction of the 
improvement, whichever occurs first. 
14. ?"Maintenance" means replacement, repair, or caring for a constructed water, sewer, fire/EMS, 
or transportation facility to preserve them in a functional state equal to their initial installed 
design; and which does not change the basic design or structure or change them from their 
original purpose. Activities that change the scope of a project beyond the original design are not 
included in this definition. 
15. ?"Project-related improvements" means site-related improvements including, without limitation, 
all access streets adjacent to the proposed development or leading only to the proposed 
development and not included on the transportation system; all streets and driveways within the 
development; all acceleration, deceleration, right, or left turn lanes leading to any streets and 
driveways within the development; all traffic control devices for streets and driveways within the 
development; all water lines or facilities adjacent to, leading to, or located within the 
development and serving only the development; all wastewater lines or facilities adjacent to, 
leading to, or located within and serving only the development; and all off-site improvements 
necessary for the safety and code compliance of a development. Credit for incidental 
improvements shall not be allowed. The presumption shall be made that the minimum 
improvement needed to serve a project shall be deemed to be a project improvement even if 
additional capacity is thereby created that may be potentially used by other developments 
presently or in the future. 
16. ?"Transportation system" means existing or planned collectors or arterial roads of three lanes or 
more and, which are either included on the most current long range transportation plan or the 
city's impact fee capital improvement program. The transportation system includes bicycle and 
pedestrian facilities appurtenant to such roads. 
17. ?Trip exchange district. 
a. ?"Trip exchange district" means a defined geographic area that meets the following criteria, 
pursuant to the transportation fee study and an independent fee calculation study as 
provided in section 2.06.1640.B.3: 
(1) ?The use of shared and consolidated parking; 
(2) ?A high degree of pedestrian and bicycle access to and throughout the proposed 
development; 
(3) ?The availability of public transit; 
(4) ?Extensive trip capture within the proposed development where trips to the proposed 
development result in visits to multiple businesses in the area via a mode other than 
automobile; 
b. ?The following additional physical development characteristics are associated with trip 
exchange district land uses: 
(1) ?The majority of buildings associated with the proposed development are multi-story 
building, often more than two stories; 
(2) ?Diverse business proprietorships within the development; 
(3) ?Primary use at the ground floor is commercial; 
(4) ?The majority of individual businesses within the development are less than 20,000 
square feet; 
(5) ?Structures within the development are in near to each other and the public street 
(with small or no setbacks); 
(6) ?Having a high percentage building coverage on the lot and typically in excess of 0.5; 
(7) ?The physical characteristics are shared among the entire business area, not just one 
or a few of the businesses; 
(8) ?The area should be at least 50 percent developed as measured by lot area utilized; 
and 
(9) ?The area is the subject of a city enforceable common plan of development, such as 
an urban renewal plan. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.040; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1471, § 3, 
1998; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.040), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.040), 1-14-2008; Ord. 
No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1853, § 1, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1936 , §§ 5, 6, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1640. - Transportation impact fees. 
A. ?Imposition of transportation impact fees. 
1. ?Any person who seeks to obtain any of the following forms of development approval is required 
to pay a transportation impact fee in the amount specified in the commission resolution adopting 
the most recent transportation impact fee study and establishing the transportation impact fee 
and as updated as required in this division. 
a. ?A building permit; 
b. ?Any other permit that will result in the construction of improvements that will generate 
additional traffic; or 
c. ?Any extension of any such permit that was issued before the effective date of the ordinance 
from which this division is derived; or 
d. ?Any delayed payment of impact fees as specified and approved by the city commission in 
accordance with chapter 38, article 43. 
2. ?Notwithstanding subsection A.1 of this section, no impact fee shall be imposed earlier than the 
issuance of a building permit for developments requiring a building permit. 
3. ?No permits of the types described in subsection A.1 of this section may be issued until the 
transportation impact fee described in this division has been paid, unless the development for 
which the permit is sought is exempted by subsection F of this section; or unless deferral of 
payment of the transportation impact fee has been approved by the impact fee coordinator 
pursuant to a deferral program approved by resolution of the Commission in compliance with 
2.06.1700.I. 
B. ?Computation of amount of transportation impact fee. 
1. ?An applicant required by this division to pay a transportation impact fee may choose to have the 
amount of such fee determined pursuant to either subsection B.2 or B.3 of this section. The 
amount of the fee calculated pursuant to either subsection B.2 or B.3 of this section shall be 
subject to the following adjustment: 
a. ?For the first expansion of an existing nonresidential building, the amount calculated shall 
not include the amount calculated for the expansion of up to 30 percent as compared with 
its size on February 22, 1996, or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
b. ?When a property changes from one nonresidential use to another within an existing 
nonresidential building, the area included in the calculation of change in demand shall 
exclude the first 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c. ?The transportation impact fees are those adopted by resolution of the commission and as 
updated as provided for in this division. 
2. ?Unless an applicant requests that the city determine the amount of such fee pursuant to 
subsection B.3 of this section, the city shall determine the amount of the required transportation 
impact fee by reference to the most recently adopted transportation impact fee study. The fee 
amounts set forth in such study include credits for expected future receipts of state and federal 
highway funds and expected future receipts of gas tax revenues, and all other non-impact fee 
sources of funding anticipated to be made by or as a result of new development to be applied to 
the transportation improvements required to serve new development. 
a. ?If the applicant's development is of a type not listed in the most recently adopted 
transportation impact fee study, then the city shall use the fee applicable to the most nearly 
comparable type or land use in the study. In making a decision about which use is most 
nearly comparable, the city shall be guided by the most recent edition of "Trip Generation: 
An Information Report" prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers; or if such 
publication is no longer available, then by a similar publication. If the city determines that 
there is no comparable type of land use listed in the study, then a new fee shall be 
determined by: 
(1) ?Finding the most nearly comparable trip generation rate from the publication noted in 
subsection B.2.a. of this section; and 
(2) ?Applying the formula set forth in subsection B.3.d of this section. 
b. ?If the applicant's development includes a mix of those uses listed in the most recently 
adopted transportation impact fee study, then the fee shall be determined by adding up the 
fees that would be payable for each use if it were a freestanding use pursuant to the most 
recently adopted transportation impact fee study. 
c. ?If the applicant is applying for an extension of a permit issued previously, then the fee shall 
be the net increase between the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application 
and any transportation impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same 
structure. In the event that the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application is 
lower than the transportation impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the 
same structure, there shall be no refund of transportation impact fees previously paid. 
d. ?If the applicant is applying for a permit to allow a change of use or the expansion, 
redevelopment, or modification of an existing development, the fee shall be based on the 
net positive increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. However, 
no new fee shall be imposed unless an additional unit of service demand is created, in 
accordance with the most recently adopted transportation impact fee study. If necessary to 
determine such net increase, the city shall be guided by the most recent edition of "Trip 
Generation: An Information Report" prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers; 
or if such publication is no longer available, then by a similar publication. In the event that 
the proposed change of use, expansion, redevelopment, or modification results in a net 
decrease in the fee for the new use or development as compared to the previous use or 
development, there shall be no refund of transportation impact fees previously paid. 
3. ?An applicant may request that the city determine the amount of the required transportation 
impact fee by reference to an independent fee calculation study for the applicant's development 
prepared by qualified professional traffic engineers and/or economists at the applicant's cost 
and submitted to the city engineer. Any such study must show the traffic engineering and 
economic methodologies and assumptions used, including, but not limited to, those forms of 
documentation listed in subsections B.3.a and B.3.b of this section and must be acceptable to 
the city pursuant to subsection B.3.c of this section. 
a. ?Traffic engineering studies must include documentation of trip generation rates, trip 
lengths, any percentage of trips from the site that represent net additions to current trips 
from the site, the percentage of trips that are new trips as opposed to pass-by or divert-link 
trips, and any other trip data for the proposed land use. 
b. ?Economic studies must include documentation of any special factors that the applicant 
believes will reduce the traffic volumes otherwise attributable to the proposed land use. 
c. ?The city shall consider all such documentation and any independent fee calculation study 
submitted by the applicant, but shall not be required to accept any such study or 
documentation that the city deems to be inaccurate or unreliable and may request that the 
applicant submit additional or different documentation for consideration. Any independent 
fee calculation study submitted by an applicant may be accepted, rejected, or accepted 
with modifications by the city as the basis for calculating transportation impact fees. 
d. ?Upon acceptance, or acceptance with modifications, of an independent fee calculation 
study and documentation, the city shall use the formulas and methodology contained within 
the most recently adopted transportation impact fee study to determine the transportation 
impact fee. 
C. ?Payment of transportation impact fee. 
1. ?All funds paid by an applicant pursuant to this division shall be identified as transportation 
impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the transportation impact fee fund described in 
subsection D of this section. 
D. ?Transportation impact fee funds. 
1. ?A single transportation impact fee fund is created and such fund must be maintained in an 
interest bearing account. 
2. ?Such fund may contain those transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this division and 
any interest which may accrue from time to time on such amounts. 
3. ?Such fund may also contain reimbursements collected pursuant to subsection 2.06.1640.F. 
E. ?Use of transportation impact fee funds. The moneys in the transportation impact fee fund shall be 
used only as follows: 
1. ?To acquire land for and/or acquire or construct capacity expanding capital improvements to the 
transportation system reasonably related to the benefits accruing to new development subject to 
the terms of this division, in accordance with the requirements of state law; or 
2. ?To pay debt service on such capital improvements to the transportation system; or 
3. ?For purposes of refunds or credits, as described in section 2.06.1680 or 2.06.1690.G; and 
4. ?May not be used for: 
a. ?Operations or maintenance purposes; 
b. ?To correct existing deficiencies; or 
c. ?For bicycle or pedestrian facilities unless built in conjunction with and included in a 
capacity-adding transportation system facility, otherwise eligible for impact fee funding. 
F. ?[Transportation impact fee reimbursement.] When the commission determines to fund capacity 
expanding capital improvements to the transportation system and the commission determines prior 
to expenditure of funds for such improvements that, upon future development, such improvements 
may be considered project related improvements the commission may by resolution create a 
transportation impact fee reimbursement district. The resolution creating the district must: 
1. ?Identify the specific transportation system improvements that will be subject to reimbursement if 
determined at a later date to be a project related improvement; 
2. ?Identify the real property to be included in such district wherein future development may be 
required to provide reimbursement; 
3. ?Identify the rationale for the commission's determination that such improvements may be 
considered in the future to be project related improvements; 
4. ?Identify the estimated amount of repayment that will be due from each property, the 
methodology for adjusting the estimated amount to the actual costs of construction, and the 
methodology for determining such amount; 
5. ?Identify whether the amount of repayment will account for the time value of the initial 
expenditure, and if so, describe the calculation methodology; 
6. ?Identify the period of time the reimbursement district will exist; and 
7. ?Identify the required timing of payment of the reimbursement which may be upon annexation or 
prior to final subdivision or site plan approval, and in no case later than issuance of a building 
permit. 
Prior to adoption of a resolution creating the reimbursement district, the city must provide written notice to 
owners of real property within the proposed district. 
G. ?Exemptions from transportation impact fee. 
1. ?The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the transportation 
impact fee: 
a. ?Alterations, remodeling, rehabilitations, expansions of existing buildings, or other 
improvements to an existing structure where no additional vehicle trips will be produced 
over and above those produced by the existing use; 
b. ?Construction of accessory buildings or structures that will not produce additional vehicle 
trips over and above those produced by the primary building or land use; 
c. ?The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new 
building or structure of the same size and use where no additional vehicle trips will be 
produced over and above those produced by the original building or structure; 
d. ?The installation or replacement of a mobile home on a lot or a mobile home site when a 
transportation impact fee for such lot or site has previously been paid pursuant to this 
division or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective 
date of the ordinance from which this division is derived; and 
e. ?Any other type of development for which the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed 
land use and development will produce no more vehicle trips from such site over and 
above the trips from such site prior to the proposed development, or for which the applicant 
can show that a transportation impact fee for such site has previously been paid in an 
amount that equals or exceeds the transportation impact fee that would be required by this 
division for such development. 
2. ?Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time when the applicant applies 
for the first permit or a type listed in subsection A.1 of this section for the proposed 
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been 
waived. 
3. ?The city shall determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth 
in subsections G.1 and G.2 of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.050; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 3, 1996; Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 
1998; Ord. No. 1471, § 4, 1998; Ord. No. 1633, § 1, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.050), 8-
6-2007; Ord. No. 1711, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.050), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1843, 
§ 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1853, § 2, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1930 , § 1, 1-3-2016; Ord. No. 1936 , § 
7, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1650. - Fire protection and emergency medical service impact fees. 
A. ?Imposition of fire protection and emergency medical service impact fees. 
1. ?Any person who seeks to obtain any of the following forms of development approval is required 
to pay a fire/EMS impact fee in the amount specified in the commission resolution adopting the 
most recent fire/EMS impact fee study and establishing the fire/EMS impact fee and as updated 
as required in this division: 
a. ?A building permit; or 
b. ?Any other permit that will result in construction that will generate demand for fire protection 
services; or 
c. ?Any extension of any such permit that was issued before the effective date of the ordinance 
from which this division is derived, is required to pay a fire protection impact fee in the 
amount specified in this division; or 
d. ?Any delayed payment of impact fees as specified and approved by the city commission in 
accordance with chapter 38, article 43. 
2. ?No permits of the types described in subsection A.1 of this section may be issued until the fire 
protection/EMS impact fee described in this division has been paid, unless the development for 
which the permit is sought is exempted by subsection F of this section; or unless deferral of 
payment of the fire protection/EMS impact fee has been approved by the city pursuant to a 
deferral program approved by resolution of the commission in compliance with 2.06.1700.I. 
B. ?Computation of amount of fire protection/EMS impact fee. 
1. ?An applicant required by this division to pay a fire protection/EMS impact fee may choose to 
have the amount of such fee determined pursuant to either subsection B.2 or B.3 of this section. 
The amount of the fee calculated pursuant to either subsection B.2 or B.3 of this section shall 
be subject to the following adjustment: 
a. ?For the first expansion of an existing nonresidential building, the amount calculated shall 
not include the amount calculated for the expansion of up to 30 percent as compared with 
its size on February 22, 1996, or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
2. ?Unless an applicant requests that the city determine the amount of such fee pursuant to 
subsection B.3 of this section, the city shall determine the amount of the required fire protection 
impact fee by reference to the most recently adopted fire impact fee study. 
a. ?If the type of development that a permit is applied for is not listed in the most recently 
adopted fire impact/EMS fee study, then the city shall use the fee applicable to the most 
nearly comparable type or land use in the study. 
b. ?If the type of development that a permit is applied for includes a mix of those uses listed in 
the most recently adopted fire impact fee study, then the fee shall be determined by adding 
up the fees that would be payable for each use if it were a freestanding use pursuant to the 
most recently adopted fire impact fee study. 
c. ?If the applicant is applying for an extension of a permit issued previously, then the fee shall 
be the net increase between the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application 
and any fire protection impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same 
structure. In the event that the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application is 
lower than the fire protection impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the 
same structure, there shall be no refund of fire protection impact fees previously paid. 
d. ?If the applicant is applying for a permit to allow a change of use or for the expansion, 
redevelopment, or modification of an existing development, the fee shall be based on the 
net increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. In the event that 
the proposed change of use, expansion, redevelopment, or modification results in a net 
decrease in the fee for the new use or development as compared to the previous use or 
development, there shall be no refund of fire protection impact fees previously paid. 
3. ?An applicant may request that the city determine the amount of the required fire/EMS protection 
impact fee by reference to an independent fee calculation study for the applicant's development 
prepared at the applicant's cost by qualified professional fire protection experts and/or 
economists and submitted to the city fire chief. Any such study shall be based on the same 
service standards and unit costs for fire protection/EMS used in the most recently adopted 
fire/EMS impact fee study, and must document the economic methodologies and assumptions 
used. Any independent fee calculation study submitted by an applicant may be accepted, 
rejected, or accepted with modifications by the city as the basis for calculating fire protection 
impact fees. If such study is accepted or accepted with modifications as a more accurate 
measure of the demand for new fire protection/EMS facilities and equipment created by the 
applicant's proposed development than the applicable fee shown in the most recently adopted 
fire impact fee study, then the fire protection/EMS impact fee due under this division may be 
calculated according to such study. 
C. ?Payment of fire protection/EMS impact fees. 
1. ?All funds paid by an applicant pursuant to this division shall be identified as fire protection/EMS 
impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the fire protection/EMS impact fee fund 
described in subsection D of this section. 
D. ?Fire protection/EMS impact fee funds. 
1. ?A single fire protection/EMS impact fee fund is created and such fund must be maintained in an 
interest bearing account. 
2. ?Such fund may contain those fire protection/EMS impact fees collected pursuant to this division 
and any interest which may accrue from time to time on such amounts. 
3. ?Such fund may also contain reimbursements collected pursuant to section 2.06.1650.F. 
E. ?Use of fire protection/EMS impact fee funds. The moneys in the fire protection/EMS impact fee fund 
shall be used only: 
1. ?To acquire or construct capacity expanding fire protection/EMS improvements within the city; or 
2. ?To pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond 
issue used to finance the acquisition or construction of fire protection/EMS improvements within 
the city; or 
3. ?As described in section 2.06.1680 or 2.06.1690.G. 
F. ?[Fire protection/EMS impact fee reimbursement.] When the commission determines to fund capacity 
expanding capital improvements to the fire protection/EMS system and the commission determines 
prior to expenditure of funds for such improvements that, upon future development, such 
improvements may be considered project related improvements the commission may by resolution 
create a fire protection/EMS impact fee reimbursement district. The resolution creating the district 
must: 
1. ?Identify the specific fire protection/EMS improvements that will be subject to reimbursement if 
determined at a later date to be a project related improvement; 
2. ?Identify the real property to be included in such district wherein future development may be 
required to provide reimbursement; 
3. ?Identify the rationale for the commission's determination that such improvements may be 
considered in the future to be project related improvements; 
4. ?Identify the estimated amount of repayment that will be due from each property, the 
methodology for adjusting the estimated amount to the actual costs of construction, and the 
methodology for determining such amount; 
5. ?Identify whether the amount of repayment will account for the time value of the initial 
expenditure, and if so, describe the calculation methodology; 
6. ?Identify the period of time the reimbursement district will exist; and 
7. ?Identify the required timing of payment of the reimbursement which may be upon annexation or 
prior to final subdivision or site plan approval, and in no case later than issuance of a building 
permit. 
Prior to adoption of a resolution creating the reimbursement district, the city must provide written notice to 
owners of real property within the proposed district. 
G. ?Exemptions from fire protection/EMS impact fee. 
1. ?The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the fire protection/EMS 
impact fee: 
a. ?Reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing residential unit that does not create 
any additional or larger residential units. 
b. ?Construction of unoccupied accessory units related to a residential unit. 
c. ?Projects that the applicant can demonstrate will produce no greater demand for fire 
protection/EMS from such land than existed prior to issuance of such permit. 
d. ?Projects for which a fire protection/EMS impact fee has previously been paid in an amount 
that equals or exceeds the fire protection/EMS impact fee that would be required by this 
division. 
2. ?Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time when the applicant applies 
for the first permit of a type listed in subsection A.1 of this section for the proposed 
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been 
waived. 
3. ?The city shall determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth 
in subsections G.1 and G.2 of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.060; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 4, 1996; Ord. No. 1464, § 2, 
1998; Ord. No. 1471, § 5, 1998; Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.060), 8-
6-2007; Ord. No. 1711, § 2, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1711, § 3, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 
1(3.24.060), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1746, § 3, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 
1853, § 3, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1930 , § 1, 1-3-2016; Ord. No. 1936 , § 8, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1660. - Water impact fees. 
A. ?Imposition of water impact fees. 
1. ?Any person who seeks to obtain a permit for connection to the city water system, or who is 
subject to subsection B.2.b of this section and applies for a city permit to expand or add to the 
structure served by a previously approved water connection, or any extension of such a permit 
issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, is required 
to pay a water impact fee in the amount specified in the commission resolution adopting the 
water impact fee study and establishing the water impact fee and as updated as required in this 
division; or 
2. ?Any delayed payment of impact fees as specified and approved by the city commission in 
accordance with chapter 38, article 43. 
3. ?No permits for connection to the city water system may be issued until the water impact fee 
described in this division has been paid, unless the development for which the permit is sought 
is exempted by subsection F of this section; or unless deferral of payment of the water impact 
fee has been approved by the city pursuant to a deferral program approved by resolution of the 
commission in compliance with 2.06.1700.I. 
B. ?Computation of amount of water impact fee. 
1. ?The city shall determine the amount of the required water impact fee by reference to the most 
recently adopted water impact fee study unless the applicant chooses to submit an 
individualized calculation pursuant to subsection B.2.a of this section or the city determines the 
application to be subject to subsection B.2.b of this section. If the applicant is applying for a 
replacement for a water connection permit issued previously, then the fee shall be the net 
positive difference between the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application and 
any water impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same structure. In the 
event that the fee applicable at the time of the replacement permit application is lower than the 
water impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same structure, there shall be 
no refund of water impact fees previously paid. 
2. ?Individualized calculations. 
a. ?An applicant may request that the city determine the amount of the required water impact 
fee by reference to an independent fee calculation study for the applicant's development 
prepared at the applicant's cost by a professional engineer and/or economist and 
submitted to the city public service director. Any such study shall be based on the same 
service standards and unit costs used in the most recently adopted water impact fee study 
and must document the economic methodologies and assumptions used. Any independent 
fee calculation study submitted by an applicant may be accepted, rejected, or accepted 
with modifications by the city as the basis for calculating water impact fees. If such study is 
accepted, or accepted with modifications, as a more accurate measure of the demand for 
new water facilities created by the applicant's proposed development than the applicable 
fee shown in the most recently adopted water impact fee study, then the water impact fee 
due under this division may be calculated according to such study. 
b. ?The city may identify a user as having extraordinary demands for water service which are 
not accurately represented by the average usage which was relied upon by the 
methodology which generated the calculated charges in the most recently adopted water 
impact fee study. In this circumstance the city shall prepare a customized calculation 
based upon the most recently adopted water impact fee study. The impact fee paid for 
water meters larger than three inches as of the effective date of the ordinance from which 
this division is derived may be adjusted based on actual usage. If usage is greater than 
110 percent of anticipated volume during the 12-month period of time beginning six months 
after building occupancy is granted by the city, an additional impact fee may be charged, 
using the same techniques for calculating peak day and storage EDUs and multiplying by 
the peak day impact fee cost per EDU and the storage impact fee cost per EDU then in 
effect. The additional impact fee is the positive net between a previously calculated impact 
fee and the impact fee based upon the metered demand. 
C. ?Payment of water impact fee. 
1. ?All funds paid by an applicant pursuant to this division shall be identified as water impact fees 
and shall be promptly deposited in the water impact fee fund described in subsection D of this 
section. 
D. ?Water impact fee funds. 
1. ?A single water impact fee fund is created and such fund must be maintained in an interest 
bearing account. 
2. ?Such fund may contain those water impact fees collected pursuant to this division and any 
interest which may accrue from time to time on such amounts. 
3. ?Such fund may also contain reimbursements collected pursuant to section 2.06.1660.F. 
E. ?Use of water impact fee funds. The moneys in the water impact fee fund shall be used only: 
1. ?To acquire or construct capacity expanding improvements to the city water system; or 
2. ?To pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond 
issue used to finance improvements to the city water system; or 
3. ?As described in section 2.06.1680 or 2.06.1690.G. 
F. ?[Water impact fee reimbursement.] When the commission determines to fund capacity expanding 
capital improvements to the water system and the commission determines prior to expenditure of 
funds for such improvements that, upon future development, such improvements may be considered 
project related improvements the commission may by resolution create a water impact fee 
reimbursement district. The resolution creating the district must: 
1. ?Identify the specific water improvements that will be subject to reimbursement if determined at a 
later date to be a project related improvement; 
2. ?Identify the real property to be included in such district wherein future development may be 
required to provide reimbursement; 
3. ?Identify the rationale for the commission's determination that such improvements may be 
considered in the future to be project related improvements; 
4. ?Identify the estimated amount of repayment that will be due from each property, the 
methodology for adjusting the estimated amount to the actual costs of construction, and the 
methodology for determining such amount; 
5. ?Identify whether the amount of repayment will account for the time value of the initial 
expenditure, and if so, describe the calculation methodology; 
6. ?Identify the period of time the reimbursement district will exist; and 
7. ?Identify the required timing of payment of the reimbursement which may be upon annexation or 
prior to final subdivision or site plan approval, and in no case later than issuance of a building 
permit. 
Prior to adoption of a resolution creating the reimbursement district, the city must provide written notice to 
owners of real property within the proposed district. 
G. ?Exemptions from water impact fees. 
1. ?The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the water impact fee: 
a. ?Alteration or expansion of an existing nonresidential building that does not require an 
additional or larger water meter; 
b. ?Replacement of a nonresidential building or structure of the same size that does not 
require an additional or larger water meter; 
c. ?The reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing residential unit that does not 
create any additional or larger residential units. 
2. ?The installation of fire lines for fire protection shall be exempted from payment of the water 
impact fee. 
3. ?Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time when the applicant applies 
for the first permit of a type listed in subsection A.1 of this section for the proposed 
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been 
waived. 
4. ?The city shall determine the validity of any claims for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth 
in subsections G.1 and G.2 of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.070; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 5, 1996; Ord. No. 1464, § 3, 
1998; Ord. No. 1471, § 7, 1998; Ord. No. 1633, § 3, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.070), 8-
6-2007; Ord. No. 1711, § 4, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.070), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1843, 
§ 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1853, § 4, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1930 , § 1, 1-3-2016; Ord. No. 1936 , § 
9, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1670. - Wastewater impact fees. 
A. ?Imposition of wastewater impact fees. 
1. ?Any person who seeks to obtain a permit for connection to the city wastewater system, or who is 
subject to subsection B.2.b of this section and applies for a city permit to expand or add to the 
structure served by a previously approved water connection, or any extension of such a permit 
issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived is required 
to pay a wastewater impact fee in the amount specified in the commission resolution adopting 
the wastewater impact fee study and establishing the wastewater impact fee and as updated as 
required in this division; or 
2. ?Any delayed payment of impact fees as specified and approved by the city commission in 
accordance with chapter 38, article 43. 
3. ?No permits for connection to the city water system may be issued until the water impact fee 
described in this division has been paid, unless the development for which the permit is sought 
is exempted by subsection F of this section; or unless deferral of payment of the wastewater 
impact fee has been approved by the city pursuant to a deferral program approved by resolution 
of the commission in compliance with 2.06.1700.I. 
B. ?Computation of amount of wastewater impact fee. 
1. ?The city shall determine the amount of the required wastewater impact fee by reference to the 
most recently adopted wastewater impact fee study unless the applicant chooses to submit an 
individualized calculation pursuant to subsection B.2.a of this section or the city determines the 
application to be subject to subsection B.2.b of this section. If the applicant is applying for a 
replacement for a wastewater connection permit issued previously, then the fee shall be the net 
positive difference between the fee applicable at the time of the current permit application and 
any wastewater impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same structure. In 
the event that the fee applicable at the time of the replacement permit application is lower than 
the wastewater impact fee previously paid pursuant to this division for the same structure, there 
shall be no refund of wastewater impact fees previously paid. 
2. ?Individualized calculations. 
a. ?An applicant may request that the city determine the amount of the required wastewater 
impact fee by reference to an independent fee calculation study for the applicant's 
development prepared at the applicant's cost by a professional engineer and/or economist 
and submitted to the city public service director. Any such study shall be based on the 
same service standards and unit costs used in the most recently adopted wastewater 
impact fee study and must document the economic methodologies and assumptions used. 
Any independent fee calculation study submitted by an applicant may be accepted, 
rejected, or modified by the city as the basis for calculating wastewater impact fees. If such 
study is accepted or accepted with modifications as a more accurate measure of the 
demand for new wastewater facilities created by the applicant's proposed development 
than the applicable fee shown in the most recently adopted wastewater impact fee study, 
then the wastewater impact fees due under this division shall be calculated according to 
such study. 
b. ?The city may identify a user as having extraordinary demands for wastewater service which 
are not accurately represented by the average usage which was relied upon by the 
methodology in the most recently adopted wastewater impact fee study. In this 
circumstance the city shall prepare a customized calculation based upon the methodology 
in the water impact fee study. When applicable an adjustment for high strength discharge 
will be applied. The impact fee paid for water meters later than three inches as of the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived may be adjusted based 
on actual usage. If usage is greater than 110 percent of anticipated volume or other 
measure of demand during the 12-month period of time beginning six months after building 
occupancy is granted by the city, an additional impact fee may be charged, using the same 
techniques for calculating treatment and collection in EDUs and multiplying by the impact 
fee cost per EDU. The additional impact fee is the positive net between a previously 
calculated impact fee and the impact fee based upon the metered demand. 
C. ?Payment of wastewater impact fee. 
1. ?All funds paid by an applicant paid pursuant to this division shall be identified as wastewater 
impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the wastewater impact fee fund described in 
subsection D of this section. 
D. ?Wastewater impact fee funds. 
1. ?A single wastewater impact fee fund is created and such fund must be maintained in an interest 
bearing account. 
2. ?Such fund may contain those wastewater impact fees collected pursuant to this division and any 
interest which may accrue from time to time on such amounts. 
3. ?Such fund may also contain reimbursements collected pursuant to section 2.06.1670.F. 
E. ?Use of wastewater impact fee funds. The moneys in the wastewater impact fee fund shall be used 
only: 
1. ?To acquire or construct capacity expanding improvements to the city wastewater system; or 
2. ?To pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond 
issue used to finance improvements to the city wastewater system; or 
3. ?As described in section 2.06.1680 or section 2.06.1690.G. 
F. ?[Wastewater impact fee reimbursement.] When the commission determines to fund capacity 
expanding capital improvements to the wastewater system and the commission determines prior to 
expenditure of funds for such improvements that, upon future development, such improvements may 
be considered project related improvements the commission may by resolution create a wastewater 
impact fee reimbursement district. The resolution creating the district must: 
1. ?Identify the specific wastewater improvements that will be subject to reimbursement if 
determined at a later date to be a project related improvement; 
2. ?Identify the real property to be included in such district wherein future development may be 
required to provide reimbursement; 
3. ?Identify the rationale for the commission's determination that such improvements may be 
considered in the future to be project related improvements; 
4. ?Identify the estimated amount of repayment that will be due from each property, the 
methodology for adjusting the estimated amount to the actual costs of construction, and the 
methodology for determining such amount; 
5. ?Identify whether the amount of repayment will account for the time value of the initial 
expenditure, and if so, describe the calculation methodology; 
6. ?Identify the period of time the reimbursement district will exist; and 
7. ?Identify the required timing of payment of the reimbursement which may be upon annexation or 
prior to final subdivision or site plan approval, and in no case later than issuance of a building 
permit. 
Prior to adoption of a resolution creating the reimbursement district, the city must provide written notice to 
owners of real property within the proposed district. 
G. ?Exemptions from wastewater impact fees. 
1. ?The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the wastewater impact 
fee: 
a. ?Alteration or expansion of an existing nonresidential building that does not require an 
additional or larger water meter; 
b. ?Replacement of a nonresidential building or structure of the same size that does not 
require an additional or larger water meter; 
c. ?The replacement of a previously existing residential unit that does not create any additional 
or larger residential units. 
2. ?Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time when the applicant applies 
for the first permit of a type listed in subsection A.1 of this section for the proposed 
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been 
waived. 
3. ?The city shall determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth 
in subsections G.1 and G.2 of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.080; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 6, 1996; Ord. No. 1464, § 4, 
1998; Ord. No. 1471, § 7, 1998; Ord. No. 1633, § 4, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.080), 8-
6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.080), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 1853, 
§ 5, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1930 , § 1, 1-3-2016; Ord. No. 1936 , § 10, 3-21-2016) 


Sec. 2.06.1680. - Refunds of development impact fees paid. 
A. ?Refunds of development impact fees shall be made only in the following instances and in the 
following manner: 
1. ?Upon application to the impact fee coordinator by the applicant, the city shall refund the 
development impact fee paid if capacity is available and service is denied. 
2. ?Expenses and encumbrances. 
a. ?Upon application to the impact fee coordinator, the city shall refund the development 
impact fee paid and not expended or encumbered within ten years from the date the 
development impact fee was paid or spent in a manner not in accordance with this division 
or MCA 17-6-1602. Refunds shall be paid to the owner of the property at the time the 
refund is due. In determining whether development impact fees have been expended or 
encumbered, fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
b. ?When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to expend or encumber development 
impact fees, the city shall publish written notice within 30 days after the expiration of the 
ten year period from the date development impact fee was paid. The published notice shall 
contain the heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." 
3. ?If an applicant has paid a development impact fee required by this division and has obtained 
any of the types of permits or extensions listed in section 2.06.1640.A.1, 2.06.1650.A.1, 
2.06.1660.A.1, or 2.06.1670.A.1, and the permit or extension for which the fee was paid later 
expires without the possibility of further extension, then the applicant who paid such fee shall be 
entitled to a refund of the fee paid, without interest. In order to be eligible to receive such refund, 
the applicant who paid such fee shall be required to submit an application for such refund within 
30 days after the expiration of the permit or extension for which the fee was paid. 
4. ?A refund application shall be made to the impact fee coordinator within one year from the date 
such refund becomes payable under subsections A and B of this section, or within one year 
from the date of publication of the notice of entitlement of a refund under subsection B of this 
section, whichever is later. Any refund not applied for within said time period shall be deemed 
waived. 
5. ?A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the impact 
fee coordinator to determine whether the refund claimed is proper and, if so, the amount of such 
refund. 
6. ?A refund shall include a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess 
development impact fee paid. 
7. ?All refunds shall be paid within 60 days after the impact fee coordinator determines that such 
refund is due. 
8. ?Any refund payable pursuant to subsections A and B of this section, shall be made to the record 
owner of property as of the date the refund was due. 
9. ?Once paid, an impact fee may not be refunded in exchange for impact fee credits issued 
according to section 2.06.1690. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.090; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 7, 1996; Ord. No. 1707, § 
1(3.24.090), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.090), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1823, § 1, 3-5-2012) 


Sec. 2.06.1690. - Credits against development impact fees. 
A. ?After the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, mandatory or voluntary 
land or easement dedications for transportation, fire protection, water, or wastewater improvements, 
and mandatory or voluntary acquisition or construction of capital improvements to the transportation 
system or the city fire protection, water, or wastewater systems by an applicant in connection with a 
proposed development may result in a pro rata credit against the development impact fee for the 
same type of service or facility otherwise due for such development, except that no such credit shall 
be awarded for: 
1. ?Projects or land dedications not listed on the impact fee capital improvements program (CIP); or 
2. ?Land dedications for, or acquisition or construction of, project-related improvements as defined 
in section 2.06.1630; or 
3. ?Any voluntary land or easement dedications not accepted by the city; or 
4. ?Any voluntary acquisition or construction of improvements not approved in writing by the city 
prior to commencement of the acquisition or construction. 
B. ?In order to obtain a credit against development impact fees otherwise due, an applicant must submit 
a written offer to dedicate to the city specific parcels of qualifying land or easements, or to acquire or 
construct specific improvements to the transportation system or the city fire protection, water, or 
wastewater systems in accordance with all applicable state or city design and construction 
standards, and must specifically request a credit against such development impact fees. Such 
written request must be made on a form provided by the city, must contain a statement under oath of 
the facts that qualify the applicant to receive a credit, must be accompanied by documents 
evidencing those facts, and must be approved not later than the initiation of construction of 
improvements or the acceptance by the city of land dedications, or the applicant's claim for the credit 
shall be waived. The granting of credit shall be approved by the city commission. The city shall 
approve a credit only after showing that the need for the dedication or construction is clearly 
documented pursuant to MCA 7-6-1602 and that any land dedication proposed for credit is 
determined to be appropriate for the proposed use. 
1. ?Upon receipt of a complete application for impact fee credit, the impact fee coordinator shall 
coordinate review of the application for compliance with the requirements of this division and 
other relevant requirements. Upon completion of the review the impact fee coordinator shall 
either: forward the application to the city manager, or when required to the city commission, for 
approval; or if the application is insufficient or otherwise does not conform to the city's 
requirements, shall communicate in writing to the applicant the reason the credit request failed. 
If the application satisfies the requirements and is approved, the credit may be provided in any 
of the allowed forms as described in subsection G of this section. 
a. ?Factors for consideration: 
(1) ?When credit is sought for an improvement listed in the second through fifth years of 
the CIP after the current fiscal year there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any 
credit shall be awarded as a credit balance and not as cash. 
(2) ?The final decision to approve a credit request in excess of $1,000,000.00 from a 
single impact fee fund shall be made by the city commission. 
(3) ?In the event that the city manager believes that a credit request may result in a 
significant effect on policy decisions the credit request may be referred to the city 
commission for final action, regardless of the dollar amount. 
(4) ?In the event that the city considers that award of a credit may negatively impact its 
ability to construct improvements listed sooner in time on the CIP, they may decline to 
award a credit at that time without removing the item from the CIP. 
2. ?Appeals of staff decisions on credit requests may be appealed to the city commission per 
section 2.06.1700. 
C. ?The credit due to an applicant shall be calculated and documented as follows: 
1. ?Credit for qualifying land or easement dedications shall, at the applicant's option, be valued at: 
a. ?100 percent of the most recent assessed value for such land as shown in the records of the 
city assessor; or 
b. ?That fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable to the city in an 
appraisal paid for by the applicant. 
2. ?In order to receive credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of transportation, fire 
protection, water, or wastewater improvements, the applicant shall submit complete engineering 
drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates to the city. The city shall determine the 
amount of credit due based on the information submitted, or, if it determines that such 
information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs 
acceptable to the city. 
D. ?Approved credits shall become effective at the following times: 
1. ?Approved credit for land or easement dedications shall become effective when the land has 
been conveyed to the city in a form acceptable to the city, and at no cost to the city, and has 
been accepted by the city commission. When such conditions have been met, the city shall note 
that fact in the credit record maintained by the city department of administrative services. Upon 
request of the credit holder, the city shall send the credit holder a letter stating the credit 
balance available to the credit holder. 
2. ?Approved credits for the acquisition or construction of transportation, fire protection, water, or 
wastewater improvements shall generally become effective when: 
a. ?All required construction has been completed and has been accepted by the city; and 
b. ?A suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the city; 
and 
c. ?All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance procedures have 
been completed in compliance with all applicable city and state procedures. 
However, approved credits for the construction of improvements may become effective at an earlier date 
if the applicant posts security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow 
agreement, and the amount and terms of such security are accepted by the city. At a minimum, such 
security must be in the amount of the approved credit or an amount determined to be adequate to allow 
the city to construct the improvements for which the credit was given, whichever is higher. When such 
conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in the credit record maintained by the city 
department of administrative services. Upon request of the credit holder, the city shall also send the credit 
holder a letter stating the credit balance available to the credit holder. 
E. ?Approved credits may be used to reduce the amount of development impact fees due from any 
proposed development for the same type of service or facility for which the applicant dedicated land 
or acquired or constructed improvements until the amount of the credit is exhausted. Each time a 
request to use credit from a mandatory or voluntary dedication, acquisition, or construction is 
presented to the city, the city shall reduce the amount of the development impact fee of the same 
type otherwise due from the applicant and shall note in the city records the amount of credit 
remaining, if any. In the case of a mandatory dedication, acquisition, or construction, any credit in 
excess of the amount of the development impact fee otherwise due under this division shall be 
deemed excess credit that is remaining and available for use by the applicant. In the case of a 
voluntary dedication, acquisition, or construction, any credit in excess of the amount of the 
development impact fee of the same type and applicable to the project shall be deemed excess 
credit that is remaining and available for use by the applicant. Upon request of the credit holder, the 
city shall also send the credit holder a letter stating the amount of credit remaining to the credit 
holder. 
F. ?Approved credit shall only be used to reduce the amount of development impact fees of the same 
type otherwise due under this division and shall not be paid to the applicant in cash or in credit 
against any development impact fees for a different type of facility or service or against any other 
moneys due from the applicant to the city, except as described in subsection G of this section. 
G. ?If the amount of approved credit for a mandatory dedication, acquisition, or construction exceeds the 
amount of the development impact fees of the same type otherwise due under this division, the 
applicant may request in writing that the city provide for reimbursement of any excess credit to the 
applicant in cash. Such written request must be approved not later than the initiation of construction 
of improvements, or the acceptance by the city of land dedications, or the applicant's claim shall be 
waived. Upon receipt of such a written request, the city may, at its discretion: 
1. ?Arrange for the reimbursement of such excess credit from the impact fee fund for the same type 
of service or facility from development impact fees paid by others; 
2. ?Arrange for the reimbursement of such excess credit through the issuance of a promissory note 
payable in not more than ten years and bearing interest equal to the interest rate paid by the 
city for its long-term debt; or 
3. ?Reject the request for cash and provide credit. Such excess credit shall be valued at 100 
percent of actual developer costs for the excess improvements, or at the actual appraised value 
of such excess improvements, at the city's option. 
H. ?Credit may be transferred from one holder to another by any written instrument clearly identifying the 
credit issued under subsection C of this section that is to be transferred, provided that such 
instrument is signed by both the transferor and transferee, and that the document is delivered to the 
city for registration of the change in ownership. 
I. ?In the event that land is annexed into the city from the county after the effective date of the ordinance 
from which this division is derived, and that road or fire impact fees have been previously paid to the 
county, an applicant proposing a development on the land may request in writing a credit against the 
transportation impact fee equal to the amount of any road impact fee paid to the county for the same 
land and may also request a credit against the fire protection impact fee equal to the amount of any 
fire protection impact fee paid to the county for the same land. Such written request must be filed not 
later than the time when an applicant applies for the first permit of a type listed in section 
2.06.1640.A.1 or 2.06.1650.A.1 that creates an obligation to pay the type of development impact fee 
against which the credit is requested, or the applicant's claim shall be waived. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.100; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 8, 1996; Ord. No. 1471, § 8, 
1998; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.100), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 1(3.24.100), 1-14-2008; Ord. 
No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012) 


Sec. 2.06.1700. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A. ?Interest earned on moneys in any impact fee fund shall be considered part of such fund and shall be 
subject to the same restrictions on use applicable to the impact fees deposited in such fund. 
B. ?No moneys from any impact fee fund shall be spent for periodic or routine maintenance of any 
facility of any type or to cure deficiencies in public facilities existing on the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this division is derived. 
C. ?Nothing in this division shall restrict the city from requiring an applicant to construct reasonable 
project improvements required to serve the applicant's project, whether or not such improvements 
are of a type for which credit is available under section 2.06.1690. 
D. ?The city shall maintain accurate records of the development impact fees paid, including the name of 
the person paying such fees, the project for which the fees were paid, the date of payment of each 
fee, the amounts received in payment for each fee, and any other matters that the city deems 
appropriate or necessary to the accurate accounting of such fees, and such records shall be 
available for review by the public during city business hours. 
E. ?At least once during each fiscal year of the city, the city manager shall present to the city 
commission a proposed impact fee capital improvements program for the transportation system, fire 
protection system, water system, and wastewater system, which identifies the capacity-adding 
capital improvements that will benefit new development subject to the terms of this division, 
exclusive of any improvements needed to correct existing deficiencies or for operation or 
maintenance purposes. Such capital improvements program shall assign moneys from each impact 
fee fund to specific projects and related expenses for improvements to the type of facilities or 
services for which the fees in that fund were paid. Any moneys, including any accrued interest, not 
assigned to specific projects within such capital improvements program and not expended pursuant 
to section 2.06.1680 or 2.06.1690.G shall be retained in the same impact fee fund until the next fiscal 
year. The impact fee capital improvements program shall be adopted by the city commission as a 
supplemental document to the city budget. The impact fee capital improvements program shall 
schedule the construction of capital improvements to serve projected growth and project capital 
improvement costs, expenditures and impact fee fund revenues for a five-year period. The individual 
fee funds shall maintain a positive fiscal balance. The program may be amended by a majority vote 
of the city commission. The city manager shall adopt and revise, as needed, an administrative 
impact fee manual to carry out the purposes of this division. 
F. ?The city shall be entitled to retain not more than five percent of the development impact fees 
collected as payment for the expenses of collecting the fee and administering this division. 
G. ?If a development impact fee has been calculated and paid based on a mistake or misrepresentation, 
it shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by an applicant shall be refunded by the city to the 
applicant within 30 days after the city's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the 
rate of five percent per annum since the date of such overpayment. Any amounts underpaid by the 
applicant shall be paid to the city within 30 days after the city's acceptance of the recalculated 
amount, with interest at the rate of five percent per annum since the date of such underpayment. In 
the event the underpayment is caused by an error attributed solely to the city, the applicant shall pay 
the recalculated amount without interest. In the case of an underpayment to the city, the city shall not 
issue any additional permits or approvals for the project for which the development impact fee was 
previously paid until such underpayment is corrected; and if amounts owed to the city are not paid 
within such 30-day period, the city may also repeal any permits issued in reliance on the previous 
payment of such development impact fee and refund such fee to the then current owner of the land. 
H. ?In order to promote affordable workforce housing of the city, the city commission may waive impact 
fees for workforce housing lots approved by the city commission pursuant to chapter 38, article 43, 
by paying some or all of the impact fee from other funds of the city that are not restricted to other 
uses. In order to promote the economic development of the city and the provision of affordable 
housing in the city, the city commission may agree to pay some or all of the development impact fees 
imposed on a proposed development by this division from other funds of the city that are not 
restricted to other uses. Any such decision to pay development impact fees on behalf of an applicant 
shall be at the discretion of the city commission and shall be made pursuant to goals and objectives 
previously adopted by the city commission to promote economic development and/or affordable 
housing. 
I. ?The city commission may, by resolution, create a program to enable deferral of payment of impact 
fees to a time after issuance of a building permit or a connection permit to the water and sewer 
systems. Any such resolution shall: 
1. ?Specify the circumstances and conditions under which a deferral may be allowed or disallowed. 
2. ?Specify the points in time when the deferral may be requested, granted, and when payment of 
fees is required. 
3. ?Specify costs to be incurred with deferral and fee payment and who is responsible for paying 
those costs. 
4. ?Specify the process to receive and process a request for a deferral, including any administrative 
fees or required security for payment. 
5. ?Specify the process for recognizing the payment of deferred fees and the release of any 
limitations on the property. 
6. ?Require an impact fee deferral agreement and related documents as approved by the city 
attorney to be recorded at the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder's Office securing the amount 
due, including a covenant running with the land agreeing that a certificate of occupancy or other 
permit required by this division when a certificate of occupancy is not required will not be 
provided until payment of the deferred fees is verified. 
J. ?1. ?Any determination made by any official of the city charged with the administration of any part of 
this division may be appealed to the development impact fees review committee by filing: 
a. ?A written notice of appeal on a form provided by the city; 
b. ?A written explanation of why the appellant feels that a determination was in error; and 
c. ?An appeal fee of $500.00 with the impact fee coordinator within ten working days after the 
determination for which the appeal is being filed. 
2. ?The development impact fees review committee shall meet to review the appeal within 30 
working days of the date the written appeal was presented to the impact fee coordinator. If the 
appellant is dissatisfied with the decision of the development impact fees review committee, the 
appellant may appeal the decision to the city commission by filing a written request with the city 
clerk within ten working days of the committee's decision. At the regular meeting following the 
filing of the appeal, the city commission shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal; and 
the city clerk shall mail notice of the hearing to the appellant at the address given in the notice 
of appeal. The hearing shall be conducted at the time and place stated in such notice given by 
the city commission. The determination of the city commission shall be final. If the city 
commission concludes that all or part of a determination made by an official of the city charged 
with the administration of any part of this division was in error, then the appeal fee described in 
this subsection shall be returned to the appellant. 
K. ?Updating of impact fee information. 
1. ?The facility plans described in this division shall be reviewed by the city at least once every five 
years and if a revision of a facility plan to address changed conditions is deemed necessary by 
the city, the plan shall be updated. 
2. ?The development impact fees described in this division, fee studies, data and analysis relied 
upon and required by MCA 7-6-1602, and the administrative procedures and manual of this 
division shall be updated at least once every four fiscal years. 
3. ?The impact fee capital improvement program shall be reviewed and updated as provided in 
section 2.06.1700.E. 
4. ?The purpose of the review and updating of impact fee related documentation is to ensure that: 
a. ?The demand and cost assumptions underlying such fees are still valid; 
b. ?The resulting fees do not exceed the actual cost of constructing improvements that are of 
the type for which the fee was paid and that are required to serve new development; 
c. ?The moneys collected or to be collected in each impact fee fund have been, and are 
expected to be, spent for improvements of the type for which such fees were paid; and 
d. ?That such improvements will benefit those developments for which the fees were paid. 
L. ?The development impact fees shown in the most recently adopted impact fee studies shall be 
adjusted annually to reflect the effects of inflation on those costs for improvements set forth in the 
impact fee studies. On January 1 of each year unless and until the impact fee studies are revised or 
replaced, and then beginning in the subsequent calendar year, each fee amount set forth in each 
such study shall be adjusted by multiplying such amount by one plus the value of the Construction 
Cost Index published in the first December edition of the current year. (Source: Engineering News 
Record.) Such adjustments in such fees shall become effective immediately upon calculation by the 
city and shall not require additional action by the city commission to be effective. 
M. ?Violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor and shall be subject to those remedies provided in 
section 1.01.210. Knowingly furnishing false information to any official of the city charged with the 
administration of this division on any matter relating to the administration of this division, including 
without limitation the furnishing of false information regarding the expected size, use, or traffic 
impacts from a proposed development, shall be a violation of this division. In addition to, or in lieu of, 
any criminal prosecution, the city or any applicant for a permit of the types described in section 
2.06.1640.A.1, 2.06.1650.A.1, 2.06.1660.A.1, or 2.06.1670.A.1 shall have the right to sue in civil 
court to enforce the provisions of this division. 
N. ?The section titles used in this division are for convenience only and shall not affect the interpretation 
of any portion of the text of this division. 
O. ?Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, or annul the reasonableness, legality, 
or validity of any development impact fee must be filed and service of process effected within 90 
days following the date of imposition of the fee or the final determination of the city commission, 
whichever is the later. 
(Code 1982, § 3.24.110; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1418, § 9, 1996; Ord. No. 1471, § 9, 
1998; Ord. No. 1707, § 1(3.24.110), 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1711, § 5, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1730, § 
1(3.24.110), 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 1746, § 3, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 1843, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 
1853, § 6, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1930 , § 1, 1-3-2016) 


Secs. 2.06.1710—2.06.1840. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 10. - LIVING WAGE 


Sec. 2.06.1850. - Title and purpose. 
    This division shall be known as the "City of Bozeman Quality Jobs and Living Wage Ordinance." The 
purpose of this division is to prescribe a living wage for City employees and to prescribe that businesses 
receiving certain financial assistance from the city pay employees a minimum level of compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.010), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1860. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"City" means the City of Bozeman and all its agencies, departments and offices. 
2. ?"Covered regular employee" shall mean any employee regularly employed for 20 or more hours 
per week by the city or by a recipient of financial assistance from the city. Covered regular 
employee does not include part-time, seasonal, temporary, short-term, or probationary 
employees, or an employee who is also an owner under a Chapter S or C corporation. 
3. ?"Financial assistance" means financial support from the city for any of the following city 
programs: 
a. ?Community Development Block Grant Economic Development Revolving Loan Fund 
(CDBG Revolving Loan); and 
b. ?Tax Incentive Program for New Industry or Expanding Industry Under MCA 15-24-1401 et 
seq. (Tax abatement). 
4. ?"Health benefits" means an offer by the recipient or city to its employees to pay at least $1.00 
per hour towards the provision of health care benefits for employees or for employees and their 
dependents. The health benefits described herein shall be increased by an amount equal to the 
increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for the Western Region for expenditure category 
medical care for the 12-month period ending in the previous November. 
5. ?"Living wage" means a wage calculated on an hourly basis equal to $8.50 with health benefits 
or $9.50 without health benefits paid to a covered regular employee; a wage calculated on an 
hourly basis equal to $8.07 with health or without health benefits paid to a probationary 
employee; a wage calculated on an hourly basis equal to $8.0618 with health benefits or without 
health benefits paid to a seasonal employee; a wage calculated on an hourly basis equal to 
$7.4933 with health benefits or without health benefits paid to a temporary employee; and a 
wage calculated on an hourly basis equal to $7.4933 with health benefits or without health 
benefits paid to a short-term employee. Beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the living wage 
described herein shall be increased at the beginning of the fiscal year of the city or recipient, or 
annually, each year thereafter by an amount equal to the change in the most recent Consumer 
Price Index, Class "B" and "C" for the Western Region. 
6. ?"Part-time employee" means an employee regularly employed for less than 20 hours per week 
by the city or by a recipient of financial assistance from the city. Part-time employee does not 
include seasonal, temporary, short-term, or probationary employees. 
7. ?"Probationary employee" means a current regular employee designated as probationary and 
one who has not been employed for a period of more than six months from the most recent date 
of hire. Neither this definition nor payment of probationary employees a living wage is intended 
to establish a shorter probationary period than established by the city or recipient receiving 
financial assistance from the city nor intended to preclude the extension of a probationary 
period by the city or recipient receiving financial assistance from the city. 
8. ?"Recipient" means any person, entity, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, 
association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, governmental entity, or organization. 
9. ?"Seasonal employee" means a regular employee who is designated as seasonal, who performs 
duties interrupted by the seasons, and who may be recalled without the loss of rights or benefits 
accrued during the preceding season. 
10. ?"Short-term worker" means a person who: 
a. ?Is hired by an agency for an hourly wage established by the agency; 
b. ?May not work for the agency more than 90 days in a continuous 12-month period; 
c. ?Is not eligible for regular status; 
d. ?May not be hired into another position by the agency without a competitive selection 
process; and 
e. ?Is not eligible to earn the leave and holiday benefits or group insurance benefits. 
11. ?"Temporary employee" means an employee who: 
a. ?Is designated as a temporary employee for a definite period of time not to exceed 12 
months; 
b. ?Performs temporary duties or regular duties on a temporary basis; 
c. ?Is not eligible for regular status; 
d. ?Is terminated at the end of the employment period; and 
e. ?Is not eligible to become a regular employee without a competitive selection process. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.020), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1870. - Living wage for city employees. 
    On and after July 1, 2002, the city shall pay to employees a living wage, except as provided by 
section 2.06.1900 and except for any employee that is a member of a bargaining unit that has not 
negotiated a new collective bargaining agreement since the effective date of the ordinance from which 
this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.030), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1880. - Living wage for employees of recipients of financial assistance. 
    On and after July 1, 2002, any recipient receiving financial assistance the tax abatement program 
shall pay its employees a living wage. On or after July 1, 2002, any recipient receiving financial 
assistance under the CDBG Revolving Loan program with less than 15 employees shall pay its 
employees a living wage within three years of receiving financial assistance. On or after July 1, 2002, any 
recipient receiving financial assistance under the CDBG Revolving Loan program with 15 or more 
employees shall pay its covered employees a living wage. This section applies only to recipients that 
make application and receive financial assistance after the effective date of the ordinance from which this 
division is derived. It does not apply to recipients receiving financial assistance on or before the effective 
date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.040), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1890. - Proof of wages and benefits and other requirements. 
A. ?Each recipient of financial assistance shall keep full and accurate payroll and benefits records for 
each covered employee. The city may demand and examine, and it shall be the duty of every 
recipient, and agent thereof, to keep and furnish to the city copies of payroll and benefits records 
which relate to wages paid to employees by recipients receiving financial assistance from the city. 
Annually or upon request by the city, the recipient receiving financial assistance shall provide proof 
of wages and benefits for employees for the period for which assistance is being provided or five 
years, whichever is longer. 
B. ?Recipients of financial assistance shall execute an agreement with the city providing for the payment 
of living wages as provided in section 2.06.1880 to employees. The agreement shall contain a notice 
in substantially the following form: 
    "The recipient agrees to pay all workers employed by the recipient in the performance of this 
loan [or grant], a living wage as provided by chapter 2, article 6, division 10 of the Bozeman 
Municipal Code. The recipient agrees to make available for city inspection the recipient's payroll 
records relating to employees providing services under this loan [or grant]. If any payroll records of 
recipient contain any false, misleading or fraudulent information, or if the recipient fails to comply with 
any of the provisions of Bozeman Municipal Code chapter 2, article 6, division 10, the city may 
withhold payments on the agreement, terminate, cancel or suspend the agreement in whole, or in 
part." 
C. ?Failure to pay employees in accordance with this division will constitute a breach of the agreement 
described in subsection B of this section and entitles the city to immediate and full repayment of any 
financial assistance provided to the recipient of financial assistance or other remedies acceptable to 
the city. 
D. ?Every recipient of financial assistance shall post a notice of the current living wage posted at the site 
of the work in a permanent place where it can be easily seen and read by the persons employed. 
The notice shall also provide information of the means the reader may use to file a complaint of 
violation. In addition, copies of the current living wage requirement shall be supplied to any person 
employed at the request of such person and within a reasonable period of time after the request. 
E. ?An employee may file a complaint alleging a recipient's violation of this section. All complaints shall 
be filed with the director of administrative services for the city. The director of administrative services 
shall investigate the complaint and present the director's findings to the city commission. 
F. ?At the time of application, recipients receiving financial assistance from the city will be advised that 
they can apply for a variance in accordance with section 2.06.1930. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.050), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1900. - Collective bargaining exemption. 
    Except for recipients covered under section 2.06.1880, all the provisions of this division, or any part 
hereof, may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, but only if the waiver is expressly 
set forth in such an agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.060), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1910. Cuts and non-wage benefits prohibited. 
    No recipient of financial assistance will fund wage increases required by this division, or otherwise 
respond to the provisions of this division, by reducing the health benefits, insurance, pension, vacation or 
other non-wage benefits of any its employees. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.070), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1920. - Non-impairment of existing contracts. 
    Nothing contained herein shall operate to impair any existing contracts, except that the renewal, 
amendment or modification of such contracts occurring on or after the effective date of the ordinance from 
which this division is derived shall be subject to this division. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.080), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1930. - Variance. 
A. ?The city commission, in its sole discretion, may grant a variance from this division if: 
1. ?A recipient of financial assistance submits a plan to comply with this division for 90 percent of 
employees upon receiving city financial assistance, for 95 percent of employees within one 
year, and for all employees within two years of receiving financial assistance; or 
2. ?The city commission determines that it would be in the public interest after a hearing that the 
recipient of financial assistance should be granted a variance or a conditional variance from this 
division. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.090), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1940. - Retaliation and discrimination barred. 
    A recipient of financial assistance from the city shall not discharge, reduce the compensation, or 
otherwise discriminate against any employee, any employee making a complaint or otherwise asserting 
the employee's rights under this division, or any employee participating in any investigation or 
proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.100), 12-19-2001) 


Sec. 2.06.1950. - Biennial review. 
    During the month of July 2004 and then every two years thereafter, the commission shall review this 
division to determine whether any modifications to this division are necessary or whether this division 
should be repealed. Failure to review this division does not affect this division nor the requirement to pay 
a living wage. 
(Ord. No. 1554, § 1(2.96.110), 12-19-2001) 


ARTICLE 7. - EMINENT DOMAIN 


Sec. 2.07.010. - Extent of power. 
A. ?The city shall have the power, known as eminent domain, to condemn and take property for all 
public purposes and city uses and purposes. The extent of the power and authority shall not be 
limited to the uses described in MCA title 70, chapters 30 and 31 (MCA 70-30-101 et seq., and MCA 
70-31-101 et seq.) and Urban Renewal Law, MCA title 7, chapter 15, parts 42 and 43 (MCA 7-15-
4201 et seq. and MCA 7-15-4301 et seq.); but shall be limited as follows: 
1. ?Prohibiting eminent domain for economic development. Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, neither the city nor any of its subdivisions shall use eminent domain to take private property 
for economic development without the consent of the owner. 
2. ?Economic development. The term "economic development" means the use of powers of 
eminent domain to acquire private property for private use in the implementation of an urban 
renewal project or similar redevelopment plan. 
3. ?Prohibiting transfer of condemned property to private parties. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, private property acquired through eminent domain without the consent of the 
owner shall not be dedicated, sold, leased in substantial part, or otherwise transferred to a 
private person, partnership, corporation, or any other entity for a period of ten years following 
the acquisition of the property by the city, except that property may be transferred or leased: 
a. ?To private entities that are public utilities or common carriers such as a railroad or toll road; 
and 
b. ?To private entities that occupy an incidental area in a public project, such as a retail 
establishment on the ground floor of a public building. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1(11.01.010), 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 11-11-2005) 


Sec. 2.07.020. - Initiation of condemnation. 
    The city shall initiate all eminent domain actions by the city commission passing a resolution 
declaring the public purpose for which the condemnation is being made, which resolution shall describe 
the property to be taken, and the extent of the interest condemned. The resolution shall authorize the city 
officials to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1(11.01.020), 12-3-2001) 


Sec. 2.07.030. - Effect of resolution. 
    The passage of the resolution initiating condemnation and taking of private property for any public 
use declared in the resolution is conclusive as to the necessity of the taking. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1(11.01.030), 12-3-2001) 


Sec. 2.07.040. - Eminent domain procedure. 
    The eminent domain procedures shall follow the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1(11.01.040), 12-3-2001) 
State Law reference— Eminent domain, MCA 70-30-101 et seq. 


Sec. 2.07.050. - State law superseded. 
    MCA 7-5-4106 is hereby superseded and the Urban Renewal Law as set forth in MCA title 7, chapter 
15, parts 42 and 43 (MCA 7-15-4201 et seq., MCA 7-15-4301 et seq.), where inconsistent herewith is 
hereby superseded. It is the intent of this article that the city may take full advantage of the urban renewal 
law by following the procedures set forth herein and shall not be restricted in the exercise of powers of 
eminent domain for the purposes described in the urban renewal law by the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1(11.01.050), 12-3-2001) 


Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, MCA 16-1-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - LICENSING AND PERMITTING SALE 


Sec. 4.02.010. - Applicability. 
A. ?For the purposes of this article, the definitions, words, phrases and expressions as set forth in this 
article are to be construed the same as those set forth in the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Wherever the words "Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code" are used in this article, they shall be held 
and construed to refer to that code. 
B. ?All of the prohibitory and regulatory provisions contained in the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code 
are adopted as provisions of this article and all licenses issued under the provisions of this article 
shall be subject to all applicable prohibitory and regulatory provisions of the code in addition to the 
provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.010; Ord. No. 1492, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.020. - License; exceptions. 
A. ?The sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted only in districts authorized in chapter 38 of this code to 
allow such sales. 
B. ?The limitations set forth in MCA 16-3-306(1) do not apply to: 
1. ?Restaurants, as defined in chapter 38, serving alcohol pursuant to a state issued restaurant 
beer and wine retail alcohol license as defined in the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code; 
2. ?Temporary events such as fairs, weddings, or sporting events serving alcohol using a catering 
endorsement regardless of the type of state issued on premises retail license as defined in the 
Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
3. ?Restaurants, as defined in chapter 38, located within the B-2M and B-3 zoning districts serving 
alcohol pursuant to a state issued beer with wine amendment retail alcohol license as defined in 
the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code. Restaurants serving alcohol pursuant to this subsection 
must comply with 38.360.060. 
C. ?Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow a business license for the sale of alcohol to be 
unilaterally approved and all must apply for and receive such land use approvals as set forth in 
chapter 38. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.020; Ord. No. 1492, § 2, 1999; Ord. No. 1999 , § 1, 4-16-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1999 , adopted May 16, 2018 states "Section 16-3-
306(4), MCA recognizes the City's authority to supplant the provisions of 16-3-306(1), MCA. 
The City Commission hereby supplants such restrictions as provided for in Sections 1 and 2 of 
this Ordinance." 


Sec. 4.02.030. - City license required; application; license fees. 
A. ?No person shall manufacture or sell alcohol in the city, under the provisions of the Montana Alcoholic 
Beverage Code, or at all, without first procuring a license to do so from the city. Application for a city 
license shall be made to the city commission on a form to be provided by the director of 
administrative services. Separate licenses shall be required for the sale of beer and for the sale of 
wine. The application will be signed by the applicant, notarized, include the license fee and contain, 
at a minimum, the following information: 
1. ?Applicant's name, age, and address; 
2. ?The business' name and address or, in the case of a transfer or relocation, the address of the 
proposed new location; 
3. ?The type of alcohol beverage license either applied for or granted by the state, when it was 
applied for, the date it was granted and expiration date; 
4. ?A short statement of the applicant's purpose for obtaining the license; 
5. ?A short explanation for the applicant's benefit explaining the city's authority to revoke or 
suspend the business license in response to a similar action by the state. 
B. ?The application shall be filed with the city clerk and presented for the consideration of the 
commission. The commission may, in its discretion, postpone any action for investigation or other 
good cause. The action of the commission with reference to the application shall be recorded in the 
meeting's minutes. 
C. ?If the application is rejected, the reasons must be noted in the minute entry, the applicant notified, 
and the tendered fee returned. 
D. ?License fees must be payable in advance and shall accompany the application therefor, whether 
original or renewal. All licenses under this article will expire at 12:00 midnight of December 31, in the 
year for which such license is issued. In the event that a license is granted after June 30 of any year, 
the license fee will be one-half of the entire yearly license. 
E. ?If the entire yearly license fee has been paid in advance and the business under the license is 
discontinued before July 1 in the year in which such license is granted, the director of administrative 
services will refund one-half of the yearly license fee upon surrender of the license, make an 
appropriate book entry, and report to the commission. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.030) 


Sec. 4.02.040. - Form of city license. 
A. ?Licenses issued under the provisions of this article must be prominently posted in the business and 
will contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1. ?The licensee's name and the business' name and address; 
2. ?The purpose for the license; 
3. ?The expiration date of the license; and 
4. ?The minute book and page number containing the commission's approval. 
B. ?The director of administrative services will keep an accurate record of all licenses issued under this 
article, showing the date issued, the minute book and page where authority for its issuance is found, 
the date of issuance, to whom issued, the amount collected, the date of expiration, a description of 
the premises, change of location, or transfer, if any, and minute entry showing authority therefor, and 
any other pertinent fact with reference to such license, so that the same may be conveniently 
available. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.040; Ord. No. 1492, § 4, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.050. - Special permits—When granted. 
A. ?The city commission, in its discretion and upon application, may grant a special permit to sell beer or 
wine for consumption on the premises to the following: 
1. ?Any association or corporation conducting a picnic, convention, fair, civic or community 
enterprise or sporting event within the city limits; 
2. ?A nonprofit arts organization, organized and operated for the principal purpose of providing 
artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances for viewing or attendance by the 
general public, to be served at an exhibition, production, performance or program for on-
premises consumption; and 
3. ?Any other organization or for any other reason the city commission, in its discretion, determines 
should be allowed to serve or sell alcohol during a function. 
B. ?The application for a special permit shall be granted only upon the organization acquiring a special 
permit from the state as provided in the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code. The applicant must 
specify the location and nature of the event and the period it is scheduled to be held. All applications 
will be signed by one or more of the association's officers, will be notarized and will be accompanied 
by the amount of the permit fee. The permit issued under this section will not authorize the sale of 
beer or wine for a longer period than one day before the event is scheduled to begin and one day 
after the event has been concluded. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.060; Ord. No. 1492, § 5, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.060. - Same—Limitations; fees. 
    The city commission will, on an annual basis, set the fee for alcohol licenses as well as special 
permits by resolution. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.060; Ord. No. 1492, § 6, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.070. - City license not transferable; exceptions. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable except as provided in the 
Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, and then only after such transfer is approved by the city commission 
after written application for permission to transfer. Such application shall be in writing, and the same form 
as in the original business license application in accordance with section 4.02.030. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.070; Ord. No. 1492, § 7, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.080. - City license suspension or revocation conditions. 
    The revocation or suspension of any license or permit granted under the provisions of the Montana 
Alcoholic Beverage Code will also operate as a suspension or revocation, as the case may be, of any 
license granted under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.080; Ord. No. 1492, § 8, 1999) 


Sec. 4.02.090. - City license fees. 
A. ?The license fees under this article shall be established by resolution. 
B. ?License fees under this article are payable with the application and subject to the half-yearly rate as 
hereinbefore provided. Fees and fines collected under this article shall be allocated to the "protection 
of life and property fund" of the city; it being hereby recited that licenses imposed under the 
provisions of this article are exclusively for the purpose of defraying the cost of necessary police 
regulation, inspection, and control under the police power of the city, and not for revenue, and that 
any business licensed under this article requires, and is subject to, the general police regulations of 
the city for the safety, health, peace, quietness, and good order of the city and the inhabitants 
thereof. 
C. ?All fees provided for in this article are in addition to any and all other license fees required to be paid 
under any other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.090; Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 10-15-2007) 


Sec. 4.02.100. - Inspection and control of premises. 
    Any business licensed under this article shall at all times be subject to the police inspection and 
control of the city. The licensee, and/or employees of such licensee, hereunder, shall at all times permit 
any member of the city commission, city manager, city attorney, director of administrative services, health 
officer, and member of the police force of the city, and they and/or any of them shall have the right to 
enter the premises where such licensed business is conducted for inspection of such premises and every 
part thereof, and for exercise of police supervision, inspection and control thereof, including arrests, so 
long as any business licensed under this article shall be conducted therein or in any part thereof. Denial, 
restriction or obstruction of such right or permission shall be deemed a violation of this article, make any 
license granted hereunder subject to revocation or suspension forthwith, and subject the offender to the 
fines and penalties herein provided. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.100) 


Sec. 4.02.110. - Violation; penalty. 
    Every person, including those employed in or in connection with any business licensed under this 
article, who is convicted in the police court of the city of any violation of this article shall be subject to a 
fine of not more than $300.00, or imprisonment in the city or county jail for not less than ten days nor 
more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment; and in addition to such fine and imprisonment, 
or either, if the convicted person is a licensee under this article, or an employee of such licensee engaged 
in or about, or in connection with, the conduct or operation of the business so licensed, such license may 
be revoked or suspended, as provided in section 4.02.080. 
(Code 1982, § 5.12.120) 


ARTICLE 3. - LIQUOR—RETAIL SALE 


Sec. 4.03.010. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this article, the words and phrases set out in the Montana Alcoholic Beverage 
Code, shall be given the interpretation and meaning given to such words and phrases in such code, and 
all other words and phrases used in this article shall be given their usual and ordinary meaning according 
to the common understanding and usage of the English language. 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.010) 


Sec. 4.03.020. - City licenses—Requirements generally; statutory provisions. 
A. ?All licensees of the state department of revenue licensed to sell liquor at retail in the city shall pay 
therefore to the city an annual license fee, to be established by resolution. 
B. ?The city will make such proportionate refund of any license paid under this article as is made by the 
state, if any, for a part of the year when such licenses may be ineffective to permit operations under 
it. 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.020; Ord. No. 1722, § 2, 10-15-2007) 


Sec. 4.03.030. - Same—Application; form, contents and filing. 
A. ?Applications for license under the provisions of this article shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by 
the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths, and be substantially in the following 
form: 
    City of Bozeman, Montana 
    Application for License to Sell Liquor at Retail Under Chapter 4, Article 3 of the Bozeman Code 
    Date________ 
    I, ________, hereby make application to the city commission of the City of Bozeman for a 
license to sell liquor at retail in the City of Bozeman at the premises known and described as 
________ _______, in said City, and I hereby state: 
    That I am the holder of a license from Montana Department of Revenue to sell liquor at retail in 
the City of Bozeman at the above described premises. 
    That said license is dated ________, 20_______, and is Numbered _______. 
    That said license is in full force and effect and has not been suspended nor revoked. 
    I agree that if the license hereby applied for is granted it: 
1. ?Shall expire with the expiration of the license from Montana Department of Revenue in this 
application above described. 
2. ?Shall be subject to all of the provisions of the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, all rules and 
regulations adopted and promulgated by Montana Department of Revenue pursuant to the 
provisions of such code, all of the provisions of chapter 4, article 3 of the City of Bozeman Code 
under which this application is made, and all other applicable ordinances of the City of Bozeman 
where not in conflict with the provisions of said Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code and said 
rules and regulations. 
3. ?Shall stand suspended or revoked upon suspension or revocation of the license from the 
Montana Department of Revenue, hereinabove referred to and described. 
4. ?Shall not be transferable. 
    The fee of $_______ for the license hereby applied for accompanies this application and is 
tendered herewith. 
    (Signed)________ 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of ________, 20_______. 
    ________ 
B. ?Such application shall be filed with the department of administrative services and be presented to 
the commission at the next available meeting. 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.030) 


Sec. 4.03.040. - Same—Form of issuance. 
    Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be substantially in the following form: 
    CITY OF BOZEMAN, MONTANA 
    Retail Liquor License 
    ________ is hereby licensed to sell liquor at retail at the premises known and described as _______, 
Bozeman, Montana, subject to all of the provisions of the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, the rules 
and regulations adopted and promulgated by Montana Department of Revenue pursuant to such code, of 
all of the provisions of chapter 4, article 3 of the city Code, and all other applicable city ordinances where 
not in conflict with the provisions of the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, and said rules and 
regulations. 
    This license runs concurrently, and expires, with the license issued by Montana Department of 
Revenue to the above named _______ _______, which is dated ________, 20_______, and is numbered 
________. 
    This license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises above described and alongside 
the license from Montana Department of Revenue as above dated and numbered. 
    ___________ 
    Director of Administrative Services, City of Bozeman 
    By___________ 
    Assistant 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.040) 


Sec. 4.03.050. - Deposit and use of license fees. 
    Fees and fines collected under this article shall be allocated to the "general fund" of the city, it being 
hereby recited that licenses imposed under the provisions of this article are exclusively for the purpose of 
defraying the cost of necessary police regulation, inspection and control under the police power of the 
city, and not for revenue, and that any business licensed under this article requires and is subject to the 
general police regulations of the city for the safety, health, peace, quietness and good order of the city 
and the inhabitants thereof. All fees provided for in this article are in addition to any and all other license 
fees required to be paid under any other city ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.060) 


Sec. 4.03.060. - Violation; penalty. 
    Every person, as defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Code, who violates any of the provisions of this 
article, shall, upon conviction thereof in the police court, be fined in a sum not exceeding $300.00 or by 
imprisonment in the city or county jail for not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; 
and the police magistrate, upon such conviction, shall certify the same forthwith to the city commission 
who may, in its discretion, forward such certificate to the Montana Department of Revenue with a request 
that the license issued to the offender by such board be suspended or revoked, pursuant to the provisions 
of Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code applicable to such case. 
(Code 1982, § 5.52.060) 


ARTICLE 4. - ALCOHOL POLICY 


Sec. 4.04.010. - General provisions and intent. 
A. ?The city commission declares that alcohol possession and consumption by minors, high risk drinking 
behaviors by minors, and the supply and sale of alcohol to minors have negative and detrimental 
impacts on the community and are, therefore, a nuisance, and constitute conduct calculated to 
disturb the public peace of the city and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of 
Bozeman. 
B. ?Significant problems exist when persons possess and consume alcoholic beverages in an 
irresponsible manner. Such persons create a public safety hazard by their consumption of alcoholic 
beverages and the subsequent driving of motor vehicles or violent encounters on public property. 
Therefore, because of the negative and detrimental impacts of such behaviors on the community, the 
irresponsible consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages which disturb the public peace of 
the city are declared a nuisance and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of 
Bozeman. 
C. ?It is the intent of the city commission to address those areas related to alcohol access, consumption 
and usage which are not otherwise addressed by the current law in the state. Violations such as 
Endangering Welfare of Children (MCA 45-5-622), Unlawful Transactions with Children (MCA 45-5-
623), Unlawful Attempt to Purchase or Possession of Intoxicating Substance (MCA 45-5-624), 
Driving under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs or Operation with Alcohol Concentration of .08 or 
More (MCA 61-8-401 and 61-8-406), and Operation of Vehicle by Person under Twenty-One with 
Alcohol Concentration of .02 or More (MCA 61-8-410) have all been specifically addressed by state 
law as noted and will be enforced within the city under those laws. Disorderly Conduct and Public 
Nuisance (MCA 45-8-101 and 45-8-111) violations shall be addressed by state code. Noise issues 
shall be addressed through chapter 16, article 6, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.010), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.020. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, or the hydrated oxide of ethyl. 
2. ?"Alcoholic beverage" means a compound produced and sold for human consumption as a drink 
that contains more than 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume. 
3. ?"Beer" means a malt beverage containing not more than seven percent of alcohol by weight. 
4. ?"Intoxicating substance" means a controlled substance, as defined in title 50, chapter 32, 
Montana Code Annotated (MCA 50-32-101 et seq.), or its successor provision, and an alcoholic 
beverage, including but not limited to a beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of 
alcohol by volume. Intoxicating substance does not include dealcoholized wine or a beverage or 
liquid produced by the process by which beer, ale, port, or wine is produced if it contains less 
than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
5. ?"Knowingly." A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by 
a statue defining an offense when the person is aware of the person's own conduct or that the 
circumstance exists; a person acts knowingly with respect to the result of conduct when the 
person is aware that it is highly probable that the result will be caused by the person's conduct. 
When knowledge of the existence of a particular facts is an element of an offense, knowledge is 
established if a person is aware of a high probability of its existence. 
6. ?"Liquor" means an alcoholic beverage except beer and table wine. 
7. ?"Negligently." A person acts negligently with respect to a result or to a circumstance described 
by a statue defining an offense when the person consciously disregards a risk that the result will 
occur or that the circumstance exists or when the person disregards a risk of which the person 
should be aware that the result will occur or that the circumstance exists. The risk must be of a 
nature and degree that to disregard it involves a gross deviation from the standard of conduct 
that a reasonable person would observe in the actor's situation. The term "gross deviation" 
means a deviation that is considerably greater than lack of ordinary care. 
8. ?"Possession" means the knowing control of anything for a sufficient time to be able to terminate 
control. 
9. ?"Public places" means all streets, avenues, alleys and parks in the city, all municipal and public 
buildings, and places to which the public or a substantial group has access, but does not 
include premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail by the state department of 
revenue, or the city. The term "public place" does not include a private residence and its 
contiguous real property (front or rear yard) or a private hotel or motel room so long as the 
possession and consumption is in compliance with the Montana Alcoholic Beverage Code, title 
45 of the Montana Code Annotated (MCA 45-1-101 et seq.) and this article; but does include 
the commonly shared areas such as common hallways of a building or apartment complex, and 
areas of city rights-of-way, including sidewalks and streets. 
10. ?"Public display or exhibition of open alcoholic beverages" means and includes the carrying and 
exhibiting of open cans or bottles of any alcoholic beverage or the carrying and exhibiting of 
glasses, cups, or other types of containers for alcoholic beverages, to, in, on or within any public 
place within the city, even though empty, but does not include carrying or transporting such 
alcoholic beverages from retail liquor or beer establishments in sacks, cases, boxes, cartons or 
similar containers with unbroken seals or when no display or exhibition is made and does not 
include carrying or exhibiting any empty or discarded bottle, can or other container solely for the 
purpose of disposal in a proper waste receptacle. 
11. ?"Public drinking" includes the consumption or possession for the purpose of consumption of 
open alcoholic beverages in or on any public place in the city. 
12. ?"Purposely." A person acts purposely with respect to a result or to conduct described by a 
statute defining an offense if it is the person's conscious object to engage in that conduct or to 
cause that result. When a particular purpose is an element of an offense, the element is 
established although the purpose is conditional, unless the condition negatives the harm or evil 
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.015), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.030. - Public drinking or display of open alcoholic beverages; open containers; prohibited. 
    Public drinking or display or exhibition of open alcoholic beverages (open container) as defined in 
section 4.04.020 is prohibited, and it is unlawful for any person to engage in public drinking, public display 
or exhibition of open alcoholic beverages (open container) within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.020), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.040. - Exemptions to section 4.04.030. 
    This provision shall not apply to a governmental agency for authorized activities conducted upon the 
agency's premises. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.030), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.050. - Exceptions to section 4.04.030. 
A. ?The director of parks and recreation may grant a waiver to the provisions of section 4.04.030 for the 
purpose of holding picnics, parties, reunions, barbecues or other public assemblies in public parks, 
provided the number of adults does not exceed 75. Larger groups shall seek a waiver from the city 
manager under subsection B of this section. 
1. ?Applications which are for events only in a public park, and do not involve more than 75 adults 
may be submitted without the public assembly permit application. All public park reservations 
are separate from the waiver process and a reservation for a park area does not guarantee the 
issuance of a waiver under this section. 
2. ?An application shall designate either the applicant, or one or more members of the group 
submitting the application, as the contact person for the event. The contact person shall be 
present at all times during the event, or shall arrange for an alternate contact person. The 
contact person shall be in charge of the event and be responsible for those attending the event. 
B. ?The city manager may grant a waiver to the provisions of section 4.04.030 for activities occurring in 
or on a public place other than a park or where the number of adults exceeds 75. 
1. ?All applications for a waiver under this subsection B shall be made in conjunction with an 
application for a public assembly permit in conformance with the procedures in sections 
34.08.040 through 34.08.080 or its successor provisions, which are incorporated herein by 
reference, subject to any specific changes as contained in this section. The form for such 
application shall be provided by the city and shall be signed by the applicant. 
2. ?An application must be filed in a timely manner prior to the event. Timely, in this instance, is a 
minimum of 14 days under this subsection B. The application may not be filed more than 180 
days before the event. The minimum period may be waived after due consideration of the 
factors specified under subsection G of this section. 
3. ?Applications submitted under this subsection B shall have proof of insurance in an amount 
acceptable to the city; and which includes the city as an additional insured. 
4. ?For applications under this subsection B, a safety plan for the event shall be submitted with the 
application, to be reviewed by the chief of police. The safety plan shall address admission of 
those who are under the legal age to drink, consequences when those under the legal age are 
caught drinking, the policy for service of those who are intoxicated or under the influence of 
alcohol, prohibiting those who are intoxicated or who appear to be impaired or under the 
influence from operating a motor vehicle by providing safe transportation alternatives, actions to 
be taken in the event of a disturbance or medical or other emergency, and other measures 
designed to maintain a safe environment for those in attendance. 
5. ?For applications submitted under this subsection B, there shall appear in the application 
arrangements for providing responsible beverage service for any group of 50 or more adults. 
Responsible beverage service requires that all beverage servers receive specific training 
through a recognized program approved by the city prior to the event. A beverage server under 
this section does not consume any alcoholic beverage during the event. 
6. ?The application shall designate either the applicant, or one or more members of the group 
submitting the application, as the contact person for the event. The contact person shall be 
present at all times during the event, and shall not consume any alcoholic beverages during the 
event, and shall be in charge of and responsible for all beverage servers and patrons. 
C. ?In seeking a waiver to section 4.04.030, the group leader or authorized representative shall file with 
the director of parks and recreation, or city manager, as applicable, an application for a city alcoholic 
beverage waiver. 
1. ?All application for a waiver shall be submitted after payment of the appropriate fee to the 
department of administrative services. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
This fee is a nonrefundable fee to cover administrative costs of processing the waiver. Payment 
of the fee does not entitle the applicant to a waiver. 
2. ?If the application is for the use of any city equipment or if any city services shall be required, the 
applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a waiver, the charges for those services in 
accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the city commission by resolution. 
3. ?If the event is to be held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a 
waiver for the calendar year or any portion thereof may be filed at least 60 days and not more 
than 180 days before the date and time of the first event proposed. The city manager or director 
of parks and recreation as appropriate, may waive the minimum period after due considerations 
of the factors under subsection G of this section. 
4. ?An application not acted upon within ten calendar days of submission, or by the day of the 
event, shall be deemed denied. 
D. ?Prior to the issuance of the waiver an investigation shall be made into the suitability and compatibility 
of the proposed function with other activities and the surrounding area. In making the investigation 
the director of parks and recreation or the city manager shall consider the criteria listed in 
subsections D.1 through 5 of this section in addition to those considerations under sections 
34.08.040 through 34.08.080. The director of parks and recreation or the city manager may issue a 
waiver subject to consideration of the relevant criteria and imposition of any conditions deemed 
necessary and reasonable, and may, in the director of parks and recreation or city manager's 
discretion, deny the waiver based upon the consideration of the relevant criteria, the application, and 
any other information as may be otherwise obtained. 
1. ?The type of activity, the hours involved, and the impact it may have on the safe and orderly 
movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and any significant negative impact on individuals 
living in the vicinity of the activity. 
2. ?The potential for the activity which is the subject of the application to conflict or interfere with 
any other scheduled or permitted use of the area, including the use of a public address system 
or amplification system. 
3. ?Any previous history with the requesting party or organization, including but not limited to past 
abuses of any privileges granted under this article or any similar provision, past successful 
requests, and any other information which may be deemed pertinent to an evaluation of the 
proposed event. 
4. ?The impact of the activity on the resources of the city, including but not limited to the need for 
additional policing, road service, clean-up crews, and other services. 
5. ?The need for and availability of any additional liability insurance over and above the standards 
required by the city. 
E. ?The director of parks and recreation or city manager shall make an investigation, which shall include 
input from appropriate city staff and may include any individuals who may be directly affected. 
1. ?The granting of a waiver in no way abrogates the responsibility and liability of the applicants, 
which includes but is not limited to cleaning up the area and having a responsible contact 
person who, for events under subsection B of this section, does not consume alcoholic 
beverages before, during or after the event. 
2. ?Any police officer shall have full authority to void a waiver for violation of park or other rules and 
regulations, any term or condition of the waiver as issued, or any ordinances or state law, 
committed by any member of the group, which may include voiding of waivers for subsequent 
days. Such action shall be immediately reported to the director of parks and recreation or the 
city manager for action in conformance with this article; and 
3. ?Public address systems and amplified music may be permitted, and may be subject to the 
provisions of chapter 16, article 6, if so noted on the waiver. 
4. ?The city may include additional conditions as a part of the waiver. The city will notify the 
applicant of such conditions. 
F. ?The director of parks and recreation or the city manager shall uniformly consider each application 
upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying waivers under this article based 
upon political, religious, ethnic, color, race, creed, national origin, age, marital status, gender, or 
actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or disability related grounds. 
G. ?Any application submitted in a less than timely manner as designated in this section may be denied 
as untimely without further review, unless a waiver of the minimum filing period is granted after due 
consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the event, and a determination that the impact 
on city services and public safety will not be adversely impacted by granting such a waiver. An 
approved application shall be given to the applicant by personal delivery or by mail. If no action has 
been taken within ten calendar days of submission or by the date of the event, the application has 
been deemed denied. 
H. ?Upon granting the waiver, a copy of the waiver shall be routed in accordance with section 34.08.130, 
and to other individuals as may be appropriate in the discretion of the director of parks and 
recreation or the city manager. 
I. ?In the event the city denies the waiver request, the city may authorize the activity at a different time, 
date, or location and issue an alternate waiver to the applicant. (See section 34.08.110.) A denial by 
the director of parks and recreation may be submitted to the city manager for reconsideration within 
four business days of the denial. If the city manager does not act on the request within ten calendar 
days it will be deemed denied. 
J. ?In the event the waiver is denied by the city manager, the applicant may appeal the decision to the 
city commission by submitting the completed application, as it existed at the time of the decision by 
the city manager, to the clerk of the commission together with a letter explaining why the applicant 
believes the decision should be overturned. The appeal materials must be received within seven 
calendar days of the decision by the city manager. Appeals received after that time will be returned 
as untimely. The clerk of the commission shall, upon receipt of a timely appeal, schedule the public 
hearing, providing for appropriate notice according to the applicable rules of the city commission. To 
reverse the decision of the city manager, the concurring vote of a majority of the commission shall be 
needed to approve the application or approve the application with additional conditions. The decision 
of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.040), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.060. - Revocation of waiver. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a waiver instantly upon a violation of the 
conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this article or when a public emergency arises. The 
revocation of a waiver due to an emergency shall not automatically operate to revoke all waivers under a 
recurring event waiver. The revocation of a waiver upon violation of the conditions or standards of the 
waiver shall automatically operate to revoke the entire waiver for a recurring event. A new application 
may be submitted in the event of a revocation of a recurring event waiver. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.060), 7-12-2004) 


Sec. 4.04.070. - Violation; penalty. 
A. ?It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
B. ?Anyone found guilty of the offense of having an open container under section 4.04.030 shall be fined 
an amount not less than $100.00 and not to exceed $500.00 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a 
term not to exceed six months, or both. The first $100.00 of a fine under this section may not be 
suspended. 
C. ?Upon conviction, the court may, in its discretion, order the payment of the costs of prosecution or 
imprisonment, or both, as part of the sentence. 
(Ord. No. 1616, § 1(9.70.070), 7-12-2004) 


Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 6.01.010. - Hours of operation of authorized live card games. 
    Pursuant to MCA 23-5-307, the hours during which live card games authorized by the state may be 
played within the jurisdictional limits of the city, include the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., 
thereby extending the playing time beyond the 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. closing times established by state 
law. 
(Code 1982, § 5.56.010; Ord. No. 1283, § 1, 1989) 


ARTICLE 2. - PUBLIC CONCERTS 


Sec. 6.02.010. - Band concerts provided by city. 
    The city shall provide public band concerts for the entertainment of the people of the city, and pay 
therefor out of any moneys which may be in the fund created by section 6.02.030. Such concerts shall be 
given at such place or places and at such time or times as may be designated by the commission, or as 
may be designated by the mayor with the consent of the commission, provided that such concerts shall 
not be given more than twice each week, and provided further that no band shall be employed to give 
such concerts except a band having its headquarters in Bozeman. 
(Code 1982, § 12.28.030) 


Sec. 6.02.020. - Contract with band authorized. 
    The commission may from time to time enter into a contract with any band having its headquarters in 
the city, through its proper officers or managing head, to furnish during any year or part of a year, a 
certain number of concert entertainments at a price to be agreed upon for the whole number of concerts, 
or for concerts at an agreed price of so much each. 
(Code 1982, § 12.28.040) 


Sec. 6.02.030. - Levy for band concert fund. 
    It shall be the duty of the city commission to levy upon all the taxable property within the city a tax 
not exceeding one mill on the dollar in each year, on the assessed value of the taxable property of the 
city, to be collected the same as other taxes and paid into a fund to be known as the "band concert fund" 
of the city, for the purpose of providing band concerts. The same shall be expended by warrants properly 
drawn on the fund in payment for the public band concerts for the entertainment of the people of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12.28.050) 


Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Domestic animal control and protection, MCA 7-23-101 et seq.; livestock, MCA 
81-1-101 et seq.; fish and wildlife, MCA 87-1-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Domestic animal control and protection, MCA 7-23-101 et seq. 


Sec. 8.02.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Animal" means any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. The term "animal" 
includes fowl, fish, and reptiles. 
2. ?"Animal control officer" means all peace officers as that term is defined in state law as well as all 
duly appointed animal control officers, animal control supervisors appointed by the city to carry 
out and enforce this article, or other officials designated by the chief of police. 
3. ?"Animal shelter" means any premises provided by, or contracted via, the city and maintained by 
the animal shelter director for impounding and caring for dogs and other animals, or any facility 
which contracts with the city to provide such services. 
4. ?"Animal shelter director" means the operator of the city animal shelter or any operator of a 
facility contracting with the city to provide the services of an animal shelter. 
5. ?"At large" means that an animal is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or responsible 
custodian of the animal and not on a leash or confined within a kennel, cage, or motor vehicle, 
or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the 
animal. 
6. ?"Cruelty" means any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death of 
an animal is caused or permitted. 
7. ?"Dangerous" or "vicious" animal means any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings, 
domestic animals, or livestock without adequate provocation, or which, because of its nature, 
temperament, training, or other characteristics, would constitute an unreasonable danger to 
human life or property if not kept, maintained, or confined in a safe and secure manner. Any 
animal that, without provocation, has aggressively bitten or caused any physical injury to any 
person shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous. 
8. ?"Exotic animal" means any wild or other animal which is not tame by nature and includes, but is 
not limited to, raccoon, fox, skunk, beaver, otter, wolf, wolf hybrid, bear, raptor, alligator, 
crocodile, poisonous snake, monkey, swine, member of the feline species other than domestic 
cat ( felis domesticus ), member of the canine species other than domestic dog ( canis familiaris 
), or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that 
required for customary household pets sold by pet shops or domestic farm animals. The term 
"exotic animal" does not include farm animals, rodents, domesticated ferret, and captive-bred 
species of fish and common cage birds. 
9. ?"Kennel" means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, 
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs, cats, or other animals 
(excluding licensed pet shops). The term "kennel" shall also include any noncommercial 
establishment or place where more than two dogs or two cats are kept over the age of six 
months, whether for breeding or otherwise. 
10. ?"Leash" means a line, chain or lead used to control or restrain an animal and does not include 
an electronic leash or shock collar. 
11. ?"Municipal infraction" means a civil offense punishable by a civil penalty as listed in this article 
of not more than $300.00 for each violation. 
12. ?"Muzzle" means a humane device, securely fastened over the mouth of an animal, which 
prevents the animal from biting. 
13. ?"Nuisance" means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health 
of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their 
owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "nuisance" shall include, but not be limited to: 
a. ?Any animal that is repeatedly (more than two separate occurrences) found running at large; 
b. ?Any dog in any section of a park or public recreation area which is not controlled by a leash 
or similar physical restraint, except in such parks or public areas designated exempt 
pursuant to section 8.02.080.G; 
c. ?Any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any property other than that of its 
owner, with the exception of service animals authorized under the Americans with 
Disabilities Act; 
d. ?Any animal that makes disturbing noises including, but not limited to, continued and 
repeated howling, barking, whining, crowing or other utterances causing unreasonable 
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where 
the animal is kept or harbored; 
e. ?Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other 
animals; 
f. ?Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, 
attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-
of-way; 
g. ?Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way; 
h. ?Any animal that attacks domestic animals; 
i. ?Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the 
animal is kept or harbored; 
j. ?Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of 
the number of animals maintained at a single residence or the inadequacy of the facilities. 
14. ?"Owner" means any person, group of persons, or corporation having temporary or permanent 
custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property 
rights to, any animal covered by this article. 
15. ?"Under restraint" means that an animal is secured by a leash not to exceed six feet in length or 
securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.010; Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 1, 
1998; Ord. No. 1764, § 2, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.020. - Dog and cat licenses—Requirements generally; fee; expiration. 
A. ?Every person, other than owners or keepers of commercial kennels, owning, keeping, or harboring 
any dog over six months of age within the corporate limits of Bozeman shall cause such dog to be 
registered, numbered, and licensed annually with the city department of administrative services and 
shall pay for such license an amount as set by resolution of the city commission. Any owner claiming 
that the owner's dog has been spayed or neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing 
authority that such operation has been performed. No license shall be issued without proof of 
vaccination against rabies disease. First-time licenses issued after July 1 shall be prorated on a 
semiannual basis. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. A late licensing 
fee will be assessed upon all renewal licenses issued after February 15 of the current license year 
pursuant to the fee schedule. 
B. ?Every person owning, keeping, or harboring any cat over six months of age within the corporate 
limits shall cause such cat to be registered and numbered annually with the department of 
administrative services and shall pay for such registration an amount as set by resolution of the city 
commission. Any owner claiming that the owner's cat has been spayed or neutered must show to the 
satisfaction of the licensing authority that such operation has been performed. No license of any type 
shall be issued without proof of vaccination against rabies disease. First time registrations issued 
after July 1 shall be prorated on a semi-annual basis. All registrations shall expire on December 31 
of the year of issuance. A late registration fee will be assessed upon all renewal registrations issued 
after February 15 of the current calendar year pursuant to the fee schedule. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.020; Ord. No. 1085, § 2, 1981; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1446, § 2, 
1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 2, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.030. - Same—Exemptions from article applicability. 
    The licensing requirements of this article shall not apply to any dog or cat belonging to a nonresident 
of the city and kept within the city for not longer than 15 days, provided all such dogs or cats of 
nonresidents shall at the time of entry into the city be properly vaccinated against rabies and, while kept 
within the city, meet all other requirements of this article. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions 
has the burden of proving to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog or cat in question is 
entitled to such exemption. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.030; Ord. No. 1085, § 4, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 2, 
8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.040. - Licenses; issuance and registration conditions; tag requirements. 
    On payment to the city of the amount of the license fee, the licensing authority shall issue a license 
to the person applying for the same, provided that all other requirements have been met, and shall 
provide and furnish with each license a durable tag upon which shall be stamped or engraved the 
registration number of the dog or cat and the year registered. The city shall keep suitable records in which 
shall be recorded the date and number of such license and the name and address of the person to whom 
issued. Whenever the dog or cat is allowed in a public place, every owner of a dog or cat within the city 
shall place and keep around the neck of each dog or cat owned a collar or harness to which shall be 
securely fastened the license tag issued by the city and to which shall also be attached a tag showing that 
the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies. In the event that a dog or cat tag is lost or destroyed, a 
duplicate shall be issued for the current year, upon the payment of a fee for such duplicate pursuant to 
the fee schedule. No person shall use, for any dog or cat, a license receipt or license tag issued for 
another dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the neck of any dog or cat the 
license tag issued pursuant to this section without the dog or cat owner's permission or alter such tag in 
any manner. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.040; Ord. No. 1085, § 3, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 3, 
8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.050. - Kennel licensing requirements; limit on number of cats and dogs kept. 
A. ?It is unlawful for any person, group of persons in the same dwelling, or family, to keep, harbor, 
maintain or knowingly permit within the city more than two each of cats or dogs, over six months of 
age, without first having obtained a kennel license from the city as herein provided. This section shall 
not apply to licensed veterinarian hospitals or animal shelters, but it is intended to apply to keeping 
or maintaining kennels where cats and dogs are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes, boarding, 
or for the enjoyment of the household. Any person keeping or maintaining a kennel shall make 
application to the city for said kennel license, or the revocation thereof, shall be authorized or denied 
at the discretion of the chief of police. 
B. ?Kennel licensing procedure. 
1. ?All applications for a kennel license, including applications for renewal or reinstatement, shall be 
reviewed by the chief of police, who shall investigate the premises of the proposed kennel and 
make findings, as set forth herein, regarding said application. 
2. ?All kennel licenses shall be for a designated purpose, and a specific number and type of cats 
and dogs. Licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another person or place. 
3. ?New kennel licenses shall only be issued after the chief of police, after appropriate inspection of 
the applicant's proposed kennel and other appropriate investigation, approves the application. 
In addition, written notice of a pending kennel license application shall be provided by the 
applicant to all owners of real property within 200 feet of the site in question, including the 
property owner if the site in question is not owned by the applicant, within 15 days of the 
application date and prior to final application approval by the chief of police. The notices, on 
forms provided by the city, shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the name and 
address of the owner of record of the property, a brief statement of the nature of the kennel 
license application, including the number and type of cats or dogs proposed in the application 
and reference to the procedures described herein. Additionally, the applicant shall provide 
notice to the city liaison (staff liaison to the InterNeighborhood Council and neighborhood 
associations). Applicant's failure to properly complete and deliver all notice forms may constitute 
cause to deny the application or revoke the kennel license. 
4. ?The chief of police, for approving a kennel license, shall find: 
a. ?That all animals listed on the kennel license application possess current city pet licenses; 
b. ?That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and topography to accommodate 
such use, and all yards, spaces, fences and enclosures are adequate to properly relate 
such use with the land and uses in the vicinity; 
c. ?That the proposed use will have no adverse affect on abutting properties or residents within 
the affected area; and 
d. ?That any conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary and shall apply and be 
followed by the applicant and the property owner as a condition of approval. 
5. ?Upon granting a kennel license, the chief of police may thereafter inspect the premises to 
ensure compliance with this article and ensure the health and welfare of the animals. 
6. ?A kennel license holder shall notify the chief of police of any change in the operations which 
may affect the license and shall keep the chief of police apprised of any change in name, use, 
or location of-said kennel, including, but not limited to, changes in animals and numbers of 
either cats or dogs listed on the original kennel license application. 
C. ?The kennel license fee shall be in an amount as set by resolution of the city commission, and the 
license shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless sooner revoked. License fees shall be 
reduced by 50 percent if application is made, and subsequently approved, between July 1 and 
December 31. The kennel license application fee is nonrefundable. 
D. ?Upon complaint being made to the chief of police that a licensed kennel is being operated in an 
improper manner, after finding the kennel was operated improperly, as a nuisance, or a condition 
existed that would preclude the issuance of a license, the chief of police may revoke the license of 
such kennel, after a minimum of 72 hours' notice to the licensee. The licensee may, at the discretion 
of the chief of police be provided up to 15 days to mitigate an offending condition and thus have the 
license reinstated. Reinstatement findings by the chief of police shall be made only after conduction 
of a subsequent site inspection and report stating that each offending condition of the kennel in 
question was satisfactorily corrected and the kennel complies with conditions set forth in this article. 
E. ?Upon annual re-application for a kennel license renewal, an inspection of the premises, in 
accordance with subsection B of this section, may be waived unless conditions listed in subsection D 
of this section are found to exist. 
F. ?Kennel license application and revocation appeals. Decisions by the chief of police to deny or 
approve a kennel license application, revoke an existing kennel license or reinstate a revoked kennel 
license may be appealed to the city commission. A written request for an appeal hearing before the 
city commission shall be submitted to the chief of police. Any appeal of a kennel license application 
approval or denial, or appeal of an existing kennel license revocation or reinstatement decision by 
the chief of police shall be in writing wherein the appellant shall set forth the specific provisions of the 
decision being appealed. Written notice of an appeal of a kennel license application approval or 
denial or existing kennel license revocation or reinstatement, including specific provisions of the 
decision being appealed and the date, time and location of the subsequent city commission appeal 
hearing, shall be provided by the applicant, to all owners of real property within 200 feet of the site in 
question, including the property owner if the site in question is not owned by the applicant, within 15 
days past the appeal submittal date and at least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing. Additionally, 
the applicant shall provide notice of appeal to the city liaison (staff liaison to the InterNeighborhood 
Council and neighborhood associations). Applicant's failure to properly complete and deliver all 
appeal notice forms may constitute cause to deny the appeal. Upon review of an appeal, the city 
commission shall have the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the findings of the chief of police. 
Commission affirmation, modification or reversal of a decision made by the chief of police shall be 
final and binding. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.060; Ord. No. 1085, § 5, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 5, 1997; Ord. No. 1754, § 1, 
1-26-2009; Ord. No. 1764, § 4, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.060. - Keeping of exotic or wild animals. 
A. ?It is unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, keep, or permit at large any exotic animal without the written 
permission of the city commission. Such permission shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the commission that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. 
B. ?Any person that owns, keeps, or harbors an exotic animal shall make application to the city 
commission for a special license in the manner provided in section 8.02.050 and said license shall 
only be issued according to procedures and criteria specified therein. Such applicant must provide 
notice of intent to maintain an exotic or wild animal to all neighbors and include specific information 
about the nature of the animal. 
C. ?The commission shall, in addition to all other conditions, impose appropriate requirements for 
proposed enclosures to house or transport the animal. The housing enclosure must be constructed 
according to applicable zoning codes and must have the proper permits. Each housing enclosure 
where an exotic or wild animal is to be kept must be periodically inspected by the animal control 
officer and the health board. Each housing enclosure must provide an adequate exercise area and 
sleeping quarters. Proper temperature control and ventilation for the particular species must be 
provided in both areas. Each housing enclosure must be kept locked and designed so that no one 
can enter or place appendages in the enclosure. Each housing enclosure must be constructed so as 
to prevent the animal from escaping. Each housing enclosure must be kept in good repair to prevent 
both escape and injury to the wild animal. Each housing enclosure must have a water container 
which is secured so as to prevent its being overturned. Each housing enclosure must be disinfected 
daily. Surfaces must be of an impervious material to allow for disinfecting. 
D. ?Exemptions. The standards set out in this section for keeping exotic or wild animals do not apply to: 
1. ?Any zoological garden accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and 
Aquariums; 
2. ?Appropriately licensed theatrical exhibits or circuses; 
3. ?Federally licensed research institutions; 
4. ?Any government agency or its employees who use the wild animals for an agency related 
education, propagation, or behavior program; 
5. ?Anyone holding a valid rehabilitation permit from the state department of fish, wildlife and parks, 
but such exception is granted only for animals which are in rehabilitation and are scheduled to 
be released to the wild. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the keeping of any wild 
animal expressly prohibited by state statute. 
E. ?The annual permit fee for keeping each exotic or wild animal shall be set by resolution. A separate 
wild animal permit is required for each animal kept as defined herein. All permits granted under this 
article shall be due and payable annually on the first business day of January. All wild animal permits 
issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. If the permit fee 
provided for by resolution of the commission is not paid on or before February 15 of the current 
calendar year, a $50.00 late registration fee shall be imposed. If application for a renewal permit is 
submitted after February 15, the application will be considered a new application and subject to all 
the requirements for a new application. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.070; Ord. No. 1085, § 6, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 6, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 4, 
8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.070. - Keeping of chickens (gallus gallus domesticus). 
A. ?Keeping of chickens lawful. Subject to the standards in this article, it shall be lawful to keep of up to 
15 female domestic chickens (hens) per permit holder. Except as provided in section 
8.02.010.A.13.d, chickens kept in accordance with the provisions of this section are not nuisance 
animals pursuant to section 8.02.120. 
B. ?Location and number. 
1. ?Chickens may be kept in the following locations, subject to all other standards in this article: 
a. ?On a single-household parcel; 
b. ?On a parcel under unitary ownership with more than one dwelling on site; and 
c. ?On residential parcels under common ownership. 
2. ?The number of chickens authorized per permit shall comply with the following, subject to all 
other standards in this article: 
a. ?For the first 3,000 square feet of any residential parcel, up to four chickens; 
b. ?For each additional 1,000 square feet of any residential parcel, one additional hen up to a 
maximum of 15; and 
c. ?For parcels with multiple households the physical area used for determining the maximum 
number of allowed hens is exclusive to each permit and may not overlap. This may restrict 
the number of permits issued on a given parcel. 
C. ?Specific standards for chickens. 
1. ?No male chickens (roosters) over the age of three months are permitted. 
2. ?No chickens may run at large within the corporate limits of the city. All chickens must be 
contained with the permittee's property boundary. 
3. ?The permittee shall provide the chickens with a covered, predator-proof chicken house that is 
thoroughly ventilated, of sufficient size to admit free movement of the chickens. The chicken 
house must be adjacent to and provide free access to the chicken enclosure. Any heat source 
or electrical facilities installed in a chicken house must comply with all adopted building and 
electrical codes of the city. 
4. ?The permittee shall provide the chickens with a predator-proof enclosure of sufficient size to 
admit free movement of the chickens. Chicken enclosures may be movable. 
5. ?Chickens shall be secured within the enclosure from sunset to sunrise. 
6. ?Chicken enclosures and houses must be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, and 
must be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent offensive odors. 
7. ?Chickens shall have continuous access to adequate food and water. 
8. ?Stored feed must be kept in a rodent- and predator-proof container. 
9. ?Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Ill chickens shall either receive appropriate 
medical care or be culled. 
10. ?No chicken house shall be located closer than 20 feet to any structure inhabited by someone 
other than the chicken owner, custodian, or keeper, and not closer than five feet to any property 
line. Chicken houses may be movable but must comply with all standards of this section. 
11. ?No chicken shall be kept in a manner so as to create noxious odors or noise of a loud, 
persistent and habitual nature. 
12. ?No chickens shall be slaughtered within the public view. 
D. ?Permits required/inspections. 
1. ?Prior to the keeping of any chickens, a party seeking to keep chickens shall obtain a permit from 
the city. A permit fee may be established by resolution of the city commissions and may be 
revised from time to time. Only one permit shall be issued per household. Issuance of a permit 
is a discretionary act. 
2. ?The owner of the chickens shall keep a copy of all signed city approval documents for 
inspection upon request by an animal control officer. 
3. ?A permit for chickens under this section does not relieve any party from any requirement to 
obtain any other permit or other necessary approvals for any structure, fence, lighting, heat 
source, etc. as required by this Code. 
4. ?A party wishing to keep chickens shall submit an application to keep chickens to the city 
treasurer's office. The application shall contain the following: 
a. ?A sketch identifying the property boundaries, the location of all structures on the property 
and distances between said structures and between the property boundaries. The sketch 
must also indicate the location of the chicken enclosure and chicken house. 
b. ?The name, address, and signed statement of the property owner, if different from the 
applicant, consenting to the keeping of the applied for number of chickens on the property. 
c. ?Whether the number of chickens kept will be between one and six, or between seven and 
15. 
d. ?A description of the enclosure and chicken house, including materials used and cubic 
footage. 
e. ?A sworn statement that all statements contained in the application are true and that the 
permit holder shall keep the chickens in compliance with the terms of the permit, 
application and this section. 
f. ?The applicant shall provide each residence adjacent, including those adjacent across a 
public right-of-way, an acknowledgement of notification and request for hearing form and 
indicate on said form that the applicant intends to keep chickens in the manner described 
in the application. The applicant shall submit the signed forms and a listing of all adjacent 
residents with the application. If a neighbor refuses to sign, the applicant shall so state on 
the application. For the keeping of seven or more chickens, if two or more adjacent 
residences request a hearing, the city shall schedule and notice a hearing before the city 
commission pursuant to subsection E of this section. 
g. ?Where the party seeking to keep chickens is not the fee owner of the property upon which 
chickens will be kept, the applicant shall obtain the property owner's consent in writing to 
keep chickens on the property. The owner's consent shall be submitted with the permit 
application or renewal. For the purposes of this section, when a party seeks to keep 
chickens on a property owned as condominium, the consent of the property owner's 
association must be obtained. An officer of the association may sign as the landowner. 
5. ?For any party wishing to keep seven or more chickens, up to the maximum number allowed, the 
party shall have the location inspected by a city animal control officer prior to the keeping of 
seven or more chickens. The animal control officer shall review the enclosure, chicken house, 
and all matters related to the keeping of chickens. 
6. ?If, during any inspection, the animal control officer determines changes are to be made to the 
enclosure, chicken house, or to the number of chickens to be kept, or require mitigation for the 
impact to adjacent properties, such as fencing or other screening, the applicant/permit holder 
shall comply with the order of the animal control officer. A person aggrieved by a decision of the 
animal control officer may appeal to the city manager who shall review all applicable information 
and issue a decision on the appeal. Appeals from the city manager's decision on an application, 
permit or order of an animal control officer's decision may be made to the city commission. At 
the time of final approval by animal control, the officer shall indicate final approval on the permit 
and keep a record of final approval. 
7. ?A permit to keep chickens is specific to the permit holder and the location of the permit. A 
person wishing to move chickens to a different property shall obtain a new permit. A new 
resident of a property who intends to keep chickens shall obtain a new permit regardless of 
whether chickens were kept on the property or continue to be kept on the property. 
8. ?Approval of a permit to keep chickens authorizes the permit holder to keep the number of 
chickens in the manner described on the application and permit. Any increase to the number of 
chickens to seven or more up to the maximum number allowed, or a significant change to the 
manner of keeping said chickens shall require a new permit. 
9. ?Nothing in this section shall prevent an animal control officer from requiring an inspection of a 
property prior to or after issuance of a permit for any number of chickens including six or less. 
10. ?Changes to the standards contained in this section shall require any permit holder to comply 
with any new standard, regulation, or condition and no notice to a permit holder is required prior 
to enforcement of any new standard beyond that required for adoption of a new or revised 
ordinance. 
E. ?Protest and hearing. For the keeping of seven or more chickens, a request by the occupants, 
owners, or residents of two or more adjacent properties for the city commission to conduct a hearing 
on the application shall subject the application to a hearing before the city commission. Adjacent 
properties shall include those properties adjacent by a public right-of-way and include those 
connected by property corners. If a hearing is held the commission may issue a permit if the 
commission finds: 
1. ?That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size to accommodate such the keeping of 
chickens, and all yards, spaces, fences, and enclosures are adequate to properly relate such 
use with the land and uses in the vicinity; 
2. ?That the proposed use will have minimal adverse impact on adjacent properties or residents; 
and 
3. ?That any conditions stated in the approval are in addition to those required in this article and are 
deemed necessary, and shall apply and be followed by the applicant and the property owner as 
a condition of approval. 
F. ?Enforcement. Upon receiving a complaint of a possible violation, the animal control officer will 
investigate and determine if a violation of this section exists. If the animal control officer determines a 
violation exists, the officer may serve upon the permit holder or the owner or lessee of the property a 
written notice of violation and an order to take corrective action, may issue a warning, or may 
immediately issue a violation notice. The notice of violation may be served by leaving the notice in a 
conspicuous location at the place of the keeping of the chickens, or in accordance with section 
8.02.200. The animal control officer will revisit the owner's address ten days or more after the notice 
of violation is issued. The provisions of sections 8.02.010, 8.02.130, 8.02.140, 8.02.150, 8.02.170, 
8.02.190, 8.02.200 and article 3 of this chapter shall apply to the keeping of chickens. 
(Ord. No. 1767, § 2(6.04.070), 9-28-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.080. - Restraint and confinement. 
A. ?It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or to permit such 
animal to run at large upon the streets and public ways of the city. 
B. ?Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, or in a park or other public space, other than areas 
as designated pursuant to subsection G of this section, or upon any private property without the 
consent of the property owner, shall be secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to 
restrain the particular dog, such leash or chain not to exceed six feet in length. However, while 
actually participating in instructional obedience training, dogs may be temporarily restrained by a 
leash of greater length. 
C. ?No owner or custodian of any animal shall leave such animal unattended while on a street, sidewalk, 
public way, or in a park or other public space, or fail to exercise proper care and control of such 
animal to prevent the same from becoming a nuisance. 
D. ?Every female dog or cat, while in heat, shall be kept in a secure enclosed shelter or area within the 
real property limits of the owner's premises in such a manner so as not to come in contact with 
another animal except for planned breeding. 
E. ?Every dangerous or vicious animal shall be confined by its owner, or authorized agent of its owner, 
within a building or secure enclosure, and, whenever off the premises of its owner, shall be securely 
muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not more 
than three feet in length or caged. Every person harboring a dangerous or vicious animal is charged 
with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that no other person has access to such 
animal. 
F. ?Dog-free areas. No dogs are allowed at the following locations: 
1. ?East Gallatin Recreation Area, beach and lake, defined specifically by Certificate of Survey 
1221 and filed with the clerk and recorders office located adjacent to Manley road is declared a 
dog-free area. Dogs are disallowed either on or off restraint. However, dogs are allowed on 
adjoining trails to the north and east of the recreation area. 
2. ?Bronken Fields, defined as recreational fields and adjoining area southwest of W. Durston 
Avenue and N. Cottonwood Road. 
3. ?Softball complex, defined as all recreational fields and adjoining areas located southeast of 
Haggerty Lane and Highland Boulevard. 
4. ?Other prohibited areas within established playgrounds, beaches, ice rinks or on any fields 
specifically designed for sports recreation to include softball fields, soccer fields or related 
areas. An exception for dogs on a beach is only allowed if authorized pursuant to Section H of 
this section. 
G. ?Restraint-free areas. Through commission action either prior to, or part of, Ordinance No. 1764, the 
following areas are exempt from subsections A and B of this section to the extent that in such areas 
animals may be permitted to run or otherwise remain unrestrained. This exemption shall not apply to 
other prohibited areas listed in subsection F of this section or otherwise relieve an owner or 
custodian of any animal to prevent the same from becoming a nuisance, as defined in section 
8.02.010. 
1. ?Burke Park. That area defined specifically by Certificate of Survey 1778 located adjacent to S. 
Church Avenue and filed with the clerk and Recorder's office, with all areas specifically signed 
as restraint-free dog park use. 
2. ?Canine Beach at the Bozeman Pond. The fenced and enclosed area, to include the actual 
beach itself, on the west side of the Bozeman Ponds defined specifically by Certificate of 
Survey 1883 and located adjacent to Huffine Lane and Fowler Lane and filed with the clerk and 
Recorder's office and specifically signed for use as restraint-free dog park. 
3. ?Highland Park. The fenced and enclosed area located on the southwest side of the Softball 
Complex located between Haggerty Lane and Highland Boulevard that is specifically signed for 
use as a restraint-free dog park. 
4. ?Snowfill. The fenced and enclosed area on the western edge of the City of Bozeman Landfill 
that adjoins McIlhattan Road that is specifically signed for use as a restraint-free dog park. 
5. ?Gallatin County Regional Park. That portion of the area defined specifically by Certificate of 
Survey 2202B and filed with the clerk and recorder's office, that adjoins West Oak Street and 
Davis Lane, and that has been specifically identified by Gallatin County for use in a restraint-
free status. 
6. ?Cooper Park. The park area with full plat and legal description maintained by the department of 
community development identified as "PARK ADD, S12, T02S, R05E" and includes that park 
surrounded by South 8th Avenue, W. Story Avenue, W. Koch Street and S. 6th Avenue. 
7. ?Centennial Park. The park area with full plat and legal description maintained by the department 
of community development identified as "IMES ADD, BLOCK 38, LOTS 1-24" and is that park 
adjacent to N. Tracy Avenue, W. Cottonwood Street and even with N. Tracy Avenue. This 
restraint-free exemption shall be only from 5:00 a.m. MST to 9:00 a.m. MST. 
H. ?The city commission may, by resolution, designate additional areas within the city which shall be 
exempt from subsections A and B of this section in addition to those listed in subsection G of this 
section. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.070; Ord. No. 1085, § 7, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 7, 1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 2, 
1998; Ord. No. 1764, § 5, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.090. - Rabies prevention requirements; tag. 
    All dogs and cats over six months of age within the corporate limits of the city shall be vaccinated 
against the disease known as "rabies." Upon vaccination of such dog and/or cat, the veterinarian shall 
issue to the owner or owners of said animal a certificate showing the inoculation thereof and shall keep a 
duplicate of such certificate and shall issue a metallic tag showing such vaccination and the date thereof. 
The owner shall cause the tag to be attached to a collar or harness on such animal. The animal control 
officer or any police officer of the city shall have the right to impound any dog or cat at large in the city, 
not wearing a collar or harness on which is displayed the license tag and also the vaccination tag. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.080; Ord. No. 1085, § 8, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 8, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 6, 
8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.100. - Quarantine for dogs biting persons. 
    Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer. Any dog 
or other animal which has bitten any person may be kept under quarantine under the direction and 
authority of the animal control officer. Such quarantine shall be for a period of ten days. If the owner of the 
animal has not appeared to claim the animal within 96 hours of the beginning of such quarantine, the 
animal may be destroyed and examined for rabies. If, during the quarantine period, the animal is 
adjudged as having rabies, the animal shall be destroyed and appropriate health authorities notified. If, 
after completion of the quarantine period, the animal is adjudged free of rabies, the animal shall be 
released to its owner upon written permission of the animal control officer unless otherwise ordered held 
pursuant to section 8.02.140 or 8.02.170. Quarantine and associated costs, including any costs of 
destruction, shall be at the owner's expense. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for 
quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made by the animal control officer or any 
law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.090; Ord. No. 1085, § 9, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 9, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 7, 
8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.110. - Rabies prevention requirements; physician and veterinarian responsibilities. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to report to the animal control officer the 
names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other 
information as will be helpful in rabies control. It shall be the duty of every veterinarian to report to the 
animal control officer the diagnosis of any animal observed by such veterinarian as a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.100; Ord. No. 1085, § 10, 1981; Ord. No. 1764, § 8, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.120. - Nuisance animals prohibited; complaints. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep, or maintain any such nuisance animal, and it shall 
be the duty of the animal control officer and all law enforcement officers to file complaints for all such 
violations occurring in their presence. Any person aggrieved by a nuisance animal may file a complaint 
with the animal control officer. Where the offense is not committed in the presence of the animal control 
officer, the animal control officer shall investigate and issue an appropriate criminal or civil citation, or 
request prosecution for the violation through the city attorney. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.110; Ord. No. 1085, § 11, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 10, 1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 
3, 1998; Ord. No. 1764, § 9, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 1778, § 1, 2-1-2010) 


Sec. 8.02.130. - Impoundment—Authorized when; records required. 
    Unlicensed dogs, or other animals found at large, shall be taken by the animal control officer to the 
animal shelter. Any dangerous or vicious dog or animal may be taken up and impounded by the animal 
control officer, or any law enforcement officer, by appropriate means, including a tranquilizer gun if 
necessary. The animal shelter shall keep a complete register of every dog or other animal impounded, 
showing the time and place of taking, the breed, color, sex, and distinguishing marks of such dog or other 
animal; and, if licensed, the number of the license and the name and address of the owner. To the extent 
possible, male dogs shall be separated from female dogs at the city animal shelter and healthy dogs shall 
be separated from unhealthy dogs. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.120; Ord. No. 1085, § 12, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 11, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 
10, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.140. - Same—Notice to owner; redemption conditions. 
A. ?It is the duty of every owner of any dog or other animal to know its whereabouts at all times. In the 
event that any dog or other animal is impounded, the owner shall redeem the same within 96 hours, 
or it shall be subject to disposal by the animal shelter director as provided in section 8.02.150. The 
owner of any impounded dog or other animal may redeem the same within such a period of time by 
accepting a citation for violation of any ordinance of the city for which the owner may be properly 
charged, and posting any boarding fees to the animal shelter in accordance with their established fee 
rates. 
B. ?Any unlicensed dog that is impounded may only be redeemed by the owner procuring a license, as 
required by section 8.02.020, in addition to paying the fees herein prescribed. 
C. ?If an impounded dog or cat has not been spayed or neutered ("unaltered") and is impounded a 
second time within three years, the dog or cat shall be altered prior to redemption at the owner's 
expense. 
D. ?If an impounded animal is suspected or known to have dangerous or vicious propensities, or 
accused of being a nuisance animal, it shall not be released or redeemed unless, or until, a hearing 
can be held before the municipal court to determine under what conditions, if any, such animal shall 
be released or redeemed. A complaint may be filed in municipal court against the person redeeming 
any dog or other animal impounded for violation of any provision of this article. 
E. ?To reclaim or redeem any animal impounded on the belief said animal is repeatedly at large, or is a 
nuisance, the owner must petition the municipal court for a hearing to determine under what 
conditions, if any, such animal shall be released or redeemed. During the hearing, the court will hear 
evidence to determine whether the animal should be declared a nuisance animal, to include any 
recommendations by the animal control officer. If a determination is made that the animal is 
repeatedly at large, or otherwise a nuisance, the owner shall be ordered to comply with provisions or 
conditions made by the court, including, but not limited to, ordered confinement of the animal in a 
secure enclosure. If the owner does not file such a petition within four days of the impound, the 
animal shall become the property of the city and subject to disposal by the animal shelter director as 
provided in section 8.02.150. Impoundment and associated costs, including any costs of destruction, 
shall be at the expense of the owner. 
F. ?To reclaim or redeem any animal impounded on the belief said animal is dangerous, vicious or the 
subject of abuse, the owner must petition the municipal court for a hearing to determine under what 
conditions, if any, such animal shall be released or redeemed. During the hearing, the court will hear 
evidence to determine whether the animal should be declared dangerous, vicious, or whether the 
animal was endangered by cruel treatment, and will take into consideration any recommendations by 
the animal control officer regarding the release of the animal. If a determination is made that the 
animal is dangerous, vicious, or the animal has been subject to cruel treatment, the owner shall be 
ordered to comply with provisions or conditions made by the court. If the owner does not file such a 
petition within four days of the impound, the animal shall become the property of the city and subject 
to disposal by the animal shelter director as provided in section 8.02.150 . Impoundment and 
associated costs, including any costs of destruction, shall be at the expense of the owner. The 
animal shall not be released to the owner until such hearing is held. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.130; Ord. No. 1085, § 13, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 12, 1997; Ord. No. 1463, § 
4, 1998; Ord. No. 1764, § 11, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.150. - Same—Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
    If any impounded dog or other animal is not redeemed within 96 hours from the time it is taken and 
impounded, the owner thereof shall forfeit all right, title, and interest therein, and the animal shelter 
director may offer the same for sale or adoption. Sale or adoption, and such certificate of sale, shall 
confer title and ownership of the dog or other animal, free of all claims and interest of the previous owner. 
In the event that any impounded dog or other animal is not redeemed by the owner or purchased, it may 
be disposed of by the animal shelter director or contracting agency in a humane manner. Any dog or 
other animal suffering from an infectious disease shall not be released but shall be disposed of, unless 
the public health officer shall otherwise order. Any animal deemed dangerous or vicious by the court may 
not be sold or adopted without proper disclosure to the individual purchasing or adopting said animal, to 
include the nature and extent of the behavior prompting the declaration of the court. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.140; Ord. No. 1085, § 14, 1981; Ord. No. 1764, § 12, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.160. - Cleaning up after animals. 
    Any person owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring any dog, cat, or other animal shall promptly 
remove and properly dispose of all feces left by the dog, cat, or animal on any public property and on any 
private property not owned by such person or lawfully occupied by such person, with the exception of 
service animals authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.160; Ord. No. 1085, § 15, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 14, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 
14, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.170. - Enforcement; animal control officer authority. 
A. ?For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and enforcing its provisions, the 
animal control officer, or any police officer, in addition to any and all other authority or power, 
whether the offense is committed in their presence or not and existing circumstances require 
immediate action, is authorized: 
1. ?After investigation and upon finding of sufficient probable cause may issue a notice to appear 
pursuant to the provisions of MCA 46-6-310, to any violator of this article; 
2. ?After investigation and upon finding of probable cause may request criminal prosecution for the 
violation through the city attorney; 
3. ?After investigation may issue a civil citation in accordance with chapter 24, article 2; 
4. ?To inspect premises subject to a kennel license application, chicken license application, a 
business license for animal boarding or any premises where the owner or occupant of the 
premises has agreed to accept an animal to board or shelter when the animal is the subject of 
an investigation, impound, upon issuance of a warrant or in accordance with judicially 
recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement; 
5. ?To demand from the occupants of any premises upon, or in which, an animal is kept or 
harbored, the exhibition of such animal and the license for such animal; 
6. ?To impound an animal which has attacked a person or other animal, is otherwise reasonably 
believed to be dangerous, or pursuant to a cruelty investigation against the animal in which 
protection of the animal from further abuse is warranted or in cases where an animal is loose, 
injured or in need of care and may order that animal held until such time as a hearing can be 
held before the municipal court to determine whether, and under what conditions, the animal 
should be released to the owner, in accordance with section 8.02.150; and 
7. ?Upon order of the municipal court, to destroy an animal deemed a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.170; Ord. No. 1085, § 17, 1981; Ord. No. 1446, § 15, 1997; Ord. No. 1488, § 
1, 1999; Ord. No. 1764, § 15, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 1778, § 2, 2-1-2010) 


Sec. 8.02.180. - Enforcement for violations; liability of owner; permit transfers. 
    In all enforcement actions for violations of this article, the person who applied for and obtained the 
license for the dog or animal in question shall be deemed the person responsible for the violation, unless 
there has been a transfer of ownership prior to the violation. Any transfer of ownership must be evidenced 
by a transfer permit issued by the city department of administrative services. A transfer permit may be 
obtained by furnishing the name and address of the transferee to the city department of administrative 
services. Nothing herein shall preclude the filing of separate or additional charges against any person 
other than the owner charged with custody of the animal. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.190; Ord. No. 1446, § 16, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 16, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.190. - Type of offenses. 
    Violation of any provisions in this article may be treated as either criminal violations or municipal 
infractions at the discretion of the animal control officer, chief of police or city attorney. This decision may 
be based on the individual and unique factors associated with each incident, to include, but not be limited 
to, impacts on risk to public safety, severity of violations and history or knowledge of previous violations. 
Offenses listed in this article involve absolute liability. These offenses shall not require proof of any one of 
the mental states as follows: "...mental states of purposely, knowingly or negligently as defined in MCA 
45-2-101." 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.200; Ord. No. 1085, § 21, 1981; Ord. No. 1764, § 17, 8-24-2009) 


Sec. 8.02.200. - Enforcement; penalty for violations. 
A. ?Criminal violations. 
1. ?Criminal citation. Upon issuance of a notice to appear and complaint as a criminal violation, or 
upon issuance of a complaint by the city attorney's office, when such complaint states the 
criminal penalty, it shall be deemed a misdemeanor violation of this article. A notice to appear is 
deemed served when handed to the defendant. A summons is deemed served three business 
days after the date of issuance. 
2. ?Penalty. Each person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this 
article, for which another penalty is not provided, shall upon conviction be punished according to 
the following schedule: 
a. ?First offense. A fine of not less than $100.00 and not to exceed $200.00. However, if the 
fine is paid within ten business days of the date of the notice to appear, the summons or 
warrant of arrest is served on the defendant, and then $50.00 of the fine shall be 
suspended. After the expiration of the ten business days, any fine over the minimum shall 
be suspended only at the discretion of the municipal court judge after the defendant has 
appeared in court. 
b. ?Second offense. A fine of not less than $200.00 and not to exceed $300.00. However, if the 
fine is paid within ten business days of the date of the notice to appear, the summons or 
warrant of arrest is served on the defendant, and then $100.00 of the fine shall be 
suspended. After the expiration of the ten business days, any fine over the minimum shall 
be suspended only at the discretion of the municipal court judge after the defendant has 
appeared in court. 
c. ?Third offense. A fine of not less than $300.00 and not to exceed $500.00. However, if the 
fine is paid within ten business days of the date of the notice to appear, the summons or 
warrant of arrest is served on the defendant, and then $100.00 of the fine shall be 
suspended. After the expiration of the ten business days, any fine over the minimum shall 
be suspended only at the discretion of the municipal court judge after the defendant has 
appeared in court. 
3. ?Court costs. Upon conviction, the court costs, including costs of prosecution, costs of a jury trial, 
or costs of a judge pro tempore or any part of the court costs may be assessed against the 
defendant at the discretion of the court. 
B. ?Municipal infractions. 
1. ?If the violation has been deemed to be a municipal infraction, pursuant to section 8.02.010, 
procedures and penalties shall be followed in accordance with chapter 24, article 2, unless 
otherwise specified differently in this section. 
2. ?Failure to either pay the penalty provided within ten business days or request a civil hearing 
within ten business days from the date the civil citation was served shall be deemed to be an 
admittance that the violation occurred and shall authorize the municipal court judge to enter 
judgment against the person served. 
a. ?Civil citation. A civil citation or notice of municipal infraction shall contain the following 
information: 
(1) ?Name and address of the defendant, including any identifying information; 
(2) ?Description and section number of the infraction attested to by the animal control 
officer issuing the civil citation; 
(3) ?Location and time of the infraction; 
(4) ?Amount of the civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both; 
(5) ?The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid if admitting to the 
infraction; 
(6) ?The manner, location and time in which a civil hearing may be requested if denying 
the infraction; 
(7) ?A notice that a failure to either pay the penalty or request a civil hearing within ten 
business days shall be deemed to be an admittance that the violation occurred and 
shall authorize the municipal court judge to enter judgment against the person served. 
b. ?Service. A civil citation may be served on a person who commits a municipal infraction by 
any one of the following methods: 
(1) ?Personal service; 
(2) ?By certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant's last known mailing 
address, return receipt requested; or 
(3) ?By publication, in the manner described in Rule 4D(5) of the Montana Rules of Civil 
Procedure. 
c. ?Court proceedings. The following procedures shall be followed upon a timely request for a 
civil hearing to contest a civil citation: 
(1) ?Upon receipt of a written request for a civil hearing, the police department shall within 
30 days notify the person of the date, time and location of the civil hearing. 
(2) ?The civil hearing shall be held before a city municipal court judge. 
(3) ?The court shall ensure the defendant has received a copy of the complaint and that 
the defendant understands the complaint. The defendant may question all witnesses 
who appear for the municipality and produce evidence or witnesses on the 
defendant's behalf. 
(4) ?The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant's own choosing and 
at the defendant's expense. 
(5) ?The civil penalty shall not be assessed if, after a hearing, the municipal court judge 
enters a finding of no liability. The municipal court judge, at any civil hearing under this 
article shall issue an order of judgment stating whether the person charged with the 
municipal infraction is liable for the municipal infraction; and if liable, the amount of 
any civil penalty, late penalty, and actual civil action hearing costs assessed against 
the person. Upon full satisfaction of penalties and costs, the police department shall 
file a notice of full satisfaction with the municipal court. A copy of the order of 
judgment issued shall be maintained by the city. 
(6) ?In a civil hearing the standard of proof must be by clear and convincing evidence. 
(7) ?If the defendant is found to have committed a violation after a civil hearing or 
requests a civil hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the 
hearing, the defendant may be held liable for actual hearing costs in accordance with 
MCA 25-10-201 together with all actual costs of service of the notice of the municipal 
infraction either by mail or personal service. The defendant must pay the civil penalty, 
hearing costs and service costs within 30 days from when judgment is entered. 
(8) ?Upon a finding that the defendant committed the violation by the municipal court 
judge, the decision shall be final, without right of appeal, in accordance with MCA 25-
30-108. 
d. ?Penalty. The imposition of civil penalty under this section is not a criminal conviction and is 
punishable by a civil penalty. 
(1) ?In addition to actual hearing costs or costs of service assessed, a defendant who 
admits liability or who is found liable after a civil action hearing shall pay the following 
civil penalty: 
(a) ?$100.00 fine, which shall be reduced to $50.00 if paid within ten business days 
from the date the civil citation is served. 
(b) ?$100.00 fine, which shall be reduced to $50.00 if paid within ten business days 
from the date the municipal court judge has issued an order of judgment on a 
finding that the defendant is liable. 
(2) ?The city attorney is authorized to file suit or engage the use of collection services to 
enforce collection of a civil penalty or court costs imposed under this article. In 
addition to the amount of the civil penalty collected, reasonable attorney's fees and 
court costs incurred in enforcing the collection shall be recoverable in that action. 
(Code 1982, § 6.04.210; Ord. No. 1446, § 17, 1997; Ord. No. 1764, § 18, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 
1778, § 3, 2-1-2010) 


ARTICLE 3. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, MCA 7-23-4104. 


Sec. 8.03.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Police dog" means any dog specifically trained for law enforcement work and under the control 
of a law enforcement officer. 
2. ?"Law enforcement officer" means any person who, by virtue of the person's office or public 
employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order and make arrests for offenses 
while acting within the scope of the person's authority. 
3. ?"Animal control officer" means all law enforcement or peace officers as those terms are defined 
herein, as well as all duly appointed animal control officers and animal control supervisors 
appointed by the city to carry out and enforce this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 6.08.010; Ord. No. 1489, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 8.03.020. - Interference with a police dog prohibited. 
    No person shall purposely or knowingly provoke, grab, strike, harass, injure or otherwise interfere 
with a police dog trained for use by a law enforcement officer, including but not limited to a police K-9 
handler, at any time during the performance, attempted performance or while waiting to perform the 
animal's or the officer's official duties. 
(Code 1982, § 6.08.020; Ord. No. 1489, § 2, 1999) 


Sec. 8.03.030. - Prohibited. 
A. ?A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals if, without justification, the person either 
knowingly or negligently: 
1. ?Subjects an animal to mistreatment or neglect including but not limited to overworking, beating, 
striking, tormenting, injuring or killing any animal; 
2. ?Carries an animal in a cruel manner; 
3. ?Fails to provide an animal in such person's custody with proper drink, food or shelter; 
4. ?Abandons a helpless animal on any public street, railroad, or in any other place where it may 
suffer injury, hunger or exposure or become a public charge; 
5. ?Promotes, sponsors, conducts or participates in any fight between any animals; or 
6. ?Commits, omits or allows the commission or omission of any act which causes the unjustifiable 
physical pain, suffering or death of an animal. 
(Code 1982, § 6.08.030; Ord. No. 1489, § 3, 1999) 


Sec. 8.03.040. - Enforcement—Penalty for violations. 
A. ?A person convicted of the offense of interference with a police dog may be fined an amount not to 
exceed $500.00 or sentenced to a term of imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months 
or both. 
B. ?A person found guilty of being cruel to an animal as described herein may be fined not less than 
$100.00 nor more than $500.00 or sentenced a term of imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 
six months, or both. The court, in its discretion, may also terminate all ownership rights in the animal 
in addition to all other fines and imprisonment set forth in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6.08.040; Ord. No. 1489, § 4, 1999) 


Sec. 8.03.050. - Same—Animal control officer authority. 
A. ?For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and enforcing its provisions, the 
animal control officer or any police officer, in addition to any and all other authority or power, is 
authorized to: 
1. ?Issue a notice to appear under the provisions of MCA 46-6-310, to any violator of this article; 
and 
2. ?Impound the abused animal and order that animal held until such time as a hearing can be held 
before the city court to determine whether and under what conditions the animal should be 
released to the owner. 
(Code 1982, § 6.08.050; Ord. No. 1489, § 5, 1999) 


Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Housing and construction, MCA 7-15-2101 et seq.; building construction 
standards, MCA 50-60-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - TECHNICAL CODES 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 10.02.010. - Model technical codes and administrative rules. 
A. ?Adoption of the model technical codes and administrative rules. 
1. ?The current editions of the model technical codes, to include but not be limited to building, 
plumbing, electrical and mechanical, and all accompanying appendices, amendments and 
modifications adopted or required to be adopted by the Building Codes Bureau, Montana 
Department of Labor and Industry (or its successor), as set out in the Administrative Rules of 
Montana (hereinafter ARM), as amended from time to time by the building codes bureau, are 
adopted by reference and incorporated in this chapter as if set forth in full, except for any 
exceptions noted in this article or any regulations not applicable to local government 
jurisdictions. 
2. ?One copy of each code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, 411 East Main Street, 
Bozeman, Montana, and one copy shall be kept on file in the offices of the building division. 
3. ?Any amendments to the codes as originally adopted by ordinance in this chapter which may be 
adopted by the building codes bureau and which apply to local government jurisdictions, 
including the adoption of the latest editions of the model technical codes, to include but not be 
limited to building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical, or applicable Administrative Rules of 
Montana, shall become effective in the city through automatic adoption upon execution of an 
administrative order of the city manager unless a different effective date is specified in the 
administrative order. 
4. ?A copy of the amendment notification will be kept in the office of the city clerk. 
5. ?The Model Technical Codes and Administrative Rules of Montana as adopted in this chapter or 
as amended through automatic adoption in subsection A.3 of this section, and the other 
provisions of this chapter are applicable within the city building jurisdiction. 
B. ?Municipality and city defined. Whenever the words "municipality" or "city" are used in the code 
adopted by this article, they shall mean the City of Bozeman. 
C. ?Authority to withhold certificate of occupancy. In addition to other authority provided by any model 
technical code adopted under the authority of this chapter, a building official of the city may withhold 
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy when the available evidence shows the structure and 
associated development does not conform with the standards and requirements of the following: 
1. ?Any model technical code, as such may be amended by the city; 
2. ?The provisions of a building permit; 
3. ?Chapter 38 of this Code; and 
4. ?Chapter 40 of this Code or a permit issued pursuant to chapter 40 including failure to pay costs 
of abatement as ordered pursuant to section 40.04.950. 
Once the nonconformity has been resolved to the satisfaction of the building official, a certificate of 
occupancy may be issued. 
D. ?Authority to issue stop work orders. In addition to authority granted under this code and under any 
applicable model technical code adopted under the authority of this chapter, a building official of the 
city may issue an order requiring any owner, contractor, subcontractor, or any other person 
performing work pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter to immediately stop all work of any 
kind related to the permit when the available evidence shows the structure and associated 
development does not conform with the standards and requirements of: 
1. ?Any model technical code, as such may be amended by the city; 
2. ?The provisions of a building permit; 
3. ?Chapter 38 of this code; and 
4. ?Chapter 40 of this code or a permit issued pursuant to chapter 40 including failure to pay costs 
of abatement as ordered pursuant to section 40.04.950. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such 
work as that person is directed by the city to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be 
subject to the penalty provision of section 10.02.100. The issuance of a stop work order cancels any 
pending inspections. The city will not inspect any work other than work necessary to correct 
nonconformity until the stop work order is lifted. 
(Code 1982, §§ 15.01.010, 15.01.020; Ord. No. 1389, §§ 1, 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 2000; 
Ord. No. 1631, §§ 1—3, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 2002 , § 1, 2, 3-26-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCA 7-5-4202(1). 


Sec. 10.02.020. - Building division fees; permits. 
A. ?Building division fees. The building division shall charge fees for permits, plan checks and other work 
based upon the following criteria and formulas. The specific fee tables referenced below, and 
including those for the various uniform, national or international codes, shall be approved by 
resolution of the city commission. 
1. ?Fees for additional and new building permits. Fees for building additions and 
commercial/residential building construction projects will be assessed based upon the current 
number of employees and their labor costs, internal and external administrative costs, the 
building square footage, and the labor factors derived from approved fee tables. The permit 
formula is: 
??
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
and 
Inte
rnal 
Cha
rge
s?? ?
=?
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e  
???????
# 
Per
son
nel 
 
? 
??
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e?? ?
=?
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e/H
our  
????
180
0 
(ne
two
rk 
hou
rs/y
ear) 
 
Admin. Charges/Employee/Hour + Inspector's Hourly Pay Rate = Total Hourly Rate 
(Total Hourly Rate)(Table A)(Building Sq. Footage) = Building Permit Fee 
2. ?Building permit factors: Table A is based on Amount of Inspection Time/Sq. Ft., Construction 
Type and Fire Rating. 
3. ?Plan review formula is: 
??
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
and 
Inte
rnal 
Cha
rge
s?? ?
=?
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e  
???????
# 
Per
son
nel 
 
? 
??
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e?? ?
=?
Ad
min
istr
ativ
e 
Cha
rge
s/E
mpl
oye
e/H
our  
????
180
0 
(ne
two
rk 
hou
rs/y
ear) 
 
Admin. Charges/Employee/Hour + Plans Examiner Hourly Pay Rate = Total Hourly Rate 
(Total Hourly Rate)(Table B)(Building Sq. Footage) = Plan Review Fee 
4. ?Plan review factors: Table B is based on Amount of Plan Review Time/Sq. Ft., Construction 
Type and Fire Rating. 
5. ?Fees for electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire suppression systems, and building remodel 
permits will be determined based on the contractor valuation of the project, subject to the 
building division's approval of the valuation. The permit valuation will be applied to the permit 
amounts detailed in Table C. 
6. ?Related fees. The payment of the fee for construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work 
done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not 
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from payment of other fees that are prescribed by 
law in IBC section 108.5 and IRC section R108.4. 
a. ?Reinspection fees. Reinspection fees may be assessed against a previously issued permit 
when additional reinspections are made in excess of what is commonly performed. Such 
fees are based on the extra time expended, multiplied by the building inspectors total 
hourly rate. This additional fee is to be paid to the building division prior to any further 
inspections being made by the building inspector to the site. The reinspection fee is to be 
based on a minimum time of two hours. 
b. ?Move-in prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. When an occupant moves into a 
structure prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued by the building inspector, a 
reinspection fee shall be assessed against the previously issued permit. Such fees are 
based on the extra time expended, multiplied by the building inspector's total hourly rate. 
This additional fee is to be paid to the building division prior to any further inspections 
being made by the building inspector to the site. The reinspection fee is to be based on a 
minimum time of two hours. 
B. ?Plan review; permit expiration; work without valid permit. 
1. ?Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be 
deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has 
been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official or 
designee is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not 
exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause 
demonstrated. 
2. ?Permit expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site 
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or, if the work 
authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after 
the time the work is commenced. The building official or designee is authorized to grant, in 
writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not to exceed 180 days each. The extension 
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
3. ?Plan review and permit renewal. 
a. ?In order to renew action on a plan review after expiration, the applicant must re-submit 
plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
b. ?In order to renew action on an expired permit, a new permit shall first be obtained and the 
fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided 
no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for 
such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded 
one year. 
c. ?In order to renew action on a permit after expiration has exceeded one year, the permittee 
shall pay a new full permit fee. 
4. ?Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a 
building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the 
necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee as established by the building division 
that shall be in addition to the required fees. The fee shall not be more than twice the permit fee 
amount. 
C. ?Refunds. 
1. ?Plan review fee refunds will not be given if the review has already been performed on the plans 
and specifications. 80 percent of the plan review fee will be refunded if the review of the plans 
and specifications has not commenced. 
2. ?Permit fees will not be refunded if the work has commenced and inspections have been made. 
80 percent of the permit fee will be refunded if no inspections have been performed at the site 
and the work is to be abandoned or postponed for more than 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 1631, § 4(15.02.010—15.02.030), 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 11-27-2006) 


Sec. 10.02.030. - International Building Code. 
    The International Building Code, 2009 Edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.131 (or successor 
provision) is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification under section 10.02.010. The 
International Building Code regulates the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, 
removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all 
buildings and/or structures in the jurisdiction of the city; and provides for the issuance of permits and 
collection of fees therefor. The International Building Code is subject to any modifications as stated in 
ARM 24.301.146 (or successor provision). 
(Code 1982, § 15.04.010; Ord. No. 1285, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1348, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 1389, § 
3, 1994; Ord. No. 1528, § 2, 2000; Ord. No. 1559, § 1, 3-18-2002; Ord. No. 1631, § 5, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.040. - International Residential Code. 
    The International Residential Code (IRC), 2006 Edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.154 (or 
successor provision) is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification under section 10.02.010. 
The IRC is a nationally recognized model code setting forth minimum standards and requirements for 
detached one or two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than 
three stories in height, and their accessory structures. 
(Code 1982, § Code 1982, § 15.05.010; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1389, § 4, 1994; Ord. 
No. 1631, § 6, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.050. - International Existing Building Code. 
    The International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2009 edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.171 (or 
successor provision) is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification under section 10.02.010. 
The International Existing Building Code may be used as an alternate prescriptive method for the 
remodel, repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing building. 
(Ord. No. 1631, § 7, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.060. - International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.173 (or successor 
provision) and as published by the international code council, is hereby adopted subject to amendment or 
modification under section 10.02.010. The International Fuel Gas Code is a nationally recognized model 
code setting forth minimum standards and requirements for certain mechanical installations. 
(Ord. No. 1631, § 8, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.070. - International Mechanical Code. 
A. ?Adopted. The International Mechanical Code, (ICC version) 2009 Edition as provided by ARM 
24.301.172 (or successor provision) is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification under 
section 10.02.010. The International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, 
is a nationally recognized model code setting forth minimum standards and requirements for certain 
mechanical installations. 
B. ?Amendments and additions. The following is added to the most current adopted International 
Mechanical Code: 
1. ?LPG appliances may be installed in single-family dwellings not withstanding the prohibition on 
the installation of such appliances by the UMC and the UPC provided: 
a. ?All LPG piping is pressure tested to insure it is gastight and not installed in concealed 
locations. Concealed LPG piping means piping and fittings which, when in place in the 
finished buildings, would require removal of permanent construction to gain access to the 
piping. Piping may be installed in an attic, under floor area, including basement or crawl 
space, provided this area is adequately ventilated from at least two exposed sides of the 
building. Each ventilation opening shall be a minimum of 36 square inches. 
b. ?The appliance is vented-type, approved by a nationally recognized testing organization, 
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c. ?Automatically controlled LPG appliances shall be of the complete shut off type. Complete 
(100 percent) shut off means the gas to both the pilot light and the main gas burner will 
shut off in the event of pilot outage. 
d. ?A readily accessible and identified shut off valve controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas 
piping system shall be installed near the point of connection to the service piping supply 
connection of the LPG tank. The container service valve may be used for this purpose. 
e. ?The installer shall promptly report any accident/incident where LPG may have been a 
factor, or could become a contributing factor, to the building codes bureau by phone. If 
death or serious personal injury occurs or if property damage in excess of $500.00 results 
from any such accident/incident, a written report shall be prepared by the installer and 
presented to the bureau within 15 days of the accident/incident. 
f. ?An LPG detection/shut-off valve system shall be installed that sounds an alarm and shuts 
off the main gas supply in the event of the detection of LPG. The valve shall be solenoid 
type shut-off valve, held open when powered, and shall be located outside the building 
foundation. 
(Code 1982, § 15.12.010; Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 1288, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1350, §§ 
1, 2, 1992; Ord. No. 1389, § 8, 1994; Ord. No. 1631, § 10, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.080. - International Energy Conservation Code. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.161 (or 
successor provision) is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification by section 10.02.010. The 
International Energy Conservation Code is a nationally recognized model code for energy efficient 
construction of buildings. 
(Code 1982, § 15.14.010; Ord. No. 1304, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1389, § 9, 1994; Ord. No. 1631, § 
11, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.090. - Uniform Plumbing Code. 
A. ?Adopted. The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 edition as provided by ARM 24.301.301 (or successor 
provision), is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification by section 10.02.010. The 
purpose of this code is to provide minimum requirements and standards for plumbing installations for 
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Uniform Plumbing Code is a nationally 
recognized model code setting forth minimum standards and requirements for plumbing installations. 
B. ?Supplemental documents. To supplement the Uniform Plumbing Code, as modified by the state, the 
city adopts and incorporates by reference into the Bozeman Municipal Code the amendments as set 
forth in the Administrative Rules of Montana at section 24.301.301 et seq. (Building Codes, 
Subchapter 3, Plumbing Requirements). 
(Code 1982, § 15.16.010; Ord. No. 1260, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1351, § 
1, 1992; Ord. No. 1389, § 10, 1994; Ord. No. 1528, § 4, 2000; Ord. No. 1631, § 12, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.100. - Violation/penalty. 
    In addition to the provisions of any adopted model technical code, any person, firm or corporation, 
their agents or servants, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of a building 
permit, or the provisions of any model technical code adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed 
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in any sum not 
exceeding $500.00 and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses of the case. A separate offense shall 
be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2002 , § 3, 3-26-2018) 


Secs. 10.02.110—10.02.240. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL CODE 


Sec. 10.02.250. - National Electrical Code. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.401 (or successor 
provision), is hereby adopted subject to amendment or modification under section 10.02.010. The 
National Electrical Code is a nationally recognized model code setting forth minimum standards and 
requirements for electrical installations. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.010; Ord. No. 1084, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1167, 1984; Ord. No. 1259, § 1, 
1988; Ord. No. 1286, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1389, § 7, 1994; Ord. No. 1631, § 9, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.02.260. - Municipality and city defined. 
    Whenever the words "municipality" or "city" are used in the code adopted by this article, they shall 
mean the City of Bozeman. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.020; Ord. No. 1084, § 2, 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.270. - Electrical inspector defined. 
    The office of the electrical inspector shall be made a part of the department of public safety and the 
electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city manager. Whenever the term "electrical inspector" is 
used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the electrical inspector or the 
electrical inspector's authorized representative. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.030; Ord. No. 1084, § 3, 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.280. - Permit—Required. 
    No alteration shall be made in the existing wiring of any building, nor shall any building be wired for 
the placing of any electrical current, nor shall any alterations be made in the wiring in any building after 
inspection, without first notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit therefor. Where work for 
which a permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permits, the 
fees specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such fee shall not relieve any person from fully 
complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work, nor from the other penalties 
prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.040; Ord. No. 1084, § 4(a), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.290. - Same—Plans required with application. 
    Accompanying the application for permit, there shall be filed with the inspector plans of the work to 
be undertaken on all nonresidential construction and, if deemed necessary by the electrical inspector, 
plans may be required for residence-type work. The above-mentioned plans shall show the character and 
precise location of the premises. The permit shall not be held to allow cutting of any structural features of 
any buildings. The permit shall cover the work set forth in the plans only, and if additional work is to be 
undertaken, a new permit to cover such additional work shall be secured in the usual manner. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.060; Ord. No. 1084, § 4(c), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.300. - Contractor's bond requirements. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in installing, repairing, or altering electrical wiring or 
conductors within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of transmitting electrical energy for light, 
heat or power, excluding any public electric utility, without first filing a $5,000.00 bond, and conditioned 
that the person, firm or corporation will in good faith perform all of the things required by the ordinances of 
the city, and that if any injury to any person or damage to any property results by reason of the person's, 
firm's or corporation's failure or neglect to conform with any ordinance relating to the installation of electric 
wiring and equipment, the person, firm or corporation shall save harmless and indemnify such person 
injured or the owner of such property damaged. Said bond shall be filed in the office of the building official 
for approval. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.070; Ord. No. 1084, § 7(part), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.310. - Wiring—Home owner rights and restrictions. 
    If an owner desires to do wiring in the owner's own home (single-family residence), the owner may 
do so without a license, but the owner must first obtain a permit required by this article; provided, 
however, the electrical inspector may refuse to issue a permit to any person who, in the electrical 
inspector's estimation, is not competent to install the electrical work in accordance with the regulations of 
this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.080; Ord. No. 1084, § 7(part), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.320. - Same—Sign company restrictions. 
    Sign companies shall be permitted to do wiring in signs and outline lighting on the secondary side of 
the transformers only. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.090; Ord. No. 1084, § 7(part), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.330. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The electrical inspector and assistants shall carry proper credentials of their respective offices, upon 
exhibition of which they shall have the right of entry, during usual business hours, to inspect any and all 
building and premises in the performance of their duties. However, should the owner or occupant 
disapprove entry, the inspector shall produce a search warrant signed by the proper authority. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.120; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(a), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.340. - Discontinuance of service; conditions; electrical inspector authority. 
    The electrical inspector shall have supervision over all wires, materials, apparatus and fittings used 
for the transmission, distribution or consumption of electrical current for light, heat or power, or for any 
other purposes, whether new or old; and whenever any such wires, materials, apparatus or 
appurtenances are, or may become, dangerous to life or property, or liable to cause fire, accident or 
injury, the electrical inspector is empowered to order the owner, agent or user to remove or repair such 
within 48 hours after receipt of the notice. In case the order is not complied with, the electrical inspector 
shall order the current to be disconnected from the installation or the part of it which is considered 
hazardous, and all owners, agents, users, light and power companies and others shall not have the 
current or circuit connected again until the electrical inspector has given a written permit to do so. All 
firms, corporations or individuals, whether operating under a regular franchise granted by the city or not, 
shall, upon written notice from the electrical inspector, disconnect from any building the service on any 
circuit as designated by the notice, and shall not reconnect the building service or circuit, except upon 
written notice from the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.130; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(b), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.350. - Inspection requirements for completed work. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring or alterations or additions to the wiring of any building, it shall be 
the duty of the person, firm or corporation installing the same to notify the electrical inspector, who shall 
inspect the installation within 24 hours of the time such notice is given, Sundays and holidays excepted, 
and if it is found to be fully in compliance with this article and does not constitute a hazard to life and 
property, the electrical inspector will authorize connection to the electrical service and the turning on of 
the current; provided however, that the inspector may give temporary permission to furnish electric 
current to or the use of the electric current, through any wires, or other equipment for a length of time not 
exceeding 30 days, if it appears that such wires, etc., may be used safely and that there exists an urgent 
necessity for such use and special permission. All wires that are to be hidden from view shall be 
inspected before concealment and any person, firm or corporation installing such wires shall notify the 
electrical inspector, giving the inspector 24 hours in which to make the required inspection before such 
wires are concealed; provided, that on large installations where concealment of parts of the wiring 
proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring shall give the electrical 
inspector due notice and inspection shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.140; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(c), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.360. - Reinspection and correction of installations. 
    When considered advisable by the electrical inspector or upon request by the fire chief, light and 
power company or the owner or tenant of any building, the electrical inspector shall make a thorough 
reinspection of the installation in any buildings of all electric wiring, electrical devices and electrical 
material now installed or that may hereafter be installed within the city. When the installation of any such 
wiring, devices or materials is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm or 
corporation owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or 
changes required to place such wiring, devices and materials in a safe condition and have such work 
completed within four days, or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector in said notice. The 
electrical inspector is empowered to order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, devices 
or materials so found to be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring, devices and material 
has been made safe as directed by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.150; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(d), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.370. - Approval; conformity with specifications required. 
    No inspection shall be approved unless the electrical light, power and heating installations are in 
strict conformity with the provisions of this article, the statutes of the state, and the National Electrical 
Code as adopted in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.160; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(e), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.380. - Condemnation of installation; petition for review. 
    When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation, the owner may, within 
five days after receiving written notice from the electrical inspector, file a petition in writing for review of 
said action of the electrical inspector with the board of appeals, who shall refer the petition to a board of 
three competent parties to be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city commission, upon 
receipt of which the board shall at once proceed to determine whether said electrical installation complies 
with this article, and within three days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings, which shall 
be returned to the city clerk for action. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.170; Ord. No. 1084, § 5(f), 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.390. - Connections unlawful until wiring approved. 
    It is unlawful for any electric utility to make any electrical connections to any building or premises 
until the wiring has been approved by the electrical inspector; provided, however, special permission may 
be given to the utility to make a temporary connection and use portions of the wiring in a building during 
construction, if it appears that this can be safely done and there exists an urgent necessity for such use 
and for such special permission. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.180; Ord. No. 1084, § 6, 1981) 


Sec. 10.02.400. - Liability limitations. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from, or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party 
owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, electric devices or electrical material for 
damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city or the inspector be held 
as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article, or certificate of 
inspection issued as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.08.190; Ord. No. 1084, § 10, 1981) 


ARTICLE 3. - BUILDING MOVING CODE 


Sec. 10.03.010. - Title for citation. 
    This article shall be known as the "Moving Code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to 
herein as "this article." 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.010; Ord. No. 1631, § 13, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.020. - Purpose of article provisions; certain buildings exempt. 
A. ?Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, safety, 
health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the moving or relocating of buildings 
and structures over, along or across highways, streets and alleys in the city. 
B. ?Exception. Buildings or structures less than 250 cubic feet in size shall be exempt from the 
provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.020; Ord. No. 1631, § 14, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.030. - Enforcement authority. 
    The building official or designee is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.040; Ord. No. 1631, § 16, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.040. - Building mover—License and insurance required. 
A. ?Any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business of moving or relocating buildings or 
structures within, without or into the corporate city limits shall first obtain a building mover's license in 
accordance with chapter 12, article 2. This license is not transferable or assignable to other persons, 
firms or corporations. 
B. ?Any person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of moving or relocating buildings or 
structures within, without or into the corporate city limits shall first provide proof of general liability 
insurance in an amount acceptable to the city; and which includes the city as an additional insured. 
C. ?A copy of the insurance policy shall be filed with the building division and shall release, defend, 
indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents and assigns from and against 
any and all actions, claims, liabilities, demands or assertions of liability, causes of action, losses, 
costs and expenses including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, involving or relating to 
any harm, injury or damage, suffered or sustained which in any manner may arise or be alleged to 
have arisen, or resulted or alleged to have resulted from the movement of the building or structure. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.050; Ord. No. 1631, § 17, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.050. - Same—Bond or cash deposit required. 
A. ?Bond. An applicant for a building mover's license shall file with the building division a bond of 
$2,000.00, conditioned that the applicant will in good faith perform all work required by this article 
and other applicable city codes, and shall release, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its 
officers, employees, agents and assigns from and against any and all actions, claims, liabilities, 
demands or assertions of liability, causes of action, losses, costs and expenses including, but not 
limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, involving or relating to any harm, injury or damage, suffered or 
sustained which in any manner may arise or be alleged to have arisen, or resulted or alleged to have 
resulted from the work authorized to be done pursuant to this article. This bond must be filed with the 
building division and must be approved by the city attorney. 
B. ?Cash deposit in lieu of bond. Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu of the bond 
required in subsection A of this section, file with the building division a cash deposit in the sum of 20 
times the permit fee as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain by reason of 
damage or injury to any highway, street, or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the city, 
which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building or structure over, along or 
across any street in the city and to indemnify the city against any claim of damages to persons or 
private property, and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by or 
incidental to the moving of any building or structure over, along or across any street in the city. In no 
case is the cash deposit herein required to be more than $2,000.00. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.060; Ord. No. 1631, § 18, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.060. - Moving permit—Required. 
    No building or structure shall be moved, removed or relocated within, without or into the city without 
first having obtained a moving permit from the building division. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.070; Ord. No. 1631, § 19, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.070. - Same—Application. 
A. ?Any person, firm or corporation seeking issuance of a permit under this article shall file an 
application for such permit with the building division. 
B. ?All applications for moving, removing or relocating of any buildings or structures in the city shall be 
made to the building division in writing upon forms furnished by the building division, and shall set 
forth the following information: 
1. ?Address of present location; 
2. ?Address of new location; 
3. ?Type of construction (frame, masonry, masonry veneer, etc.); 
4. ?Length, width and height of building or structure; 
5. ?Specific route over which the building or structure is to be moved including identification of any 
hazards along the route and description of actions to be taken to address the hazard; 
6. ?Type of occupancy (dwelling, garage, office, etc.) for both old and new location; 
7. ?Proposed moving date and time of day; 
8. ?Any additional information which the building official or designee finds necessary to make a fair 
determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.080; Ord. No. 1631, § 20, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.080. - Same—Contents. 
    The permit required by this article shall state the name of the person, firm or corporation authorized 
to move the structure, shall describe the location from which and the location to which the structure is to 
be moved, and the route to be followed. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.090; Ord. No. 1631, § 21, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.090. - Same—Issuance authorized when. 
    If the applicant for a permit under this article is qualified and has the license, insurance and bond 
required elsewhere in this code and, in the judgment of the building official, the building or structure can 
be moved as contemplated, the building division shall issue a permit for the moving, except as provided in 
section 10.03.110. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.100; Ord. No. 1631, § 22, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.100. - Same—Fee. 
A. ?The fee for a moving permit shall be $86.00 per hour, or prorated portion thereof, necessary for the 
building official or designee to conduct an inspection. Additional costs, including mileage for travel 
outside the city limits, may be assessed. 
B. ?The base fee in subsection A of this section shall be modified in accordance with the following: 
1. ?If the moving distance is one-quarter mile or less, the fee shall be 25 percent of the base as 
determined in subsection A of this section; 
2. ?If the moving distance if over one-quarter mile but not more than one-half mile, the fee shall be 
50 percent of the base as determined in subsection A of this section; 
3. ?If the moving distance is over one-half mile but not more than three-quarters of a mile, the fee 
shall be 75 percent of the base as determined in subsection A of this section; 
4. ?If the moving distance is more than three-quarters of a mile, the fee shall be 100 percent of the 
base as determined in subsection A of this section. 
C. ?If the building or structure to be relocated presently lies outside the city limits, the applicant shall pay 
a mileage fee of ten cents per mile for each mile actually and necessarily traveled by the building 
official to make such inspection. Such fee shall be paid in advance, and shall be in addition to all 
other fees required by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.110; Ord. No. 1631, § 23, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.110. - Same—Issuance restrictions and moving conditions. 
A. ?The following restrictions and conditions must be observed before the issuance of a permit as 
required by this article: 
1. ?No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to move or relocate any building or 
structure upon another building site unless such use, building or proposed conversion thereof 
conforms to chapter 38, to include when applicable the final approval by the review authority 
specified in section 38.34.010, of a certificate of appropriateness, section 10.02.030, (the 
International Building Code), section 10.02.040, (the International Residential Code), section 
10.02.050 (the International Existing Building code) and all other pertinent portions of this Code. 
2. ?No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to move or relocate any building or 
structure which is: 
a. ?So constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous or unsafe; 
b. ?Infested with pests or is otherwise unsanitary; 
c. ?Or, if a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation; 
d. ?Or is so dilapidated, defective or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its 
relocation at the proposed site would create a safety or health hazard, or would cause 
substantial damage or material detriment to the property in the immediate vicinity of the 
proposed site. 
3. ?Every application must be accompanied by the written consent of the deputy police chief and 
fire department, who must be notified as to the route to be taken and the date of the move. 
4. ?The department of public works shall specify in the permit the route to be taken in the moving of 
a building or structure, such means to be used to prevent the street pavement from being 
subjected to abnormal stresses as may be deemed necessary by the city engineer, and the limit 
of time which such building or structure shall be upon the streets or alleys. 
5. ?No circuit or box of the city fire alarm shall be disturbed in any manner except with the 
permission of the fire department. 
6. ?No building or structure which is being moved upon or over any street, alley or property of the 
city shall be occupied as living quarters while such building or structure is in transit. 
7. ?No permit as required by this article shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the 
applicant has adequate machinery, appliances and equipment to safely complete the proposed 
move. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.120; Ord. No. 1631, § 24, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 1920 , § 2, 2-13-2017) 


Sec. 10.03.120. - Same—Responsibilities of permit holders. 
A. ?Every permittee under this article shall: 
1. ?Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit; 
2. ?Notify the building official in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed 
in the application; 
3. ?Notify the building official in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city 
within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred; 
4. ?Cause warning lights to be displayed during the hours of darkness on every side of the building, 
while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at 
all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the 
public from damage or injury by reason of the moving or removal of the building; 
5. ?Remove the building from the city streets after four days of such occupancy, unless an 
extension is granted by the chief building official; 
6. ?Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building 
site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition; 
7. ?Properly disconnect all utilities, plug the sanitary sewer with a concrete plug, and have the water 
department disconnect the water service. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.130; Ord. No. 1631, § 25, 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.03.130. - Same—Revocation conditions. 
    The building official is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit granted under the terms of 
this article if it becomes known to the building official that the permittee is in any manner failing to comply 
with the terms of this article, or when, in the opinion of the building official, public convenience and safety 
require such revocation. 
(Code 1982, § 15.20.140; Ord. No. 1631, § 26, 4-4-2005) 


ARTICLE 4. - DEMOLITION CODE 


Sec. 10.04.010. - Title for citation. 
    This article shall be known as the "Demolition Code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to 
herein as "this article." 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.010; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.010), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.020. - Purpose and scope of provisions. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and 
public welfare by regulating and controlling the methods and procedures for demolishing and disposing of 
buildings and structures. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.020; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.020), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.030. - Permit—License and insurance required. 
A. ?Any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business of building demolition within the 
corporate city limits shall first obtain a demolition permit from the building official. At the time of 
application for the permit, the applicant shall present proof of a valid city business license. 
B. ?Any person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of building demolition within the corporate 
city limits shall first provide proof of general liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city; 
and which includes the city as an additional insured. 
C. ?A copy of the insurance policy shall be filed with the building division and shall release, defend, 
indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents and assigns from and against 
any and all actions, claims, liabilities, demands or assertions of liability, causes of action, losses, 
costs and expenses including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, involving or relating to 
any harm, injury or damage, suffered or sustained which in any manner may arise or be alleged to 
have arisen, or resulted or alleged to have resulted from the movement of the building or structure. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.040; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.040), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.040. - Same—Issuance approved when. 
    If the applicant for a permit under this article is qualified and has the license and insurance, and has 
supplied the bond or cash equivalent as required elsewhere in this code, and in the judgment of the 
building official, the building or structure can be demolished as contemplated, the building division shall 
issue a permit for the demolition except as provided in section 10.04.050. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.050; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.050), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.050. - Same—Issuance restrictions. 
A. ?The following restrictions and conditions must be observed before the issuance of a permit as 
required by this article: 
1. ?No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to demolish any building or 
structure while any part thereof is occupied. 
2. ?No permit as required by this article shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the 
applicant has adequate machinery, appliances, and equipment to safely complete the proposed 
demolition and disposal. 
3. ?No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation to demolish any building or 
structure unless such demolition thereof conforms to chapter 38 to include when applicable the 
final approval by the review authority specified in section 38.34.010, of a certificate of 
appropriateness, the provisions of this article, and this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.060; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.060), 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 1920 , § 3, 2-13-
2017) 


Sec. 10.04.060. - Same—Fee schedule. 
    The applicant for a permit under this article shall pay a fee of $86.00 to the building division for the 
issuance of a demolition permit at the time of application. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.070; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.070), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.070. - Same—Responsibilities of permit holder. 
A. ?Every permittee under the article shall: 
1. ?Remove all rubbish and waste materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the site so 
that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition; 
2. ?Properly disconnect all utilities, plug the sanitary sewer with a concrete plug, and have the water 
department disconnect the water service; 
3. ?Notify the building official in writing of any and all damages to public or other property or 
persons within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.090; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.090), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.080. - Same—Performance bond requirements. 
    Every person, firm or corporation applying for a demolition permit shall file with the city a bond in the 
sum of $2,000.00, conditioned that the person, firm or corporation will in good faith perform all work 
required by the code and other applicable codes of the city, and shall release, defend, indemnify and hold 
harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents and assigns from and against any and all actions, 
claims, liabilities, demands or assertions of liability, causes of action, losses, costs and expenses 
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, involving or relating to any harm, injury or 
damage, suffered or sustained which in any manner may arise or be alleged to have arisen, or resulted or 
alleged to have resulted from the work authorized to be done pursuant to this article. Such bonds must be 
filed with the building division. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.100; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.100), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.090. - Same—Surety bond required when. 
A. ?Required. Every person, firm or corporation applying for a demolition permit shall file with the 
building division a surety bond, in the sum of 125 percent of the contract price issued by an 
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, to insure that all work is completed in a 
proper and safe manner and in accordance with all the provisions of this article. In no case shall the 
surety bond be less than $5,000.00. 
B. ?Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to single-family residences, garages, out-
buildings, or customary accessory buildings or structures. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.110; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.110), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.100. - Same—Revocation conditions. 
    The building official is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit granted under the terms of 
this article if it becomes known to said building official that the permittee is in any manner failing to comply 
with the terms of this article, or when, in the opinion of the building official, public convenience and safety 
require such revocation. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.130; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.130), 4-4-2005) 


Sec. 10.04.110. - Failure to complete demolition; work performed by city; costs. 
    If the permittee fails or refuses to complete the demolition authorized by this article within a 
reasonable period of time, and, after ten days' written notice having been given to the permittee and 
owner, the city may proceed to have the necessary work completed, and may recover the expense of 
such work from the surety bond required to be posted by section 10.04.090. The permittee shall be liable 
for any amounts not covered by the surety bond. 
(Code 1982, § 15.28.120; Ord. No. 1631, § 27(15.28.120), 4-4-2005) 


ARTICLE 5. - ADOPTED SAFETY CODE INSPECTIONS FOR BUSINESSES 


Sec. 10.05.010. - Inspection fees; exemptions. 
A. ?Every business and organization located in a building or office in the jurisdictional limits of the city 
shall pay to the city a reasonable inspection fee to ensure that the building or office complies with the 
adopted safety codes. 
B. ?In the enforcement of the adopted safety codes, the city commission by resolution shall periodically 
establish a reasonable inspection fee taking into account the actual costs to the city. 
C. ?Exemptions. Those businesses and organizations with a current Bozeman business license shall not 
be required to pay any additional adopted safety code inspection fee as the licensing fee included an 
amount for the safety code inspection. 
(Code 1982, § 5.64.010; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 1989) 


Sec. 10.05.020. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Buildings and offices" means all buildings, structures, rooms, offices, or portions thereof 
wherein a business or organization is located and which may be accessible to the public, 
employees, or members or located in such close proximity to other buildings, structures, rooms, 
offices, or portions thereof so as to constitute a public threat in the event of an adopted safety 
code violation. 
2. ?"Business or organization" means any occupation, trade, profession, commercial activity, social 
activity, fraternal activity or religious activity located or meeting regularly in buildings or offices; 
includes sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, nonprofit corporations, religious 
corporations, social organizations and fraternal organizations. 
3. ?"Adopted Safety Codes" means the most recent version of the following codes adopted by the 
city: 
a. ?International Fire Code; 
b. ?International Building Code; 
c. ?Uniform Plumbing Code; 
d. ?National Electrical Code; 
e. ?International Mechanical Code; 
f. ?International Residential Code. 
(Code 1982, § 5.64.020; Ord. No. 1292 § 2, 1989) 


ARTICLE 6. - EXCAVATIONS 


Sec. 10.06.010. - Permit required for all excavations. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, corporation and/or association to excavate on any lot, lots or 
parcels of ground within the corporate limits of the city without having first applied for and received a 
written permit to do so, issued and signed by the chief building official. 
(Code 1982, § 15.44.010) 


Sec. 10.06.020. - Excavation without permit deemed nuisance. 
    The excavation on any lot or parcel of ground within the city for which no permit has been procured 
as hereinafter provided is defined and declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 15.44.020) 


Sec. 10.06.030. - Permissible excavations described; permit issuance conditions. 
    The chief building official shall have no authority to issue a permit for any excavation below the grade 
established for sidewalks abutting any lot, lots or parcel of land within the area of any platted subdivision 
of the city, but this provision shall not be construed to prevent the chief building official and/or building 
inspector from granting a permit for such excavation in, and as a part of, a building and/or improvement 
permit for a basement, foundation or other excavation incidental to and a part of any building or other 
bona fide improvement to be made or erected upon any such lot, lots or parcel, of land within a platted 
subdivision. As to land within the corporate limits of the city not included within a platted subdivision, no 
excavation shall be made without a permit as herein provided, but the granting or withholding of such 
permit shall be within the sound and reasonable discretion of the chief building official, subject to review 
by the city commission at any regular meeting thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 15.44.030) 


Sec. 10.06.040. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person, persons, corporation and/or association and/or group of persons guilty of a violation of 
this article shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $300.00, and the person and/or persons directly 
engaged in making such unpermitted excavation and the person, persons, corporation and/or association 
under and by whose direction and/or authority such unpermitted excavation is made shall each and 
severally be deemed guilty of violating this article and subject to the penalty herein provided. If such fine 
is not paid, the person upon whom it is imposed shall serve it out in the city or county jail at the rate of 
one day for each $2.00 thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 15.44.040) 


ARTICLE 7. - BUILDING NUMBERS 


Sec. 10.07.010. - Purpose of article provisions. 
    In order to establish a uniform system of numbering houses, private, public or business, within the 
city, all houses, private, public or business, fronting on streets, avenues and public highways within the 
city shall be numbered as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.010) 


Sec. 10.07.020. - Official map adopted. 
    The map or plat heretofore prepared by the city engineer under the date of October 1919, 
designated as "Map of Bozeman, Montana, Showing House Numbering System," is hereby referred to 
and made a part of this article, and shall govern in all matters relating to the numbering of houses, 
private, public and business, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.020) 


Sec. 10.07.030. - Numbers assigned before 1920. 
    The numbers assigned before 1920 to houses, private, public or business, except as provided in this 
article, shall remain the numbers of such houses, respectively, until otherwise changed by the 
commission. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.030) 


Sec. 10.07.040. - Numbering buildings required. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of every house, private, 
public or business, in the city, to number it as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.040) 


Sec. 10.07.050. - City engineer to assign numbers. 
    The city engineer shall assign to each house, private, public or business, in the city, its proper 
number, and upon application shall deliver, free of charge, to the owner or occupant thereof, a certificate 
designating the number. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.050) 


Sec. 10.07.060. - Numbering system described; base lines. 
A. ?All streets and avenues running north and south shall be numbered from Main Street as a base or 
division line and shall be numbered north and south therefrom. All streets running east and west 
shall be numbered from Tracy Avenue as a base or division line and shall be numbered east and 
west therefrom. The initial number in each instance shall be zero. 
B. ?One hundred numbers shall be assigned to the houses, private, public or business, on any street or 
avenue in any block. On both sides of Main, Babcock and Mendenhall Streets, between Wallace 
Avenue and Third Avenue, one number shall be given for every 15 feet fronting on said streets. On 
both sides of Wallace Avenue, Church Avenue, Rouse Avenue, Bozeman Avenue, Black Avenue, 
Tracy Avenue, Central Avenue, Grand Avenue and Third Avenue, between Babcock Street and 
Mendenhall Street, one number shall be given for each 15 feet fronting thereon. On both sides of all 
other streets and avenues, or parts of streets and avenues, one number shall be given for each 25 
feet fronting thereon. 
C. ?Houses, private, public or business, on the north and west sides of streets and avenues shall be 
given odd numbers, and houses, private, public or business, on the south and east sides of streets 
and avenues shall be given even numbers. 
D. ?In numbering, only full blocks shall be given one hundred numbers; blocks approximately double the 
ordinary frontage shall be given two hundred numbers. Across all undivided tracts of land intervening 
between portions laid out into blocks, the lines of all streets or avenues shall be considered to cross 
in regular continuation of streets in additions adjoining. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.060) 


Sec. 10.07.070. - Affixing numbers to buildings; owner or occupant responsibility. 
    It is the duty of every owner or occupant of every house, private, public or business, and the agents 
of such owners of such houses upon all streets and avenues of the city to number buildings in 
accordance with the provisions of this article, and it is unlawful for any such owner, occupant or agent to 
retain or use, or permit to remain upon any such house, any other number than the number designated by 
this article for such house. It shall be the duty of every such owner, occupant or agent, upon notice from 
the city engineer, to cause the official number to be placed upon every house so owned or occupied by 
such owner or occupant, or for which such agency may exist, such numbering to be done in the manner 
provided in this article within 30 days after service of such notice. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.070) 


Sec. 10.07.080. - Style and location of numbers. 
    All numbers shall be of some metallic substance, or porcelain, or may consist of gilt lettering on the 
inside of a glass transom or door, and shall be distinctly legible and at least three inches high, and all 
such metal or porcelain figures or lettering shall be in a conspicuous place where the number can be 
easily seen from the middle of the street. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.080) 


Sec. 10.07.090. - Alley numbering system. 
    Every alley running east and west shall take the number of the street south of it, and every alley 
running north and south shall take the name of the street or avenue east of it. All alleys shall take the 
same numbers as the streets or avenues from which they are named, the even numbers being on the 
south and east sides and the odd numbers being on the north and west sides thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.090) 


Sec. 10.07.100. - Numbers procured by city. 
    The city engineer shall, and it is the engineer's duty to arrange with some business house in the city 
to procure a supply of standard figures to number houses as provided in this article, and thereafter keep 
on hand a sufficient supply therefor, which numbers shall be furnished to owners, occupants and agents 
of houses at a minimum and standard price therefor. 
(Code 1982, § 12.08.100) 


ARTICLE 8. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1922, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2015 , repealed art. 8, §§ 10.08.010—10.08.120, 
which pertained to workforce housing and derived from Ord. No. 1710, § 2(17.02.010, 17.02.030—
17.02.110), adopted July 16, 2007; Ord. No. 1714, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2007; and Ord. No. 1814, §§ 1, 
2, adopted Aug. 1, 2011. 
Cross reference— Affordable housing, § 38.43.010 et seq. 


Secs. 10.08.010—10.08.120. - Reserved. 


Chapter 12 - BUSINESS LICENSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Trade and commerce, MCA 30-1-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 12.01.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and other related regulations in 
this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly 
indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Business" is meant to include all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, 
establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, 
vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit, or 
benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, not exempted by state law or 
this chapter. 
2. ?"Electronic amusement games" means any electronic game or mechanical device operated for 
the sole purpose of amusement of the patrons. 
3. ?"Going out of business sale" means a sale held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the 
public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock on hand, the business will cease and be 
discontinued. Going out of business sales shall be strictly limited to stock on hand at the 
commencement of the sale. 
4. ?"Home-based business" has the meaning ascribed to it in section 38.42.1380. 
5. ?"Itinerant vendor" means any person engaged or employed in the business of selling to 
consumers by going from consumer to consumer, either on the streets or to their places of 
residence or employment and soliciting, selling or taking orders for future delivery of any goods, 
wares, or merchandise or for services to be performed in the future. 
6. ?"License" means the authority, necessary from the city, granted the person to whom it is issued 
to engage in a specific business or occupation. 
7. ?"Marijuana" and "usable marijuana" have the meanings as defined in the Montana Marijuana 
Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.). 
8. ?"Marijuana" means the uses of marijuana as authorized pursuant to and defined in the Montana 
Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.). 
9. ?"Nonprofit organization" means any group which does not distribute pecuniary gains, profits or 
dividends, and pecuniary gains are not the objective of the organization. Nonprofit organizations 
or groups must be recognized as such by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the 
state department of revenue. 
10. ?"Person" means and includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, 
associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; or any officers, agents, employees, factors, 
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for 
themselves, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
11. ?"Property manager" means a person which rents or leases rental units and does not include 
hotels or motels. 
12. ?"Square footage" means the total number of square feet contained within the exterior walls of a 
building, used in the business operation and open to the public. 
13. ?"Temporary premises" means any hotel, motel, roominghouse, storeroom, building, or any part 
of any building whatsoever, tent, vacant lot, freight station, car or truck, temporarily occupied for 
the business defined above. Temporary premises does not include sales booths, concession 
stands, etc. which are operated in conjunction with a community sponsored event authorized by 
the city commission. 
14. ?"Transient merchant" means any person who brings into temporary premises into the city a 
stock of goods, wares or articles of merchandise or notions or other articles of trade, and who 
solicits, sells or offers to sell, or exhibits for sale, such stock of goods, wares or articles of 
merchandise or notions or other articles of trade is within the meaning of this chapter a 
"transient merchant," and such definition shall continue to apply until such person is 
continuously engaged at such temporary premises for a period of one year. 
(Code 1982, §§ 5.02.010, 5.02.020, 5.02.050—5.02.150; Ord. No. 1273, § 3(A), (D)—(N), 1988; 
Ord. No. 1786, § 1(5.02.100, 5.02.110), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 3, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 
1974 , § 2, 9-11-2017, eff. 12-1-2017) 


ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 12.02.010. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or to use in 
connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine, device, employee, or agent in whole or in part, for 
which a license, or permit, is required by any law or ordinance of this city, without a license, or permit 
being first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this chapter or other law or 
ordinance of this city; nor shall the issuance of a license entitle or authorize the applicant to open or 
maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter or law. In addition to the provisions of this 
chapter, "mobile vendors" as defined in section 28.03.030 are subject to the provisions of chapter 28, 
article 3. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.010; Ord. No. 1273, § 4(A), 1988; Ord. No. 1950 , § 3, 3-20-2017) 


Sec. 12.02.020. - Separate license for branch establishments. 
    A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or 
location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate 
business; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a 
business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of 
business or branch establishments. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.020; Ord. No. 1273, § 4(B), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 1, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.030. - Joint license. 
    A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain 
separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses but shall be issued a single license if the 
requirements of this chapter are met. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.030; Ord. No. 1273, § 4(C), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 2, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.040. - Exemptions. 
A. ?No license shall be required of any person or entity for any mere delivery in the city of any property 
purchased or acquired in good faith from such person or entity as the person or entity's regular place 
of business outside the city where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions 
this chapter. 
B. ?No license shall be required of any nonprofit organization as defined by this chapter. 
C. ?No license shall be required of any person under 18 years of age. 
D. ?No license shall be required for any property manager managing or renting less than three dwelling 
units as defined in section 38.42.940. 
E. ?No license shall be required for short term rentals as defined in section 38.42.2835. 
F. ?The exemptions listed in subsections A, B, C, D and E of this section do not apply to a transaction, 
use, or business involving marijuana. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.040; Ord. No. 1273, § 4(D—G), 1988; Ord. No. 1786, § 2, 7-26-2010; Ord. 
No. 1869 , § 3, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1974 , § 3, 9-11-2017, eff. 12-1-2017) 


Sec. 12.02.050. - Administrative duties. 
A. ?The city manager or the person appointed by the city manager as the administrator of the business 
license program ("program administrator") shall collect all license fees and shall issue license and 
renewals thereof in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter 
and shall have the power to: 
1. ?Make rules. The program administrator shall promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and 
regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter. All rules are subject to 
commission review and modification. 
2. ?Adopt forms. The program administrator shall adopt all forms and prescribe the information to 
be given therein as to character and other relevant matter for all necessary papers. 
3. ?Obtain endorsement. The program administrator shall submit all applications to interested city 
officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with all city 
regulations which they have the duty of enforcing. 
4. ?Investigate. The program administrator shall investigate and determine the eligibility of any 
applicant for a license as prescribed herein. 
5. ?Examine records. The program administrator shall examine the books and records of any 
applicant of licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this 
chapter. 
6. ?Give notice. The program administrator shall notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection 
of the application and shall, upon the program administrator's refusal of any license or permit, at 
the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
New applicants will be notified within seven working days. 
7. ?Register of licenses. The program administrator shall maintain at all times a license register, in 
which shall be entered the full name of each licensee, the address at which such business is 
conducted, the date of the issuance, the purpose for which the license is issued, the amount 
paid therefor, the telephone and address of the applicant, and the time such license will 
continue in force. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.050; Ord. No. 1273, § 5, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 3, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.060. - Formal application required. 
A. ?Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city 
shall submit an application for such license to the city. The application requirements are as follows: 
1. ?Form of application. The application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the 
city. 
2. ?Contents of application. The applicant is required to disclose all information necessary to 
comply with this chapter and of any other information which the program administrator shall find 
to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
3. ?Compliance with laws and regulations. Issuance of a business license is contingent upon a 
business being in compliance with all applicable zoning, building and fire codes and other laws 
and regulations which protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the community. 
4. ?Payment of fees. The application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the fees 
chargeable for such license. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.060; Ord. No. 1273, § 6(A), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 4, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.070. - Change of location. 
A. ?A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed business; provided that the 
licensee shall comply with zoning, building, engineering and fire regulations. A licensee shall: 
1. ?Obtain a new license for such change of location; 
2. ?Pay a new special services and regulatory inspection fee. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.070; Ord. No. 1273, § 6(B), 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.080. - Transfer of license. 
A. ?A licensee hereunder shall have the right to transfer the licensee's license to another person 
provided the licensee shall: 
1. ?Execute the transfer in the form and under the conditions required by law and as prescribed by 
the director of administrative services; 
2. ?Promptly report the completed act of transfer to the city; 
3. ?Upon the completion of a transfer of license in compliance with this section, be issued a new 
license to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old license; 
4. ?Pay the required fee. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.080; Ord. No. 1273, § 6(C), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 5, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.090. - Contents of license; information required. 
A. ?Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following: 
1. ?The name, address, and telephone number of the licensee and any other name under which 
such business is to be conducted; 
2. ?The type and address of each business so licensed; 
3. ?The amount of license fee therefor; 
4. ?The dates of issuance and expiration thereof; 
5. ?Approval of the various regulatory departments of the city; 
6. ?Such other information as the program administrator shall determine. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.090; Ord. No. 1273, § 10, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 6, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.100. - Expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for one year from the month in which such 
license is issued. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.100; Ord. No. 1273, § 8(A), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 7, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.110. - License renewal. 
    Every person licensed to engage in any business covered by this chapter, if such business is to be 
continued, shall renew such license annually. It is the licensee's responsibility to renew the business 
license on time even if a courtesy reminder notice is not received by licensee. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.110; Ord. No. 1273, § 8(B), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 8, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.120. - Noncompliance; penalty. 
    Failure of a business to either obtain a new business license or to renew a business license as 
required by this chapter will result in a delinquent charge as established by resolution of the city 
commission. Failure to renew a business license as required by this chapter may result in suspension 
and/or revocation of the license pursuant to section 12.02.170.A. Violations of this chapter may result in 
civil suit to recover unpaid fees and/or criminal prosecution pursuant to sections 12.02.210, 12.02.220, 
and 1.01.210. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.120; Ord. No. 1273, § 9, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 9, 5-9-2016; Ord. No. 2001 , 
§ 2, 4-9-2018) 


Sec. 12.02.130. - Duties of licensee. 
A. ?General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this chapter shall: 
1. ?Permit all reasonable inspections of the licensee's business by public authorities so authorized 
by law; 
2. ?Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed 
business; 
3. ?Avoid all illegal, forbidden, improper or unnecessary activities, practices or conditions which do 
or may affect the public health, safety, or welfare; 
4. ?Refrain from operating the licensed business on premises after expiration of the license and 
during the period the license is revoked or suspended. 
B. ?Display of license. Every licensee under this chapter shall post and maintain such license upon the 
licensed premises in a place where it may be seen at all times by the public. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.130; Ord. No. 1273, § 11, 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.140. - Inspections; persons authorized. 
A. ?The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed herein: 
1. ?Program administrator. The program administrator shall make all investigations reasonably 
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
2. ?City officers. All police, fire, building inspectors, city engineers, zoning officials, and other 
officials designated by the city manager, shall inspect and examine businesses located within 
their respective jurisdictions to enforce compliance with the chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.140; Ord. No. 1273, § 13(A), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 10, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.150. - Authority of inspectors. 
A. ?All persons authorized herein to inspect licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, 
with or without search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises: 
1. ?Those for which a license is required; 
2. ?Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspection, are operating under 
such license; 
3. ?Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.150; Ord. No. 1273, § 13(B), 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.160. - Reports by inspectors. 
    Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses, or premises as herein authorized shall report all 
violations of this chapter or of other laws or ordinances to the city attorney and shall submit such other 
reports as the city attorney shall order. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.160; Ord. No. 1273, § 13(C), 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.170. - License revocation/suspension—Generally. 
A. ?The city manager may suspend or revoke a license when the licensee commits one or more of the 
following acts or omissions: 
1. ?The violation of any provision of this chapter; 
2. ?The violation of any ordinances provisions relating to the health, safety and welfare of the 
citizens of the community; or 
3. ?The securing of any license by fraud or misrepresentation, to specifically include false or 
incorrect information on the license application. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.170; Ord. No. 1273, § 14, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 11, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.180. - Same—Procedure. 
A. ?When any of the acts or omissions as herein enumerated are committed by a licensee and the 
license is suspended or revoked, the procedure shall be as follows: 
1. ?The licensee shall be notified in writing by the program administrator at least seven days prior to 
the action contemplated and the reasons therefor. 
2. ?Upon receipt of the notice, the licensee may request a hearing with the city manager. Such 
request shall be in writing and shall be received by the program administrator within seven days 
of the receipt of notice. Failure on the part of the licensee to request a hearing in writing and 
within the specified time period shall be deemed a waiver of the licensee's right to a hearing. 
3. ?If a hearing is requested by the licensee, the city manager shall set a time, date and place and 
shall so notify the licensee, in writing. 
4. ?When a hearing is conducted, the licensee and other interested parties may be in attendance. 
The city shall present the evidence supporting the contemplated action. The licensee may 
present evidence. The city manager shall take all evidence admitted under advisement and 
once a decision has been made, the city manager shall notify the licensee of the findings and 
rule in writing. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.180; Ord. No. 1273, § 15, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 12, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.190. - Appeal. 
A. ?Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager shall have the right of 
appeal to the city commission by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within 20 days following the 
effective date of the action taken or the decision made. 
B. ?Contents of appeal. Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed and shall 
include a statement of the facts relied upon to avoid such action taken or decision made. 
C. ?Notification of city manager. At the time of filing any such appeal a copy thereof shall be filed by the 
appellant with the city manager. 
D. ?Hearing. The city commission shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall personally 
serve a written notice, as provided herein, upon the appellant informing the appellant thereof. The 
city commission shall also give such notice to the city manager and such officer shall be entitled to 
appear and defend such action taken or decision made. 
E. ?Effect of decision. The findings of the city commission shall be final and conclusive and shall be 
personally served upon the appellant as required herein. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.190; Ord. No. 1273, § 16, 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 13, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.200. - Unpaid fee constitutes debt. 
    The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required hereunder, shall constitute a debt 
due the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.200; Ord. No. 1273, § 17(A), 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.210. - Action by city attorney. 
    The city attorney may institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid fee. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.210; Ord. No. 1273, § 17 (B), 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.220. - Civil judgment no bar. 
    No civil judgment, or any act by the city attorney, the city manager, the program administrator or the 
violator shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.220; Ord. No. 1273, § 17(C), 1988; Ord. No. 1948 , § 14, 5-9-2016) 


Sec. 12.02.230. - Interstate commerce. 
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to operate so as to interfere with the power of the Congress of the 
United States to regulate the commerce between the states. 
(Code 1982, § 5.04.230; Ord. No. 1273, § 18, 1988) 


Sec. 12.02.240. - Compliance regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a 
written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the director 
of administrative services, who shall make, or cause to be made, a complete investigation of the 
allegations and take the appropriate action as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 5.68.010; Ord. No. 1117, § 16, 1982) 


ARTICLE 3. - LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE 


Sec. 12.03.010. - Business license fees. 
    All business license fees are based on the costs of administering this chapter and the regulatory 
costs incurred. The fee schedule shall be approved by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 5.05.010; Ord. No. 1273, § 7(A), 1988; Ord. No. 1786, § 3, 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 
1869 , § 3, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1948 , § 15, 5-9-2016; Ord. No. 2001 , § 3, 4-9-2018) 


Sec. 12.03.020. - Allocation of fees. 
    All fees collected under this chapter shall be deposited by the city treasurer in the city's general fund 
and be used to support the various departments, divisions, and activities of the city which provide 
regulation and to recover the costs of the administering of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 5.05.020; Ord. No. 1273, § 7(B), 1988) 


Sec. 12.03.030. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1948 , § 16, adopted May 9, 2016, repealed § 12.03.030 which 
pertained to a prorated fee for new general businesses and derived from § 5.05.030 of the 1982 
Code, and Ord. No. 1273, § 7(C), adopted in 1988. 


Sec. 12.03.040. - Rebate of fee; general prohibition. 
    No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason of the nonuse of such 
license or by reason of a change of location or business rendering the use of such license ineffective. 
(Code 1982, § 5.05.040; Ord. No. 1273, § 7(D), 1988) 


Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemetery services, MCA 7-35-2131 et seq.; cemetery associations, MCA 35-20-
101 et seq.; mausoleum-columbarium authorities, MCA 35-21-101 et seq. 


Sec. 14.01.010. - Authority. 
A. ?Pursuant to the provisions of MCA 7-35-4101, the city has established a municipal cemetery known 
as the "Sunset Hills Cemetery." 
B. ?It is unlawful for any person, association or corporation to bury or inter, or cause to be buried or 
interred, the dead body of any person in any place in the city, or to maintain a cemetery within the 
limits of the city, or within three miles of the limits of the city, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.010; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.020. - Cemetery land. 
    Sunset Hills Cemetery shall be comprised of all those lots, blocks and parcels of land heretofore 
conveyed to the city for cemetery purposes, as recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder of the 
county, together with such land hereafter conveyed and recorded for that purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.020; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.030. - Management; enforcement authority. 
    The management, maintenance and control of the Sunset Hills Cemetery shall be under the direct 
control and supervision of the city manager. It shall be the city manager's duty to enforce all rules, 
regulations and ordinances promulgated by the cemetery board and adopted by the city commission for 
the administration of the cemetery. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.040; Ord. No. 1200, 1986; Ord. No. 1643, § 6, 7-18-2005) 


Sec. 14.01.040. - Sale of lots. 
A. ?All ground within the Sunset Hills Cemetery, as now created or hereinafter added to, as platted or as 
hereinafter platted, shall be sold for burial purposes only, and such sale shall be made subject to the 
rules and regulations promulgated by the cemetery board and adopted by the city commission. The 
director of administrative services shall sell lots at the prices fixed by the city commission, giving to 
the purchaser a deed receipt therefor, showing the amount paid and a description of the lots sold. 
Said deed form and sale price of the lots shall be as recommended by the cemetery board and 
approved in resolution form by the city commission. The purchase price for the lots and the 
maintenance fee for same, as required in subsection B of this section, are due and payable before a 
deed receipt can be issued. 
B. ?The purchaser may enter into a sale/purchase agreement with the city for a cemetery lot or lots with 
the following stipulations: 
1. ?The total purchase price shall be the same as in subsection A of this section. 
2. ?A down payment in the amount of one-third shall be paid at the time of the execution of the 
agreement. 
3. ?The balance of the total purchase price shall be paid on or before one year from date of 
execution of the agreement. An administrative charge of $1.00 per month shall be assessed, 
regardless of the amount due, until the full purchase price has been paid. 
4. ?Upon final payment, as per the agreement, a deed receipt shall be issued by the director of 
administrative services in the same manner as provided for in subsection A of this section, but 
in no case shall the lot or lots be used for purposes of interment until the full purchase price has 
been paid. 
5. ?In the event that the purchaser fails to pay the balance within one year from date of execution of 
the agreement, the purchaser shall lose the down payment and forfeit all rights, title and interest 
in and to said lots and the same shall revert to the city. 
6. ?The above agreement may be revoked by the purchaser for good cause (i.e., leaving the state, 
etc.), upon notification to the director of administrative services of same. The down payment 
shall be refunded, less the administrative charge as listed in subsection B.3 of this section. 
The sale/purchase agreement shall be promulgated by the director of administrative services and 
approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.050; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.050. - Transfer of lots. 
A. ?No lot sold by the director of administrative services shall be sold or transferred by the purchaser to 
any person whomsoever except as follows: 
1. ?Such lot may be transferred to other members of the family upon receipt by the director of 
administrative services of a notarized letter from the owner requesting such transfer and stating 
the reason therefor. Nothing herein shall prevent the interment of nonfamily members at the 
request of the owner of the lot. 
2. ?Such lot may be reconveyed to the city. The purchaser shall receive therefor the price paid for 
the lot in the first instance less an administrative charge as recommended by the cemetery 
board and approved by the city commission. Such reconveyance to the city shall be by quitclaim 
deed. 
3. ?The owner of such lot may trade same for another lot of equal size. If the current price of the 
deed and the maintenance fee (previously called permanent care) is greater for the new lot than 
that paid for the original lot, the owner shall pay the difference before the trade shall be 
completed. In addition, if no permanent care fee had been paid on the original lot, the current 
maintenance fee shall be paid before the trade shall be completed. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.060; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.060. - Record of lots sold. 
    The director of administrative services shall keep a record of all lots sold and the deed receipt 
therefor; the deed receipt shall be duly recorded in a book kept for that purpose. In addition, a record of 
such sales shall also be made in the cemetery plat book. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.070; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.070. - Special cemetery sections. 
    Certain sections of the Sunset Hills Cemetery have been set aside and are known as the Veteran's 
Section, the Catholic Section, the I.O.O.F. Section and the Masonic Section. The sale of such lots shall 
be in the same manner as provided in section 14.01.040. Operation, care and maintenance of these 
sections shall be the same as provided in all other parts of the cemetery. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.080; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 14.01.080. - Interment permit required. 
    No person, firm, association or corporation shall inter or assist in and about the interment of the final 
placing of the body of any human being within the cemetery unless an interment permit has first been 
applied for, and been granted, authorizing such interment. Said interment permit shall be issued by the 
director of administrative services, and shall not be so issued until the fee (as set forth by resolution of the 
city commission) therefor has been paid. The interment permit shall only be issued subject to a permit 
therefor obtained from the county sanitarian's office and under such rules and regulations as shall be 
prescribed by the bureau of records and statistics of the state department of health and environmental 
sciences. The city shall prepare all grave sites for interment. The foregoing shall not preclude the director 
of administrative services from billing local mortuaries on a monthly basis for such fees. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.090; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.090. - Disinterment. 
A. ?No person, firm, association or corporation shall disinter, move or remove any body from the 
cemetery without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of administrative services. The 
disinterment permit shall only be issued subject to a permit therefor obtained from the county 
sanitarian's office and under such rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the bureau of 
statistics of the state department of health and environmental sciences. 
B. ?If the original interment took place more than one week prior to the request for disinterment, said 
request showing reasonable cause, shall be in writing to the city manager, and be accompanied with 
the appropriate fee. 
C. ?In addition, if the original interment took place more than one week prior to the request for 
disinterment, and the coffin is to be opened, the county coroner or other disinterested official shall be 
on hand to witness the disinterment. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.100; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.100. - County burial. 
A. ?Lots in the Sunset Hills Cemetery shall be set aside and are so reserved for pauper dead. All burials 
therein shall be made subject to the order of the board of county commissioners of this county. In all 
cases of the burial of poor, the interment fee shall be charged to, and collected from, the county. The 
interment fee shall be as agreed upon by the county commissioners and the city commission. 
B. ?Cadavers from the Montana State University Biology Department, Medical Science and WAMI 
Programs shall be interred in the same manner as county burials, the interment fee being charged 
to, and collected from, Montana State University. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.110; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.110. - Expenditures; payment of claims. 
    The city commission shall annually appropriate money for operation and maintenance of the 
cemetery, and the director of administrative services shall pay all approved claims that are within the 
appropriation. Claims for expenditures may be ordered and authorized by the parks and recreation 
director. Upon the approval and allowance of said claims, so presented, the same shall be paid from the 
all-purpose general fund. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.120; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.120. - Perpetual care—Plan generally. 
    The city shall provide for the perpetual care of cemetery lots in the cemetery under such rules and 
regulations promulgated by the cemetery board and approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.130; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.130. - Same—Fund established; maintenance fee; agreement and deposit conditions. 
A. ?The permanent care fund heretofore established is reestablished as the cemetery perpetual care 
trust fund and is herein referred to as the CPC. All moneys deposited in, or credited to, the CPC shall 
be held in trust by the city and the same shall be kept by the director of administrative services in a 
separate fund apart from all other funds of the city. 
B. ?For the purpose of providing funds for care and maintenance of the cemetery, both now and in the 
future, there is established a maintenance fee a percentage of which, as adopted by resolution of the 
city commission, shall be deposited into the CPC trust fund. At the time of purchase of the lot the 
purchaser shall deposit the maintenance fee as herein established and at the same time enter into 
an agreement with the city for perpetual care of the lot, which agreement shall be known as the 
"perpetual care agreement." 
C. ?The CPC trust fund shall be invested and reinvested by the director of administrative services. The 
city commission may from time to time direct the investment of such funds. The interest thereon, or 
earnings therefrom, shall be credited to the CPC trust fund for the sole purpose of defraying the cost 
of operating and maintaining the cemetery in future years. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.140; Ord. No. 1200, 1986; Ord. No. 1817, § 1, 10-24-2011) 


Sec. 14.01.140. - Same—Form of agreement. 
    The form of the perpetual care agreement shall be as determined by the director of administrative 
services and approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.150; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.150. - Same—Fund recordkeeping and reports. 
A. ?The director of administrative services shall prepare and keep a record of the perpetual care fund, 
which record shall show: 
1. ?The name of the person in whose name, or for whom the deposit is made, and the amount 
thereof; 
2. ?The character and amount of the securities in which the perpetual care fund is invested; 
3. ?Income from perpetual care fund investments. 
B. ?An unaudited report shall be made by the director of administrative services in the month of August 
immediately following the close of the fiscal year, to the city commission, or at such times as the 
cemetery board or the city commission may request. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.100; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.160. - Terms of interment. 
A. ?Funerals may be conducted on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays only when it is impossible or 
impractical to conduct the funeral at another time. However, an additional opening and closing fee 
shall be charged as established by city commission resolution. 
B. ?Generally there shall be one interment per standard size (five foot by ten foot) lot. If requested in 
advance, not more than two coffins may be interred in the standard size lot. If requested in advance, 
and only if the coffin is interred first, a standard size lot may be used to inter one additional infant or 
up to four ashes canisters. In all cases where more than one interment is to take place on a standard 
size lot, an additional fee shall be charged as established by city commission resolution. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.170; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.170. - Fences prohibited. 
    No lot in the cemetery shall be marked or defined by any fence, coping, railing, hedge, corner posts 
or embankment, nor shall any lot be filled above the established surrounding grade. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.180; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 


Sec. 14.01.180. - Malicious mischief prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cut, injure or remove any tree, shrub or vegetation in the cemetery 
(except authorized maintenance), or deface any tombstone or ornament in the cemetery, or any building 
in or fence surrounding the cemetery. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.190; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, MCA 45-6-101 et seq. 


Sec. 14.01.190. - Entering at night prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, without written permission of the director of parks and recreation, to 
enter the Sunset Hills Cemetery at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before 
sunrise. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.200; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, MCA 45-6-201 et seq. 


Sec. 14.01.200. - Speed limit and other motor vehicle restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, on any of the roadways in 
the cemetery at other than 15 miles per hour so as not to damage to roadways or any of the lots, and in 
accordance with the rules and regulations of the cemetery board. Such driver shall observe and be 
confined to the roadways as established. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.210; Ord. No. 1200, 1986) 
State Law reference— Vehicle operating requirements, MCA 61-8-301 et seq. 


Sec. 14.01.210. - Dogs prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to release, cause, permit or bring a dog into the Sunset Hills Cemetery, 
unless prior approval is obtained from the cemetery superintendent and the dog is part of a funeral 
procession or was owned by the deceased or the immediate family of the deceased. The cemetery 
superintendent may impose reasonable conditions upon the superintendent's approval. This section shall 
not apply to service dogs authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.220; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 1996) 


Sec. 14.01.220. - Penalties for violations. 
A. ?It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B. ?Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall 
be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 or more than $500.00 with the following exceptions: 
1. ?The minimum fine for violation of sections 14.01.180, 14.01.200 and 14.01.210 shall be 
$100.00; 
2. ?Violations of section 14.01.180 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or by 
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. 
C. ?Upon conviction, the court costs shall be assessed against the violator. 
(Code 1982, § 2.76.230; Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 1996) 


Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT AND HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health and safety, MCA 50-1-101 et seq.; environmental protection, MCA 75-1-
101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public nuisance, MCA 45-8-111 et seq. 


Sec. 16.02.010. - Purpose. 
A. ?The intent of this article is to provide a comprehensive mechanism for the identification and 
abatement of public nuisances within the city. 
B. ?The remedies provided for in this article are supplemental and complementary to all of the provisions 
of this Code, and state and federal law, and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or construed in 
any manner to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all public nuisances. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.010; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.020. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all property throughout the city wherein any of the 
conditions hereinafter specified are found to exist; provided, however, that any condition which would 
constitute a violation of this article but which is duly authorized under any other city, state or federal law, 
shall not constitute a violation. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.020; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.030. - Responsibility for maintenance. 
A. ?Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of real property within the city is 
required to maintain such property so as not to violate the provisions of this article. The owner of the 
property shall remain liable for violations hereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any 
third party regarding such property or the occupation of the property by any third party. 
B. ?Every owner of property within the city must maintain such property to ensure the safe condition of 
the property, in a weather tight condition, and secure from unauthorized entry. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.030; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998; Ord. No. 1920 , § 4, 2-13-2017) 


Sec. 16.02.040. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Abatement" means the removal, stoppage, prostration, or destruction of that which causes or 
constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or otherwise destroying, or 
effacing it. 
2. ?"Owner" means the owner of record or any person with legal, financial or equitable interest in 
the property on which the alleged public nuisance exists at the time of the violation. 
3. ?"Property" means any real property, premises, structure or location on which a public nuisance 
is alleged to exist. 
4. ?"Public nuisance" means any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building, structure or any 
part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, 
basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in 
its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is found or 
permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property, or 
cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more 
individuals in the city, in any one or more of the following particulars: 
a. ?By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the 
community. 
b. ?By reason of being a fire hazard. 
c. ?By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, about or around the 
aforesaid property. 
d. ?By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, and/or being 
vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate 
vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such property is 
situated or such condition exists. 
The term "public nuisance" shall mean any nuisance designated in section 16.02.050. 
5. ?"Safe condition" means a condition not involving or likely to involve danger, harm or loss from 
fire and other hazards. 
6. ?"Summary abatement" means abatement of the nuisance by the city, or a contractor employed 
by the city, by removal, repair, or other acts without notice to the owner, agent, or occupant of 
the property except for the notice required by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.040; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998; Ord. No. 1920 , § 5, 2-13-2017) 


Sec. 16.02.050. - Public nuisances. 
A. ?The following are declared to be public nuisances: 
1. ?Any building or structure which meets the definition of an unsafe building or structure as 
provided in section 116 of the International Building Code, or any successor provision, adopted 
pursuant to section 10.02.010. 
2. ?Any violation of chapter 38 relating to the city's subdivision and zoning laws and regulations. 
3. ?Any imminent life safety hazard which creates a present and immediate danger to life, property, 
health or public safety. 
B. ?The following may be declared to be public nuisances: 
1. ?Any condition which constitutes an attractive nuisance whether within a structure or on the 
premises. 
2. ?Any building or place which has been operated or maintained in a manner that has resulted in 
repeated disruptive activities including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, public 
drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, sale of stolen goods, public urination, 
theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, loud noises 
(particularly in late night or early morning hours), traffic violations, or police detentions and 
arrests. 
3. ?Any condition which renders air, food or drink unwholesome, unsanitary or detrimental to health. 
4. ?Any condition which poses a fire hazard. 
5. ?Any condition in violation of chapter 8 (Animals). 
6. ?The ownership, maintenance or operation of a dog or animal kennel without proper provisions 
for the protection of the surrounding properties from odor and sound generated by the kennel. 
7. ?The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation on the premises for an unreasonable period 
of time of any personal property or wastes, including, but not limited to, abandoned, wrecked, 
dismantled or inoperative vehicles, abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled boats or vessels, 
automotive parts and equipment, appliances, furniture, containers, packing materials, scrap 
metal, wood, building materials, junk, rubbish, debris, dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar 
materials which is within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public 
right-of-way and which is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. However, 
building materials being used or to be used for a project of repair or renovation for which a 
building permit has been obtained may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to 
expeditiously complete the project. 
8. ?Any public nuisance as defined in MCA 45-8-111 or otherwise recognized in law as constituting 
a public nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.050; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.060. - Enforcement. 
    The department of community development shall have primary responsibility for the abatement of a 
public nuisance under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.060; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.070. - Summary abatement. 
A. ?Whenever a complaint is made to the department of community development of the existence of a 
public nuisance, as defined in section 16.02.040 or 16.02.050, the department of community 
development shall promptly cause to be inspected the property on which it is alleged that such public 
nuisance exists. Should the department of community development find that a public nuisance 
exists, and that the public health, safety or welfare may be in immediate danger, then summary 
abatement procedures shall be implemented and the department of community development may 
cause the nuisance to be removed or abated. The department of community development may notify 
the building inspector if the public nuisance involves a building that appears structurally unsafe. The 
building inspector, upon being notified by the department of community development, shall cause the 
building on which it is alleged such public nuisance exists to be inspected and submit a written report 
of such inspection and the findings to the department of community development. 
B. ?When summary abatement is authorized, notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property is 
not required. Following summary abatement, the department of community development shall cause 
to be posted on the property liable for the abatement a notice describing the action taken to abate 
the nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.710; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.080. - Abatement in other cases; notice. 
A. ?If, after inspecting the property on which the nuisance is reported, the department of community 
development declares the existence of a public nuisance, but the nature thereof is not such as to 
require the summary abatement of such nuisance, then, regular abatement procedures shall be 
followed. Photographs and reports of the findings and inspections shall be made and filed with the 
department of community development. 
B. ?The department of community development shall determine the individual, firm or corporation who, 
from the records in the clerk and recorder's office, appears to be the titled owner of the aforesaid 
property and immediately cause a written notice to be served on such individual, firm or corporation 
by personal service or by leaving a copy of the notice at the usual place of residence or business of 
such owner, or address of such owner shown in the clerk and recorder's records, or by copy mailed 
to such owner at such place or address by United States certified mail return receipt. If service of 
such written notice is unable to be perfected by any of the methods described in this subsection, the 
department of community development shall cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be published in 
a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once a week for two consecutive weeks and shall 
further cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be left with the individual, if any, in possession of such 
property on which it is alleged such public nuisance exists, or if there is no individual in possession 
thereof, the department of community development shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted at 
such structure, location or premises. The department of community development shall also 
determine from the clerk and recorder's office who the lienholder of the property, if any, as 
documented therein, is and cause a written notice to be served on such lienholder by United States 
mail return receipt. 
C. ?The aforesaid notice to the owner, and lienholder, if any, of the property shall state clearly and 
concisely the findings of the department of community development with respect to the existence of 
a public nuisance. The notice shall further state that unless the owner thereof shall cause the 
abatement of the public nuisance, pursuant to the orders contained in the department of community 
development's notice, the public nuisance shall be abated by the city at the expense of the owner. 
D. ?Any person who is the record owner of the premises, location or structure at the time an order 
pursuant to this article is issued and served upon said person, shall be responsible for complying 
with that order, and liable for any costs incurred by the city therewith, notwithstanding the fact that 
such person conveys such person's interests in the property to another after such order was issued 
and served. 
E. ?It shall not be a defense to the determination that a public nuisance exists that the property is 
boarded up or otherwise enclosed. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.080; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.090. - Abatement by owner. 
A. ?Within 30 days after the posting and mailing of a notice to abate a nuisance, the owner, agent of the 
owner, or individual in possession of the affected property shall remove and abate such nuisance or 
show that no nuisance in fact exists. Such showing shall be made by filing a written statement that 
no nuisance exists. The statement shall be filed with the department of community development. 
B. ?The department of community development, upon written application by the owner within the 30-day 
period after the notice has been served, may grant additional time for the owner to effect the 
abatement of the public nuisance, provided that such extension is limited to a specific time period. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.090; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.100. - Appeal procedures; hearing. 
A. ?The owner or occupant of the property who has been served with a notice pursuant to this article 
that a public nuisance exists and that it must be abated within 30 days, may, within seven calendar 
days after receipt of such notice, make a written demand to the department of community 
development for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in fact exists. The hearing 
shall be held at the next scheduled regular meeting of the city commission following receipt by the 
department of community development of the written demand, and at least two days' notice of the 
hearing shall be given to the individual who made the written demand for the hearing. 
B. ?The hearing shall be conducted by the city commission. The commission may amend or modify the 
notice and/or order, or extend the time for compliance with the department of community 
development's order by the owner by such date as the majority of the commission may determine. 
C. ?The owner, agent of the owner, occupant and lienholder, if any, of the subject property shall be 
given the opportunity to present evidence to the commission in the course of the hearing. 
D. ?In those instances where the nuisance has been abated by the city, the commission shall have 
discretion to waive the cost of abating a nuisance, in whole or in part, if in the course of the hearing 
reviewing the decision, the commission finds that any of the following did not conform to the 
provisions of this article: 
1. ?The notice to remove the nuisance; 
2. ?The work performed in abating the nuisance; or 
3. ?The computation of charges. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.100; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.110. - Abatement by city. 
A. ?Should any public nuisance not be abated at the expiration of time stated in the notice/order or within 
such additional time as the department of community development or commission may grant, the 
department of community development shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate 
the public nuisance found thereon. In abating such nuisance, the department of community 
development may go to whatever extent may be necessary to complete the abatement of the public 
nuisance and should it be practicable to salvage any material derived in the aforesaid abatement, the 
department of community development may sell the salvaged material at private or public sale at the 
best price obtainable and shall keep an accounting of the proceeds thereof. 
B. ?The proceeds, if any, obtained from the sale of any material salvaged as a result of an abatement of 
a public nuisance by the department of community development shall be deposited to the general 
fund of the city and any deficit between the amount so received and the cost of the abatement may 
be levied as an assessment against the property in question by the city commission and collected as 
any other assessment by the city; however, any other alternative collection method may be utilized 
by the city to recoup the deficit. Should the proceeds of the sale of such salvaged material exceed 
the cost of abatement, the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property from which the 
public nuisance was abated when a proper claim to the excess is established. 
C. ?In abating a public nuisance, the department of community development may call upon any of the 
city departments or divisions for whatever assistance shall be deemed necessary or may by private 
contract cause the abatement of the public nuisance. 
D. ?The department of community development shall, after completing the removal and abatement, file a 
statement of costs with the department of administrative services. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.110; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.120. - Notice of assessment—Appeal of charges. 
A. ?Upon receipt of the statement of costs from the department of community development, the 
department of administrative services shall mail to the owner of the property upon which the public 
nuisance has been abated notice of the amounts set forth in the statement plus an additional amount 
sufficient to defray the costs of the notice and stating that the city proposes to assess against the 
property the amount set forth in the notice and that objections to the proposed assessment must be 
made in writing and received by the department of administrative services within 20 days from the 
date of mailing such notice. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period, if no objections have been 
received by the administrative services department, the administrative services department shall 
enter that amount in the city liens docket which shall therefore constitute a lien against the property. 
B. ?If objections of either the property owner or their representative are received by the administrative 
services department prior to the expiration of the 20-day period, the administrative services 
department shall refer the matter to the department of community development for administrative 
review. 
C. ?Upon conclusion of administrative review, the department of community development shall make a 
written determination that the amount of the charges shall be canceled, reduced, or remain the 
same. A copy of this determination shall be furnished to the person making the objections together 
with a notice of such person's right to appeal to the city commission. 
D. ?If no appeal of a determination by the department of community development is filed within the time 
period allowed, a copy of the determination will be furnished to the administrative services 
department who shall then enter a lien in the amount determined by the department of community 
development in the city liens docket as provided in subsection A of this section. 
E. ?If a timely appeal is received by the city commission, a hearing shall be scheduled and held on the 
matter. If, after the hearing, the city commission determines that the proposed assessment does not 
comply with subsection G of this section, the city commission shall so certify to the administrative 
services department, and the proposed assessment shall be canceled. If, after the hearing, it is 
determined that the proposed assessment or any part of it is proper and authorized, the city 
commission shall so certify to the administrative services department who shall enter a lien in such 
amount as determined appropriate by the city commission, in the lien docket as provided in 
subsection A of this section. 
F. ?The determination of the city commission is a final administrative decision. 
G. ?The department of community development, in administrative review, or the city commission, on 
appeal, may reduce or cancel a proposed assessment if it is determined that: 
1. ?Any of the following did not conform to the provisions of this article: 
a. ?The notice to remove the nuisance; or 
b. ?The work performed in abating the nuisance; or 
c. ?The computation of charges; or 
2. ?The owner of the property was eligible for a waiver of costs under section 16.02.140. 
H. ?The department of community development, in administrative review, or the city commission, on 
appeal, may reduce a proposed assessment by eliminating the civil penalty portion of the invoice if it 
is determined that: 
1. ?The current owner was not in possession of the property at the time the notice required in 
section 16.02.080 was posted; or 
2. ?The owner did not receive the notice to remove the nuisance, did not have knowledge of the 
nuisance and could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, have had such knowledge. 
I. ?If, after a lien has been entered in the docket of city liens, there is a written request of an owner who 
alleges that the owner did not receive notice of the proposed assessment, the administrative 
services department shall refer the matter for review pursuant to subsection B of this section. 
J. ?The lien may be canceled or reduced by the department of community development, in 
administrative review, or the city commission, on appeal, if it is determined that the owner did not 
receive notice of the proposed assessment, did not previously have knowledge of the lien or of the 
nuisance abatement work constituting the basis of the lien, could not, in the exercise of reasonable 
care or diligence, have had such knowledge, and in addition, that the circumstances are such that a 
reduction or cancellation of the charges would have been appropriate had the matter been reviewed 
pursuant to this section prior to assessment. Upon receipt of a certification from the city commission, 
pursuant to subsection E of this section, the administrative services department shall cancel or 
reduce the lien if required by the determination of the department of community development and/or 
city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.120; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.130. - Personal liability of owner. 
    The person who is the owner of the property at the time at which the notice required under section 
16.02.080 is posted shall be personally liable for the amount of the assessment including all interest, civil 
penalties, and other charges. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.130; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


Sec. 16.02.140. - Overhead charge; civil penalties. 
A. ?Whenever a nuisance is abated by the city, the department of community development shall keep an 
accurate account of all expenses incurred, including an overhead charge of 25 percent for 
administration and a civil penalty of $200.00 for each nuisance abated. 
B. ?When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by any owner of real property, for each subsequent 
nuisance that is abated by the city within two consecutive calendar years concerning real property 
owned by the same person, an additional civil penalty of 50 percent, minimum of $50.00, of the cost 
of abatement shall be added to the costs, charges and civil penalties provided for in subsection A of 
this section. The civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the nuisances abated by 
the city involve the same real property or are of the same character. 
(Code 1982, § 8.28.140; Ord. No. 1452, § 2, 1998) 


ARTICLE 3. - ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Removal and sale of abandoned vehicles, MCA 61-12-401 et seq. 


Sec. 16.03.010. - Leaving abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles on private property prohibited when; 
removal. 
A. ?It is unlawful to park, store or leave, or permit parking or storing of any licensed or unlicensed motor 
vehicle or any kind, or part thereof, for a period of time in excess of 72 hours, which is in rusted, 
wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or 
not, upon any private property within the city limits, unless it is completely enclosed within a building, 
or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for same. 
B. ?The accumulation and storage of two or more of such vehicles or part thereof as hereinbefore 
defined on private property shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare 
of inhabitants of the city, and it shall be the duty of the registered owner of such vehicle or part 
thereof, and it shall also be the duty of the owner of the private property, or lessee or other person in 
possession of private property upon which such vehicle or part thereof is located, to remove same 
from the city limits, or to have the same housed in a building where it will not be visible from the 
street. 
(Code 1982, § 10.64.010) 


Sec. 16.03.020. - Removal notice—To owner of vehicle or land. 
A. ?It shall be the duty of the director of community development to give written notice to the registered 
owner of any motor vehicle or part thereof which is in violation of section 16.03.010, or to give such 
notice to the owner or lessee of private land upon which the motor vehicle or part thereof is situated, 
giving notice that the vehicle or part thereof violates section 16.03.010 and demanding that the motor 
vehicle or part thereof be removed from the city limits within 72 hours from the time of service of 
notice, or that within 72 hours same may be housed in a building where it will not be visible from the 
street. The notice may be given by personal service, or by certified mail, with a return receipt 
requested. 
B. ?Written notice required by this section shall be deemed to have been given (i.e., constructive notice) 
when the registered owner of the motor vehicle or part thereof, or the owner, lessee or other person 
in possession of private property concerned herein either: 
1. ?Refuses to accept the prepaid United States mail certified letter from the city and the letter is 
returned from the post office marked "refused"; or 
2. ?The person to be notified is present in the city but the notification letter is returned marked 
"unclaimed" by the post office, in which event notice by the city may be made by affixing the 
letter in a conspicuous place at the main entrance or to the front door of the residence of such 
person. 
(Code 1982, § 10.64.020) 


Sec. 16.03.030. - Same—Public posting required when; form. 
A. ?After diligent search and inquiry by the director of community development, no written notice as in 
section 16.03.020 shall be required where the registered owner of such vehicle or part thereof or the 
owner of the private property or lessee or other person in possession of private property upon which 
such vehicle or part thereof is located cannot be found or determined, but instead a public notice 
shall be posted by the city clerk in three public places in the city for five consecutive days. 
B. ?Such public notice shall include, among other information: "Public Notice; To Whom It May 
Concern," date, legal description of the situs, address of same, a full description of the motor vehicle 
or part thereof, when available, the last known owner of the vehicle and/or owner of the realty or last 
known person in possession of the situs, and the date from or approximate period of time during 
which the nuisance has existed. 
(Code 1982, § 10.64.030) 


Sec. 16.03.040. - Removal of vehicle by city or contractor authorized when; costs. 
    In the event that any of the aforesaid persons, whether an individual, firm or corporation, fails, 
neglects or refuses to remove the abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or part thereof, or house same 
in the building as provided in section 16.03.010, and abate the nuisance after the required notice, the city, 
its agent or contractor may remove the vehicle or part thereof at the cost not to exceed $25.00 and a 
minimum cost of $5.00 as determined by the city; which cost shall, if in the best interests of the city as 
determined by the city manager, be collected from the registered owner of such vehicle or part thereof or 
the owner of the private property or lessee or other person in possession of private property upon which 
such vehicle or part thereof is located. Ownership of any vehicle or part thereof removed by the city, its 
agent or contractor shall, upon such removal, be vested in the city, its agent or contractor, as applicable. 
(Code 1982, § 10.64.040) 


Sec. 16.03.050. - Contract for removal; authority of city manager. 
    The city manager is authorized to enter into a written agreement with a duly licensed junk dealer for 
the removal of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or part thereof under this article wherein the 
consideration for the services of the junk dealer shall be the vehicle or part thereof at no expense to the 
city. The junk dealer, before entering into contract with the city or being appointed its agent or contractor 
in reference to sections 16.03.040 and 16.03.050, shall furnish evidence of public liability insurance, to 
adequately protect such agent or contractor and the city, deemed reasonable in the opinion of the city 
manager. In the event a qualified and suitable junk dealer is not available to contract with or act as the 
city's agent or contractor as provided herein, the city manager is authorized to contract with the lowest 
responsible bidder to provide for the removal from private property of abandoned, wrecked or junked 
vehicles or part thereof under section 16.03.040. 
(Code 1982, § 10.64.050) 


ARTICLE 4. - WEED ABATEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Control of nuisance weeds within municipality, MCA 7-22-4101. 


Sec. 16.04.010. - Cutting weeds and vegetation required; notice; failure deemed misdemeanor. 
    Any person who is the owner of or agent for any lot or parcel of land within the city limits, who 
permits or suffers to exist upon, in front of, or along such premises so owned by said person or for which 
said person is the agent, any growth of weeds or vegetation, or any tree or shrub of which the limbs or 
branches extend over any public sidewalk at a height of less than seven feet above such sidewalk, shall 
be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and if such owner or agent neglects or refuses to cut and 
destroy any such growth of weeds or vegetation, or to cut away such branches, within ten days after 
being notified in writing by the city engineer to cut the same, the owner or agent shall be deemed guilty of 
a violation of this article, and upon conviction shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 8.36.010) 


Sec. 16.04.020. - Abatement by city authorized when; assessment of costs. 
    In case any nuisance as defined in section 16.04.010 exists upon, in front of or along any lot or 
parcel of land within the city, whether such lot or parcel of land is occupied or unoccupied, the city 
engineer, instead of prosecuting such owner or agent, may cause such nuisance to be abated either after 
notice or immediately without notice, as the necessity therefor in each case in the city engineer's 
judgment may warrant, either of which shall be done at the expense of the owner, and the city 
commission may specially assess such expense to such property as a tax, which shall be collected as 
other taxes are collected. 
(Code 1982, § 8.36.020) 


ARTICLE 5. - TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 16.05.010—16.05.140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - TREE MAINTENANCE DISTRICT 


Sec. 16.05.150. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Maintenance" means the planting, pruning and removal of trees. Routine watering does not 
come within the definition of maintenance as used in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 12.14.010; Ord. No. 1311, § 1, 1990) 


Sec. 16.05.160. - Method of planting and maintaining trees. 
    All planting and maintenance of trees in all public places, rights-of-way and parks to be done within 
the district or districts created by the city may be done by contract or by forces employed by the city, or by 
both, in such manner as the commission may elect. 
(Code 1982, § 12.14.020; Ord. No. 1311, § 2, 1990) 


Sec. 16.05.170. - Method of paying for maintenance. 
A. ?The city commission shall estimate, as near as practicable, the cost of the maintenance in each 
established district annually, before the first Monday in September. The commission shall pass and 
finally adopt a resolution specifying the district assessment option and levying and assessing all the 
property within each established district. 
B. ?The resolution levying the assessment to defray the cost of maintenance shall contain or refer to a 
list in which shall be described the lot or parcel of land assessed, with the name of the owner thereof 
if known, and the amount levied thereon set opposite. 
C. ?Such resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
D. ?A notice of intent to adopt such resolution, signed by the city clerk, stating that the resolution levying 
the special assessment to defray the cost of maintenance in each established district is on file in the 
city clerk's office and subject to inspection for a period of five days, shall be published at least once 
in a newspaper published in the city. The notice shall state the time and place at which objections to 
the final adoption of the resolution will be heard by the commission. The time for the hearing shall be 
not less than five days after the publication of the notice. 
E. ?At the time so set, the commission shall meet and hear all objections which may be made to such 
assessment or any part thereof and may adjourn from time to time for that purpose and may by 
resolution modify such assessment in whole or in part. 
F. ?A copy of the resolution, certified by the city clerk, must be delivered to the city treasurer and the 
assessments shall be placed upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner as other taxes and 
assessments. 
(Code 1982, § 12.14.030; Ord. No. 1311, § 3, 1990; Ord. No. 1429, § 1, 1996) 


Secs. 16.05.180—16.05.290. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - TREE REGULATIONS 


Sec. 16.05.300. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Board" means the appropriate advisory board, such as cemetery, park or tree board, appointed 
by the city commission and charged with the overseeing of a particular public area. 
2. ?"City forester" means the superintendent in charge of forestry, assigned as part of the 
professional staff of the forestry division to implement this division and carry out its 
enforcement. 
3. ?"Hazard" means a tree, or parts thereof, that by some natural cause or accident, becomes an 
immediate threat to life or property. 
4. ?"Large tree" means trees attaining a mature height of 25 feet. 
5. ?"Maintenance or maintaining" means and includes but is not limited to pruning, fertilization, 
insect and disease control, guying, cabling, bracing and repair of trees. 
6. ?"Public area" means Sunset Hills Cemetery, public ways, city parks, and all other lands owned, 
leased, managed or occupied by the city. 
7. ?"Public nuisance" means any tree or shrub or part thereof upon private or public property which: 
a. ?Is dead or dying; 
b. ?Is interfering with the use of public property by reason of its location or condition; 
c. ?By reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or 
welfare of the general public or which obstructs the free safe passage of pedestrian or 
vehicular traffic, or obstructs a streetlight or sight triangle; or 
d. ?Is harboring insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm other 
trees or shrubs. 
8. ?"Public way" means all city property deeded or recorded as public streets, roads, boulevards, 
alleys, sidewalks and parking strips. 
9. ?"Sight triangle" means the area on the public way as described in the Bozeman zoning code. 
10. ?"Small tree" means trees attaining a mature height of less than 25 feet. 
11. ?"Street level" means the highest point of elevation of the finished surface of the street. 
12. ?"Street tree" means trees planted in the public way. 
13. ?"Tree service business" means any person engaged in one or more of the following activities 
for profit: 
a. ?Diagnoses the condition of trees or shrubs; 
b. ?Recommends or supervises treatment of trees or shrubs; 
c. ?Treats trees or shrubs by feeding, fertilizing, pruning, topping, trimming, cutting or bracing; 
or 
d. ?Treats cavities in trees or shrubs. 
This definition shall include any person who is deemed by the city to be an "arborist" or "tree 
expert." The term "tree" shall also include a stump. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.010; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.310. - City forester. 
A. ?The city forester with input from the tree advisory board shall have the following responsibilities and 
duties: 
1. ?Administer, direct, manage, supervise and control all the various city tree programs; the forestry 
division; the establishment and maintenance of professional standards, training, titles and 
certification for forestry division personnel; and the forestry budget; 
2. ?Develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the arboricultural specifications 
manual. This manual shall contain regulations and standards supplementing this division for 
establishing the valuation and appraisal of trees and shrubs, and the planting, maintenance and 
removal of trees and shrubs upon all city-owned property; 
3. ?Enforce or cause the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.020; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.320. - Master street tree plan. 
    The city forester and the tree advisory board, with a public hearing and approval by the city 
commission, shall develop a master street tree plan which shall include but not be limited to a city-wide, 
street-by-street written evaluation of all space and site factors which aid in the determination of the tree 
species best suited to a particular planting site in regard to growing habits, shape, form, health, disease 
and pest resistance, conflicts with wires, lights, pavement, traffic, pedestrians, sidewalks, environmental 
pollution, sewers and space availability. The master street tree plan shall also include a plan for a cost-
share tree program. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan, or any amendment 
thereof, all planting shall conform thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.030; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.330. - Arboricultural specifications and standards. 
A. ?The following specifications and standards are established for the removal, planting, trimming, 
maintenance and care of trees and shrubs in the public area: 
1. ?Removing. 
a. ?No person shall remove a tree or shrub without first obtaining a permit and paying any 
permit fee established by resolution of the city commission. 
b. ?All trees and shrubs which are marked for removal shall be completely removed from the 
growing site and disposed of in an authorized manner, as determined by the city forester. 
The stump shall be ground out to a depth suitable for future planting of turf. 
c. ?Any person may make a request to the city forester for a tree to be removed. The city 
forester's decision to approve removal of a tree shall be based on its detriment to the 
community due to disease, insect damage or other damage which creates a hazard to the 
public health, safety and welfare. Any person aggrieved by the city forester's decision to 
remove or not remove the tree may then apply to the appropriate board having jurisdiction 
over the public area to overturn the city forester's decision, except when the city forester 
determines the tree to be a hazard. The person may appeal the board's decision to remove 
or not remove the tree to the city commission. 
d. ?If said tree is to be removed, full compensation for the cost of removal and the value of the 
tree will be paid by the persons requesting removal. 
2. ?Planting. 
a. ?No tree shall be planted without first obtaining a permit from the city forester and paying 
any permit fee established by resolution of the city commission. No tree with a mature 
height in excess of 25 feet shall be planted under any utility line. 
b. ?All street trees shall be planted in line with each other and at a spacing of a minimum of 30 
feet on center for large trees and 25 feet on center for small trees. 
c. ?Single-stem canopy trees may be permitted in sight vision triangles, provided that mature 
trees do not significantly affect safe driving conditions and are maintained such that no 
canopy foliage exists below a height of 14 feet from street level. 
3. ?Trimming. 
a. ?No person, except for city crews or licensed arborists with which the city has contracted for 
tree trimming services, shall trim a tree without first obtaining a permit and paying any 
permit fee established by resolution of the city commission. 
b. ?All trees and shrubs, including trees and shrubs on private property, which have branches 
overhanging a public street, shall have said branches trimmed to a minimum clearance 
height of 14 feet above the parking lane, unless the city forester determines the clearance 
at this location would be detrimental to public safety. All trees and shrubs, including trees 
and shrubs on private property, which have branches overhanging a public sidewalk, shall 
have said branches trimmed to minimum clearance height of nine feet, unless the city 
forester determines the clearance at this location would be detrimental to public safety. The 
city forester may waive the provisions of this section if the city forester determines that the 
tree or shrub does not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight, or 
endanger public safety. 
c. ?All dead wood, stubs, broken branches, badly formed branches, disease-infected and 
insect-infested branches interfering with public travel, lighting, existing buildings and traffic 
signs shall be removed with consideration given to the symmetry and beauty of the tree or 
shrub. 
d. ?Topping of trees is prohibited. 
4. ?Maintenance and duty to avoid damage to trees and shrubs. 
a. ?No person or animal under any person's control shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy 
any tree or shrub; permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub; or permit any 
toxic chemical to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub. 
b. ?During building operations, the builder shall erect suitable protective barriers around public 
trees and shrubs which may be injured. If any tree is damaged or must be removed during 
construction, the person causing the removal of a tree shall replace the tree with a tree of 
equal value or pay the value of the tree as established by the Bozeman Street Tree 
Analysis and Recommendations, dated December 11, 1990, and amendments thereto, 
until updated through adoption of the arboricultural specifications manual. 
c. ?It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner and tenant to maintain all street trees and 
vegetative growth in front of and adjoining their property and keep them free of becoming a 
public nuisance or hazard. 
5. ?Fastening materials to trees and shrubs. No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other 
materials to or around or through any public trees or shrubs without obtaining written permission 
from the city forester, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. 
6. ?Public utilities. Public utility work affecting trees or shrubs shall be limited to the actual 
necessities of the service of the company and such work shall be done in a neat and 
professional manner and according to the arboricultural specifications manual. The city forester 
may supervise the work performed and has the authority to stop work if not in accordance with 
the arboricultural specifications manual. The public utility shall replace any tree that dies or is 
removed with a tree of equal value or pay the value of the tree as established by the Bozeman 
Street Tree and Park Tree Analysis and Recommendations, dated January 1, 1996, and 
amendments thereto, until updated through adoption of the arboricultural specifications manual. 
7. ?Planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs. All trees or shrubs shall be 
planted, removed, maintained and protected according to the master street plan and the 
arboricultural specifications manual. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.040; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.340. - Hazards and public nuisances. 
A. ?General prohibition; duty to abate. It is unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any 
lot, tract, parcel of land or portion of it, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the 
city limits to permit or maintain on any such lot, tract, or parcel or part any tree, shrub, or part thereof 
which is a public nuisance or hazard and it shall be the duty of such person to promptly remove, 
eradicate or otherwise control such condition in accordance with this division and the arboricultural 
specifications manual. 
B. ?Trees and shrubs in public areas. If the city forester determines, with reasonable certainty upon 
inspection or examination, any tree or shrub exists in or upon any public area in a hazardous 
condition or as a public nuisance, the city forester shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, 
removed or otherwise abated in such manner as to prevent the spread of the hazard. The manner in 
which the hazard shall be abated shall be determined by the city forester. 
C. ?Trees and shrubs on private premises. If the city forester determines, with reasonable certainty, 
upon inspection or examination, that any tree or shrub exists in or upon any private premises in a 
hazardous condition or as a public nuisance, the city forester shall immediately, in writing, notify the 
owner or tenant having charge of such premises of the existence of the public nuisance or hazard 
and issue said owner or tenant an order detailing the requirements of and the reasons for the 
abatement to be completed within a reasonable time to be specified in the order, but not less than 15 
days. If the owner cannot be found, a copy of said notice shall be placed upon said infected tree or 
shrub. The owner may appeal the order of the city forester to the city commission within the time 
specified for abatement in the order. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and the appeal shall 
be placed upon the commission agenda as soon as practicable. Until a final determination by the city 
commission, work required to be done by the city forester shall not be required, and if the city 
commission sustains all or any part of the order, it shall set the time within which the work required to 
be done shall be completed. 
D. ?Abatement at owner's expense. In the event that the public nuisance or hazard is not abated by the 
date specified in the notice or specified by the city commission, the city forester is authorized to 
cause the abatement of said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a 
lien against the property on which the public nuisance or hazard was located. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.050; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.350. - Cost of planting, removing, maintaining and protecting trees and shrubs. 
    The entire cost of planting, removing, maintaining and protecting trees and shrubs on all public areas 
and public ways of the city, when done by city employees or their contractors at the director of the city 
forester, shall be borne by the city out of the tree maintenance district fund and from funds donated 
specifically for this purpose. When a private party other than the city, with appropriate permit, plants, 
removes, maintains or protects trees and shrubs, the private party shall incur all expenses. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.060; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.360. - Tree service businesses and licensing. 
A. ?License required. Any person who engages in the tree service business within the corporate limits of 
the city shall first obtain International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certification, or an equivalent, and 
obtain and maintain a city license in accordance with chapter 12. If a license or permit to engage in 
the tree service business is required by the state, the issuance of a state license shall be a 
prerequisite to the issuance of a city license. The licensee shall display the license to any of its 
customers or city officials upon demand. The city may suspend or revoke a license when the tree 
service business violates any provision of chapter 12, article 2; this division; any ordinance 
provisions relating to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city; or secures any license 
by fraud or misrepresentation to include false or incorrect information on the license application. The 
procedure for license suspension or revocation is set forth in sections 12.02.180 and 12.02.190. 
B. ?Insurance and bond. Any applicant for a tree service business license shall provide, at the time of 
application, a certificate of insurance showing insurance coverage for general liability, automobile 
liability, worker's compensation, and other coverages required by law in minimum amounts set by the 
city commission resolution. The certificate of insurance shall name the city and its officials and 
employees as additional insured for work on public lands. The applicant shall also provide a street 
obstruction bond in an amount set by the city commission resolution for work to be performed within 
any public street, alley or right-of-way in the city. 
C. ?License exemptions. Any person acting within the scope of such person's employment with any 
public utility, with the city, or with any governmental entity shall be exempt from the licensing 
provisions of this division. However, the public utility or the governmental entity, except for the city, 
desiring to do work on trees or shrubs located in public areas shall be required to obtain a permit to 
do such work as required by section 16.05.330. 
D. ?Protection of utilities. A licensee shall, before commencing work on any tree or shrub, determine the 
location of utility facilities, including water and sewer lines, and shall be responsible for contacting 
any joint utility locator entity in operation for subsurface work or, if such entity is not in operation or 
does not provide service for above-ground work, each utility or entity owning such facilities. This 
section applies to overhead and underground facilities. 
E. ?Permit for removal of trees on public right-of-way. At least 48 hours prior to engaging in any work 
(except in the case of a hazard), a licensee shall apply for a permit to do any work on any tree or 
shrub which is located in any public area. The permit application shall be filed with the city manager 
on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain any information required by the city for 
processing the application, including the scope and nature of the work to be performed on the 
specified tree or shrub. The city shall issue the requested permit only if the proposed work complies 
with all applicable laws and ordinances, any master street tree plan, any urban forestry plan, and any 
arboricultural specification manuals adopted by the city and upon payment of permit fee as 
established by city commission resolution. 
F. ?Debris removal. A licensee shall clean the work site and remove any debris after completing any 
work on public or private property, including the removal of branches, twigs and chips. 
G. ?Stump removal. All stumps on public rights-of-way shall be removed to a depth of at least eight 
inches, and all holes remaining from the stump removal shall be filled with dirt and covered with 
appropriate groundcover. 
H. ?Power equipment. All power equipment used by a licensee shall include reasonable safety devices 
to protect employees and other persons. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.070; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


Sec. 16.05.370. - Enforcement. 
A. ?Authority of city forester to enter private premises. The city forester is charged with enforcement of 
this division and to that end may enter upon private premises at any reasonable times for the 
purposes of examining and inspecting any suspected public nuisance or hazardous tree or shrub in 
order to carry out duties assigned under this division; provided that the city forester first makes a 
reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner or other persons who have charge or control of 
premises and demand entry. 
B. ?Interference with the city forester or staff. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city 
forester, or the city forester's assistants or agents, while engaged in or carrying out the execution or 
enforcement of this division. 
C. ?Penalty. In addition to any penalty, the court, also, shall order restitution to the city for each tree or 
part thereof, unlawfully damaged, destroyed or removed. 
(Code 1982, § 12.30.080; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 1993) 


ARTICLE 6. - NOISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle noise, MCA 61-9-401 et seq. 


Sec. 16.06.010. - Purpose. 
    The city commission hereby enacts the ordinance from which this article is derived to protect, 
preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the city through the 
reduction, control, and prevention of raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or 
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.010), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.020. - Findings. 
A. ?Loud and raucous noise degrades the environment of the city to a degree that: 
1. ?It may be harmful to the health, welfare, and safety of its inhabitants and visitors; 
2. ?It may interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property reasonably expected in an 
urban environment; 
3. ?It may cause or aggravate health problems. 
B. ?Both the effective control and the elimination of loud or raucous noise are essential to the health and 
welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city as well as to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, 
including recreation, work and communication. 
C. ?The use of sound amplification equipment creates loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular 
manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace, 
and freedom of the citizens of and visitors to the city. 
D. ?Certain short-term easing of noise restrictions is essential to allow the construction and maintenance 
of structures, infrastructure, and other elements necessary for the physical and commercial vitality of 
the city. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.020), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.030. - Scope. 
    This article applies to the control of all sound originating within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.030), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.040. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent 
physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate attention. 
2. ?"Emergency work" means any work: 
a. ?Performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage; 
b. ?Restoring property to a safe condition following a public calamity; 
c. ?By private or public utilities when restoring utility service; or 
d. ?Performed to protect persons or property from exposure to danger or potential danger. 
3. ?"Health" means an optimal state of physical, mental and emotional well-being and not merely 
the absence of disease. 
4. ?"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or public 
entity, including but not limited to federal, state or city government. 
5. ?"Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar 
place which is normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government 
entity. 
6. ?"Public space" means any real property or structure on real property, owned by the government 
and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other recreational 
areas. For the purposes of this article, public space will also include any property, whether 
publicly or privately owned, used by members of the general public as a method of ingress, 
egress or for parking. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.040), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.050. - Loud noises prohibited. 
A. ?It is unlawful to perform any of the following acts anywhere within the city's jurisdictional limits: 
1. ?Sound amplifying equipment. Except as authorized in section 16.06.070.A.5, using operating or 
permitting the use of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, "boombox," CD Player, radio, 
television, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in 
such a manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any normally sensitive and 
reasonable person. 
2. ?Yelling and shouting. Except as authorized in section 16.06.070.A.5, yelling, shouting, hooting, 
or whistling on public rights-of-way at any time as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or 
repose of any normally sensitive and reasonable person. 
3. ?Animals. Owning, keeping, having in possession or harboring any animals which, by frequent or 
habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking, or any other noise as to disturb the quiet, 
comfort, or repose of any normally sensitive and reasonable person, or as defined in section 
8.02.010.A.13.d. 
4. ?Defect in vehicle or load. Operating any truck, trailer, automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out 
of repair or so leaded in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, 
rattling or other noises. 
5. ?Loudspeakers, amplifiers, public address systems. Except as authorized in section 
16.06.070.A.5, the use or operation of any loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system or any 
similar instrument or equipment whose purpose is to amplify or make sound louder in a fixed or 
movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purpose of giving instructions, 
directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any person or assemblages, in or 
on any public right-of-way within city areas in such a manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or 
repose of any normally sensitive and reasonable person. 
6. ?Loud or unusual noises. Making or causing to be made any excessive or unusually loud noise or 
any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time and place as to annoy, 
disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any reasonable 
person of normal sensitivity within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.050), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.060. - Loud noises prohibited in residential areas. 
A. ?Except as authorized in section 16.06.070, it is unlawful to perform any of the following acts within 
areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-O, RMH, R-S or PLI: 
1. ?Non-emergency signaling devices. Sounding any horn or signaling device on any truck, 
automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle, including but not limited to the use of backup beepers, 
except as a warning signal. 
2. ?Exhausts. Discharging into open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal 
combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which 
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. 
3. ?Construction projects. Operating equipment or performing any construction or repair work on 
buildings, structures, streets, highways, bridges or other public rights-of-way or operating any 
pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam electric hoist, generator, pump or 
other construction-type device in such a manner which may disturb the quiet, comfort or repose 
of any normally sensitive and reasonable person. 
4. ?Loading, unloading or opening containers. Loading, unloading, opening or other handling of 
boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects in such a manner as to disturb 
the quiet, comfort or repose of any normally sensitive and reasonable person. 
5. ?Snow blowers, leaf blowers or similar devices. Operating any noise-creating blower, power fan, 
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of 
operating gases or fluids, including but not limited to snow blowers or other snow removal 
devices, leaf blowers, chainsaws, or lawnmowers in a manner which may disturb the quiet, 
comfort or repose of any normally sensitive and reasonable person. 
B. ?The activities described in subsection A of this section are authorized in areas within the city zoned 
B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, HMU, UMU and BP without restrictions set forth in section 16.06.070. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.055), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.070. - Exceptions. 
A. ?Subject to sections 16.06.050 and 16.06.060.A., the following activities will be authorized as follows: 
1. ?Non-emergency signaling devices. Except as authorized in subsection A.3 of this section, the 
sounding or permitting of any sounding of amplified signals from any bell, chime, siren, whistle 
or similar device intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, including but not limited to 
back-up beepers, will be authorized at any time between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
from October 1 through March 30 and between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through 
September 30. 
2. ?Construction projects. Operating equipment or performing any construction or repair work as 
defined in section 16.06.060 will be authorized between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
from October 1 through March 30 and between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through 
September 30. The director of public service may authorize temporary relief from this section 
upon application and a showing of extraordinary need for the use of this equipment beyond or 
outside these hours. Such authorization will clearly set forth the dates and hours of the 
authorized use as well as any special conditions needed to mitigate potential negative noise 
impacts. 
3. ?Loading, unloading or opening containers. The loading, unloading, opening or other handling of 
boxes, crates, containers, solid waste containers or other similar objects, including but not 
limited to the collection of solid waste as defined in section 32.02.010, recyclables or 
compostable materials by either the city or a private contractor duly licensed by the Montana 
Public Service Commission for the collection and transportation of solid waste will be authorized 
provided the parties obtain and comply with any permits required by chapter 38. Should a 
permit not be required, this activity is authorized between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
from October 1 through March 30 and between 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through 
September 30. 
4. ?Snow blowers, leaf blowers or similar devices. The operation of any equipment as defined 
above will be authorized between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. from October 1 through 
March 30 and between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through September 30. 
5. ?Outdoor events. Any outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows sporting events, and other 
similar outdoor events will be authorized provided the parties obtain any permits required by 
chapter 34, article 8. Should the event not require a permit, the gathering will be authorized 
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. from October 1 through March 30 and between 
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through September 30. 
6. ?Outdoor activities. Activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school 
grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are 
generally used, including but not limited to the use of a city-owned park, swimming pool, skate 
park, ball fields, school athletic or school entertainment events. 
7. ?Public work. Noise created in the performance of any work in the public right-of-way or on public 
space as defined herein which is reasonably necessary for the public benefit, welfare, 
convenience or safety, including but not limited to the maintenance of streets, parking lots, 
water and wastewater lines but excluding solid waste activities. 
B. ?Nothing in this section will be construed to allow activity which is prohibited under chapter 38. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.060), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.080. - Emergency exemption. 
    Any of the acts defined in sections 16.06.050, 16.06.060 and 16.06.070 which are performed for 
emergency work for the safety, welfare, and public health of the citizens of the city are exempted from the 
provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.070), 9-24-2001) 


Sec. 16.06.090. - Enforcement. 
A. ?The chief of police will have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Nothing in 
this article will prevent the chief of police from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, 
notice or education. 
B. ?A violation of this article will be punishable as follows: 
1. ?First offense will be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or six months in the county 
jail or both; 
2. ?Second offense occurring within one year from the conviction of the first offense will be 
punishable by a minimum fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, a maximum of six 
months in the county jail or both; 
3. ?Third offense occurring within one year from the conviction of the first offense will be punishable 
by a minimum fine of not less than $200.00 but in no event more than $500.00, a maximum of 
six months in the county jail or both; 
4. ?4th offense occurring within one year from the conviction of the first offense will be punishable 
by a minimum fine of not less than $350.00 but in no event more than $500.00, a maximum of 
six months in the county jail or both; 
5. ?5th offense occurring within one year from the conviction of the first offense will be punishable 
by a fine of $500.00, a maximum of six months in the county jail or both. 
C. ?Nothing in this article will be construed to prevent or interfere with an individual's constitutional right 
to free speech. If a person's exercise of a constitutional right to free speech would violate this article, 
that person must be ordered, and have the opportunity, to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the 
violation prior to arrest or a citation being issued. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1(8.30.080), 9-24-2001) 


ARTICLE 7. - SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Montana Clean Indoor Air Act, MCA 50-40-101 et seq. 


Sec. 16.07.010. - Legislative findings and intent. 
A. ?The city commission finds that: 
1. ?Pursuant to article II, section 3 of the Montana Constitution, all persons have certain inalienable 
rights that include a right to a "clean and healthful environment." Article IX, section 1 of the 
Montana Constitution further provides "the state and each person shall maintain and improve a 
clean and healthful environment in Montana for present and future generations." With respect to 
these rights and correlating duties, it is the intent of the city commission and the citizens of the 
city in enacting this article to prescribe requirements concerning smoking tobacco in enclosed 
public places and in places of employment to provide a clean and healthful environment and to 
protect the health and safety of people from exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. 
2. ?Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution 
and that breathing second-hand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a 
cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, 
and lung cancer. The United States Surgeon General has determined that second-hand smoke 
is responsible for the early deaths of 65,000 Americans annually. 
3. ?Reliable scientific studies, including studies by the Surgeon General of the United States and 
studies commissioned and assessed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, have shown 
that breathing secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard to non-smokers, elderly people, 
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, 
including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Children exposed to second-
hand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome, development abnormalities, and cancer. 
4. ?The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program has listed second-hand smoke as a 
known carcinogen (U.S. DHHS, 2000 citing Cal. EPA 1997). 
5. ?The United States Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of smokers and 
non-smokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of 
non-smokers to second-hand smoke. The Environmental Protection Agency has determined 
that second-hand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of 
ventilation. Air cleaners, which are only capable of filtering the particulate matter in odors and 
smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in second-hand smoke. 
6. ?A significant amount of second-hand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who 
work in smoke-filled businesses suffer 25 percent to 50 percent higher risk of heart attack and 
higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute 
respiratory disease and measurable degrees in lung function. 
7. ?Smoke-filled work places result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower 
productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and 
increased liability claims for disease related to exposure to second-hand smoke. 
8. ?Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for 
economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after 
enactment of laws requiring work places to be smoke-free. Creation of smoke-free work places 
is sound economic policy and provides the maximum level of employee health and safety. 
9. ?Smoking is a potential cause of fires; cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise 
and fixtures causes economic damage to businesses. 
10. ?Accordingly, the city commission and the citizens of Bozeman find and declare that the 
purposes of this article are: 
a. ?To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in enclosed public places 
and places of employment; and, 
b. ?To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air and to recognize that the 
need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
11. ?The city commission finds that it is within their police powers to implement and enforce the 
provisions of this article. 
12. ?The city commission further finds that it is also within their self-government powers to 
implement and enforce the provisions of this article and to supersede any conflicting state 
statutory provisions pursuant to MCA 7-1-105. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.010), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.020. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Bar" means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for 
consumption by guests and/or patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only 
incidental to consumption of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to taverns, night 
clubs, cocktails, lounges and cabarets. This definition is further limited by section 16.07.020.A.6. 
2. ?"Casino" means an establishment whose primary use or activity is gambling, either in the form 
of gambling machines, card games, or other licensed gambling activity. In all instances, an 
establishment will be considered a casino for the purpose of this article if any of the following 
characteristics apply: 
a. ?The establishment is referenced as a casino by signage or by name; 
b. ?More than one card table is on the premises; 
c. ?15 or more gambling machines are on the premises. 
3. ?"Employee" means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or 
indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers such person's services for a 
nonprofit entity. 
4. ?"Employer" means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a 
municipal corporation, trust, governmental entity, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of 
one or more individual persons. 
5. ?"Enclosed public place" means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the 
public is permitted, including but not limited to banks, bars, educational facilities, health care 
facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, rest rooms, retail food 
production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping 
malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. 
6. ?"Incidental to consumption of alcoholic beverages" means that no more than 40 percent of the 
business's annual gross income from the operation may be from the sale of food. 
7. ?"Place of employment" means an area under control of a public or private employer that 
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work 
areas, employee lounges, restaurants, conference rooms, meeting rooms, class rooms, 
employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles. 
8. ?"Public function" means a gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberation, education, 
instruction, entertainment, amusement, or dining, where membership or specific invitation is a 
prerequisite to entry and where the event is not intended to be open to the public. 
9. ?"Retail tobacco store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and 
accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
10. ?"Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, 
weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or any form. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.020), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.030. - Prohibition against smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment. 
    Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of employment, except as otherwise 
provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.030), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.040. - Exemptions to smoking prohibitions. 
A. ?The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
1. ?Private functions and parties, or gatherings not advertised or accessible to the general public. 
Rooms or areas exempted must be fully separated by location or building construction such that 
the building areas remain smoke-free. 
2. ?Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult care, or health care facility. 
3. ?Hotel or motel guest rooms or suites which are designated as smoking rooms. 
4. ?Outdoor areas. 
5. ?Retail tobacco stores. 
6. ?Bars and casinos, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where 
smoking is prohibited under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.040), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.050. - Declaration of establishment as non-smoking. 
    Not withstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person 
who controls any establishment described in this article may declare the entire establishment as a non-
smoking establishment or a portion of the establishment as non-smoking. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.050), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.060. - Notification. 
A. ?"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial 
representation of a burning cigarette in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, 
sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking 
is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of that place. 
B. ?Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have 
posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
C. ?All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from the area where smoking is 
prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of the area. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.060), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.070. - Nonretaliation. 
    No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any 
employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant or customer 
exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.070), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.080. - Other applicable laws. 
    This article may not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by 
other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.080), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.090. - Enforcement. 
A. ?This article shall be enforced by the chief of police. 
B. ?Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a city business license. 
C. ?Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the 
chief of police. 
D. ?The police department and/or the city-county health department shall, while an establishment is 
undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
E. ?An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform 
persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
F. ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal 
action to enforce this article. 
G. ?In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this article, the chief of police, the city 
manager, the city attorney, or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, 
or other person in control of the public place or place of employment to comply with the provisions of 
this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent 
jurisdiction. 
H. ?Upon a complaint being filed with the city, the city may request records and other documents related 
to the exemptions under section 16.07.040, and the owner, manager or operator of the business 
claiming an exemption shall provide the records and/or documents requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.090), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.100. - Violations and penalties. 
A. ?It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited under this 
article and such person shall be subject to a fine of not exceeding $100.00. 
B. ?A person who owns, managers, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of 
employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by: 
1. ?A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
2. ?A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
3. ?A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation. 
C. ?In addition to the fines established by this section, a violation of this article by a person who owns, 
manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the 
suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to a person for the premises on which the 
violation occurred. 
D. ?Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct 
violation. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.100), 9-9-2002) 


Sec. 16.07.110. - State law superseded. 
    This article hereby supersedes the Montana Clean Air Act as set forth in title 50, chapter 40, part 1 
(MCA 50-40-101 et seq.), only to the extent this article provides more stringent restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1(8.48.110), 9-9-2002) 


ARTICLE 8. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Montana Medical Marijuana Act, MCA 50-46-301 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 16.08.010—16.08.140. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - SALES 


Sec. 16.08.150. - Applicability; failure to maintain state authorization. 
A. ?For purposes of this division, the definitions, words, phrases, and expressions as set forth in this 
division are to be construed the same as those set forth in the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-
301 et seq.). 
B. ?Any individual or entity licensed under this division to conduct any transaction, use or business 
involving marijuana, in addition to the requirements of this division, is subject to all other 
requirements of this Code, and the Montana Marijuana Act and any limits on possession, clean air, 
etc., and any applicable administrative rules established by the state. Should such rules or laws 
change, any person or entity licensed under this division shall immediately come into compliance 
with any newly adopted rules. 
C. ?Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this Code shall be construed to authorize any person or entity 
to perform any act or conduct any enterprise not in conformance with state or federal law. 
D. ?Compliance with this Code does not shield any person, corporation, or other legal entity from the 
requirements of, or enforcement by, other governing entities, or from civil liabilities. 
E. ?Each individual or entity issued a license under this division shall at all times maintain authorization 
from the State of Montana under the Montana Medical Marijuana Act to acquire, possess, cultivate, 
manufacture, deliver, transfer, or transport medical marijuana. Failure to maintain authorization 
under the Medical Marijuana Act shall be cause for immediate suspension of a license issued under 
this division and may be cause for revocation or cause for criminal prosecution as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 4(5.06.010), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 1, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.160. - License; application; fee; change; confidentiality. 
A. ?Business licenses. 
1. ?In addition to complying with the requirements of MCA tit. 50, ch. 46, and section 16.08.150.E, 
any individual or entity desiring to conduct any transaction, use, or business regarding the use 
of marijuana within the City must first submit and obtain approval for an application for a 
business license under this chapter from the director of administrative services and pay the 
fee(s) for such license(s) as established by this Code. An activity where a duly licensed medical 
doctor engages in the review of a person's medical condition for purposes of recommending 
marijuana under the Montana Marijuana Act and who does not provide marijuana to a 
registered cardholder, as defined in the Montana Marijuana Act, is not subject to these licensing 
requirements but may be subject to other requirements of this Code. 
2. ?There shall be the following types of business licenses related to marijuana activities conducted 
in the city pursuant to the Montana Marijuana Act regardless of whether the marijuana is sold, 
bartered, exchanged, or gifted: 
a. ?Storefront/retail locations. Any person or entity that provides a location other than the 
residence of the person's or entity's registered cardholder where a transaction or use 
related to marijuana is engaged in for more than three cardholders registered by the state 
to the applicant or the applicant's employees or agents shall, prior to engaging in such 
transaction or use, obtain a marijuana storefront license. As of August 25, 2012, the 
maximum number of marijuana storefront licenses shall be 20. 
b. ?Delivery. Any person or entity that delivers marijuana within the city to more than three 
registered cardholders or another entity regardless of whether the marijuana is sold, 
bartered, exchanged, or gifted shall prior to engaging in such activity obtain a marijuana 
delivery license. 
c. ?Growing and/or processing. Any person or entity that operates a facility for the purpose of 
growing and/or processing marijuana as authorized under the Montana Marijuana Act shall 
prior to engaging in such activity obtain a marijuana grow license. 
A person or entity desiring to engage in an activity related to marijuana pursuant to the Montana 
Marijuana Act must obtain a separate license for each activity described in this subsection A.2 
except a person or entity obtaining a marijuana storefront license may also under said license 
deliver marijuana from that location without obtaining a separate marijuana delivery license. 
B. ?Application information. An application under this division, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 
12 of this code, shall include the following: 
1. ?The name of all owners/principals of the business as applicable and the name of all agents, 
contractors or employees, if any; 
2. ?Documentation demonstrating the applicant and all owners/principals, agents, contractors or 
employees, as applicable, that may be involved in transactions regarding marijuana within the 
city are registered with the state under the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.), 
and are duly authorized by state law to acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, 
transfer, or transport marijuana; 
3. ?A sworn statement signed by the applicant verifying the number of registered cardholders which 
name the applicant and any other owner/principal, agent, contractor, or employee of the 
applicant as the cardholder's provider. The number of registered cardholders to be included in 
the sworn statement shall include all cardholders who may be registered with a provider acting 
as an agent, contractor, employee or owner/principal of the applicant; 
4. ?A statement addressing how the applicant will comply with the security requirement provisions 
of section 16.08.180; and 
5. ?Each applicant for a business license shall provide a detailed statement regarding the nature of 
activities related to marijuana for which the applicant is engaged in and the specific license for 
which an application is being submitted. 
C. ?Duty to inform. An individual or entity licensed under this division to conduct a transaction, use, or 
business related to marijuana must, within the time period described below, inform the director of 
administrative services of the occurrence of the following: 
1. ?Every 90 days, any change to the licensed individual or entity's number of registered qualifying 
patients cardholders (including those of a principal/owner, agent, contractor, or employee); 
and/or 
2. ?Every 30 days, a change in the principals of the business or a change of agents, contractors or 
employees. 
If either of these conditions occur, a new statement under subsection B.3 of this section is required. 
Failure to inform the director of administrative services of the changes listed herein within the time periods 
described above shall be cause for revocation of the license pursuant to sections 12.02.170 and 
12.02.180. 
D. ?Public document. An application for business license under this division is a public document except 
that the names of all agents, employees and/or contractors and the number of registered cardholders 
provided to the city in fulfillment of the requirements of this division are to be kept on a separate form 
and are to be considered confidential by the city unless disclosure is required by law. Nothing herein 
shall prevent a duly authorized agent of the city from sharing the information described in this section 
with other authorized city employees or other state or local law enforcement as necessary to perform 
official duties. 
E. ?Nontransferable. A license issued under this division is not transferable and the provisions of section 
12.02.080 shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 4(5.06.020), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 7-
23-2012; Ord. No. 1869 , § 1, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.170. - Inspection. 
    In addition to the authorization to inspect under section 12.02.150, as a condition of receiving a 
business license under this division, a city employee, including law enforcement, may without notice 
during normal business hours inspect any premises under license pursuant to this division to determine 
whether the licensee is in compliance with the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.), or any 
other state or local regulation, and may inspect the number of plants or amount of marijuana on the 
premises or in control of the licensee to determine whether these amounts correspond to the amounts 
established by the Montana Marijuana Act, which the licensee is authorized to lawfully possess. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 4(5.06.030), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 1, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.180. - Security requirements. 
    Prior to issuance of a license under this division, a marijuana commercial business where any 
amount of marijuana is stored on the premises beyond normal business hours or where marijuana is 
grown in any amount shall be secured at all times by a physical barrier with suitable locks and also by an 
electronic barrier or alarm that is designed to detect entry by unauthorized persons at any time. In 
addition, any marijuana grown or stored on the premises after normal business hours shall be kept in a 
security safe incorporated into the building's structure or securely attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 4(5.06.040), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 1, 7-22-2013) 


Secs. 16.08.190—16.08.290. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC USE AND DISPLAY 


Sec. 16.08.300. - Purpose and intent. 
A. ?The purpose of this division is to identify acts regarding the use of marijuana as authorized in Title 
50, Chapter 46, MCA within the city that are not authorized to be conducted in a manner open or 
visible to the general public. In addition, the purpose of this division is to identify that acts related to 
smoking, consuming, or displaying marijuana in certain public areas are to be punished as criminal 
acts and as such shall be subject to criminal penalties. The purpose of establishing these acts where 
the use is further limited by the city as criminal is to protect the public's health, safety, and general 
welfare. 
B. ?It is the intent of this division that the visible or open display, smoking, or consumption of marijuana 
by registered cardholders is to be confined to private property where that property or portions thereof 
are not adapted and fitted for public travel or are not in common use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.010), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 2, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.310. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Marijuana" has the meaning provided in MCA 50-32-101. 
2. ?"Ways of the city open to the public" means any highway, road, driveway, alley, lane, parking 
area, sidewalk, park, trail, or other public or private place within the city that is adapted and 
fitted for the use of the public and that is in common use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.020), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 2, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.320. - Public display, smoking, or consumption of marijuana prohibited. 
    No person authorized by the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.) to acquire, possess, 
cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer, or transport marijuana, may, on the ways of the city open to the 
public, display, smoke, or consume marijuana in an open or visible manner. A violation of this section is 
an absolute liability offense. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.030), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 2, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.330. - State law superseded and applicable. 
    The provisions of this division shall supersede by the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et 
seq.), only in so far as this division expands the limitations on the use of marijuana authorized under the 
Montana Marijuana Act. All other provisions of state law related to marijuana shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.040), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 2, 7-22-2013) 


Sec. 16.08.340. - Violation and penalty. 
    A violation of section 16.08.320 is a misdemeanor and upon conviction a person shall be fined not 
more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the Gallatin County Detention Center for a period not to exceed six 
months or both such fine and imprisonment. A person so convicted shall also be required to pay all costs 
and expenses of prosecution and the courts as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.050), 7-26-2010) 


Sec. 16.08.350. - No private right of action. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to create a private right of action regarding the acquisition, 
possession, cultivation, manufacture, delivery, transfer, or transport of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 1786, § 5(8.52.060), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 2, 7-22-2013) 


ARTICLE 9. - ALARM SYSTEMS 


Sec. 16.09.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Alarm system monitoring company" means any individual, partnership, corporation or other 
form of association that engages in the business of monitoring security alarm systems and 
reporting any activation of such alarm systems to the police. 
2. ?"Alarm user" means any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association that 
owns or leases a security alarm system or on whose premises a security alarm system is 
maintained for the protection of the premises. 
3. ?"Automatic dialing telephone alarm" means a security alarm system with a device that 
automatically dials the police department emergency assistance telephone lines without human 
activation of the device by the alarm user. 
4. ?"Dispatch" or "response" means a discretionary decision whether to direct police units to a 
location where there has been a request, made by whatever means, for police assistance or 
investigation. There is no duty to dispatch under any circumstances, including to answer an 
alarm signal, and all dispatch decisions are made subject to competing priorities and available 
police resources. 
5. ?"False alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting notification to and a response by the police when 
there is no evidence of a crime or other activity that warrants a call for immediate police 
assistance and no person who was on or near the property or has viewed a video 
communication from the property called for the police dispatch or confirmed the need for police 
assistance. The term "false alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused by violent 
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user. 
6. ?"Security alarm system" means any system, device, or mechanism for the detection and 
reporting of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon premises 
protected by the system that may be activated by sensors or other techniques and, when 
activated, automatically transmits a telephone message or emits an audible, visible, or 
electronic signal that can be heard, seen, or received by persons outside the protected 
premises and is intended to summon police assistance. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.010; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.010), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.020. - Audible alarm standards. 
A. ?A security alarm system that emits an audible signal that may be heard outside the protected 
premises shall conform to the following requirements: 
1. ?Audible alarms shall automatically discontinue emitting the audible sound within ten minutes 
after activation of the alarm; and 
2. ?Security alarm systems that do not comply with subsection 1 of this section shall have 30 days 
from the issuance of a notice of noncompliance in which to make the necessary modifications to 
the alarm system in order to comply with the requirement. If there is no evidence of compliance 
at the end of the 30 days, the system is subject to a determination under section 16.09.090 and 
a "No Response" designation under section 16.09.120. Subsequent evidence of compliance 
with the alarm standards may allow for cancellation of the action under sections 16.09.090 and 
16.09.120 in the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.020; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.020), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.030. - Violation of audible alarm standard. 
A. ?The sounding of an audible signal from a security alarm system that can be heard continuously off 
the premises for more than ten minutes is not an emergency exemption to the provisions of article 6 
of this chapter unless the defenses found in subsection B of this section apply. A system which 
continuously sounds an audible alarm under circumstances where subsection B of this section does 
not apply is subject to the provisions of article 6 of this chapter and may be cited as such. 
B. ?It is a defense to a violation of this section that the continuous sounding of the alarm: 
1. ?Assisted in saving a life or avoiding injury; or 
2. ?Was caused by a malfunction of the alarm system equipment without the alarm user's prior 
knowledge of the cause of the malfunction; or 
3. ?Was activated by an unauthorized entry of criminal activity. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.030; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.030), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.040. - Automatic dialing telephone systems prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association to sell, 
offer for sale, install, maintain, operate or assist in the operation of any alarm system with an automatic 
dialing or digital alarm communicator feature that automatically calls the police in the event of an alarm. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.040; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.040), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.050. - Alarm users. 
A. ?An alarm user shall: 
1. ?Maintain the premises and security alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate 
false alarms; 
2. ?Review all alarm system operating instructions, including those for verification of an alarm; 
3. ?Maintain a verification process, as specified in section 16.09.070, for all monitored security 
alarm systems in order to prevent unnecessary police dispatches resulting from false alarms; 
4. ?Notify the alarm system monitoring company of a false alarm activation as soon as the user is 
aware of the false alarm; 
5. ?Not manually activate an alarm except when needing an immediate police response to an 
emergency; 
6. ?Provide an immediate response to the alarm site in an effort to address the alarm cause and 
facilitate access to the premises. This response shall be made by the alarm user or their 
authorized key holder; and 
7. ?Provide the alarm company with a current, accurate, maintained list of authorized key holders. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.050; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.050), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.060. - Alarm system monitoring companies. 
A. ?An alarm system monitoring company engaging in business activities in the city shall: 
1. ?Obtain all necessary business licenses as required by the city and state; 
2. ?Maintain a current record, accessible to the chief of police at all times, that includes: the names 
of the alarm users serviced by the company; the addresses of the protected properties; the type 
of alarm system, original installation date and subsequent modifications, if any, for each 
protected property; and a record of the false alarms at each property; 
3. ?Provide the chief of police such information as may be requested regarding: the nature of the 
company's security alarms; the company's method of monitoring the alarms; the company's 
program for preventing false alarms, including educational programs for alarm users; and the 
company's method for disconnecting audible alarms; 
4. ?Provide each of its alarm system users with: operating instructions for the alarm system, 
including an explanation of the alarm company's alarm verification process; a telephone number 
to call for assistance in operating the system; and a summary of the provisions of this article 
relating to penalties for false alarms and the possibility of no police response to alarm systems 
experiencing excessive false alarms; 
5. ?Maintain a verification process, as specified in section 16.09.070, for all monitored security 
alarm systems in order to prevent unnecessary police dispatches resulting from false alarms; 
6. ?Communicate requests for police response to the police department in a manner specified by 
the chief of police; 
7. ?Communicate requests for cancellations of police response in a manner specified by the chief of 
police; 
8. ?Maintain a record of all requests for police response to alarm, including: the date and time of the 
alarm and request for police response; the alarm system user's name and address; evidence of 
the company's attempt to verify the alarm; and, to the best of its knowledge, an explanation of 
the cause of any false alarm; and 
9. ?Work cooperatively with the alarm system user and the chief of police in order to determine the 
cause of any false alarm and to prevent recurrences. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.060; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.060), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.070. - Security alarm verification process. 
A. ?A verification process is an independent method of an alarm system monitoring company for 
determining that a signal from a security alarm system requires immediate police response. The 
verification process shall not take more than five minutes, calculated from the time that the alarm 
company receives the alarm signal until the alarm company determines whether to request a police 
dispatch. The means of verification shall include at least one of the following: 
1. ?The establishment of voice communications with the alarm user or a person authorized by the 
user at or near the premises with the alarm who may indicate whether there is an immediate 
need for police response; 
2. ?A feature that permits the alarm user or a person authorized by the user to send a special signal 
to the alarm company that will cancel the alarm immediately after the signal has been sent and 
prevent the alarm company from calling the police; 
3. ?The installation of a video system that provides the alarm company, when the alarm signal is 
received, with the ability to ascertain whether activity is occurring that warrants immediate police 
response; 
4. ?A confirmation made before dispatching the police that an alarm signal reflects a need for 
immediate police response from either the alarm user or a person authorized by the user or an 
alternate response agency; or 
5. ?An alternate system that the chief of police determines has or is likely to have a high degree of 
reliability. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.070; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.070), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.080. - Unlawful activation or report of alarm. 
A. ?No person shall activate a security alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in 
the event of an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime being committed or attempted on the 
premises, or if the person needs immediate assistance in order to avoid injury or serious bodily 
harm. 
B. ?Any person who shall notify the police of an activated alarm and has knowledge that such activation 
was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction shall at the same time notify the police of 
the apparent malfunction. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.080; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.080), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.090. - Determination of false alarm; rebuttable presumption. 
A. ?For the purposes of this article, there is a rebuttable presumption that the following determinations 
made by the chief of police or by a police officer dispatched to the premises reporting an alarm signal 
are correct: 
1. ?There is no evidence of a crime or other activity that would warrant a call for immediate police 
assistance at the premises; 
2. ?No individual who was on or near the premises, or who has viewed a video communication from 
the premises, called for a police dispatch or verified a need for an immediate police response; 
and 
3. ?There is no evidence that violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances 
beyond the control of the alarm user caused the activation of the alarm. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.090; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.090), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.100. - Penalty for false alarm. 
    A false alarm is an administrative infraction, and upon determination of a false alarm, the alarm 
system user may be subject to administrative designation under section 16.09.120. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.100; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.100), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.110. - Appeal of false alarm fine. 
A. ?The city court may waive the administrative penalty incurred by an alarm system user for a false 
alarm and clear the notice of violation as a warning if: 
1. ?The notice to alarm user describes a violation of section 16.09.100; and 
2. ?Within 15 days after the date of the notice of a false alarm, the alarm user either follows the 
instructions on the back of the notice of violation to arrange an appearance in court or mails a 
written response to the court requesting a waiver and clearance as a warning. 
B. ?The alarm user may present evidence before the court or in the written response to the court that 
shows: the steps that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken, or is taking, to 
correct the false alarm problem; the incidence of crime in the area of the property; the facts and 
circumstances of the false alarm; and other relevant information. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.110; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998) 


Sec. 16.09.120. - No-response to frequent false alarms; appeal of no-response determination. 
A. ?When the chief of police determines whether to make an immediate dispatch in response to 
notification of a signal from a security alarm system, the director of public safety may disregard a call 
for police assistance when: 
1. ?The call for assistance comes from an alarm system for a premises that has a record of sending 
four false alarms in a 12-month calendar year; and 
2. ?The call is the only basis for making the dispatch. 
B. ?The chief of police may consider such a call for assistance as an additional factor in the director's 
decision to order an immediate police response when an in-person call, verification from a person at 
or near the premises, or other independent evidence shows a need for immediate police assistance 
at the premises. 
C. ?To discourage false alarms, the director shall adopt a process of communication (by letter, 
telephone and in-person) with the alarm user who has had one or more false alarms emphasizing 
the need to take corrective action, and that four false alarms in a 12-month calendar year may result 
in the police disregarding alarms from the premises and not responding to requests for immediate 
police assistance unless there is an in-person call for assistance from someone at or near the 
premises or other independent information that verifies the need for an immediate police response. 
D. ?Before determining not to respond to alarms from a premises as specified in subsection C of this 
section, the chief of police shall communicate with the alarm user that: 
1. ?Four false alarms have been received from the property within a 12-month calendar year; 
2. ?The remedy authorized in subsection A of this section may be taken; 
3. ?The alarm system user may request a meeting before the chief of police and explain why the 
director should not take the proposed action; 
4. ?If no meeting is requested, the police department will, after ten days from the delivery of the 
notice, disregard alarms from the premises unless there is an in-person call for assistance from 
someone at or near the premises or other independent information that verifies the need for an 
immediate police response; and 
5. ?A requirement of an in-person communication or other verification shall remain in effect until 
adequate corrective action has been completed. 
E. ?If a meeting is requested, the chief of police shall schedule the meeting within ten days of the receipt 
of the request. At the meeting, the director may consider such factors as: the steps that the alarm 
user or alarm system monitoring company has taken, or is taking, to correct the problem; the 
frequency of crime in the area of the premises; the facts and circumstances of the false alarms; and 
other relevant information presented by the alarm user or the alarm system monitoring company. 
F. ?The chief of police may suspend or cancel the remedy under subsection A of this section if the 
director determines that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken appropriate 
actions to prevent the recurrence of false alarms. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.120; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.120), 6-16-2005) 


Sec. 16.09.130. - Violation; penalties. 
A. ?An alarm system monitoring company's failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article 
shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $250.00. Each day of noncompliance shall 
constitute a separate offense. 
B. ?The violations of the other sections of this article shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of 
up to $50.00, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1982, § 8.05.130; Ord. No. 1470, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1639, § 1(8.05.130), 6-16-2005) 


Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire safety in public buildings, MCA 50-61-101 et seq.; fire hazards, MCA 50-62-
101 et seq.; investigation of fires, MCA 50-63-101 et seq. 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - FIRE CODE 


Sec. 18.02.010. - International Fire Code. 
A. ?Adoption by reference of the International Fire Code. 
1. ?The current edition of the International Fire Code together with any supplements, adopted by 
the Fire Prevention and Investigation Bureau of the Montana Department of Justice (or its 
successor), as set out in the Administrative Rules of Montana, and as amended from time to 
time by the Bureau, are adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if set forth in 
full, with the additions, amendments, and deletions enumerated within the Administrative Rules, 
except as may be noted in this article, by future administrative order, or by any regulations not 
applicable to local government jurisdictions. 
2. ?One copy of the current edition of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the 
Commission of the City of Bozeman, 121 North Rouse Avenue, Bozeman, Montana, and one 
copy shall be kept on file in the office of the Bozeman Fire Department, 34 North Rouse, 
Bozeman, Montana. 
3. ?Any amendments adopted by the Fire Prevention and Investigation Bureau which apply to local 
government jurisdictions, including the adoption of the latest editions of the International Fire 
Code or applicable Administrative Rules of Montana shall become effective upon execution of 
an administrative order of the city manager unless a different effective date is specified in the 
administrative order. 
4. ?A copy of the amendment notification and the corresponding new edition will be kept in the 
office of the city clerk, and the city fire department. 
5. ?The International Fire Code, Administrative Rules of Montana, as adopted in subsection A.1 of 
this section, are applicable within the city limits. 
B. ?Violation; penalty. 
1. ?Any person, firm, business or corporation, who erects, constructs, reconstructs, enlarges, alters, 
repairs, moves, improves, removes, converts, equips, uses, changes the use of, occupies or 
maintains any building or structure in violation of any provision of this code shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanor criminal offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or be imprisoned in 
the county jail for a term not to exceed six months, or both. Each day the violation is allowed to 
continue shall be deemed a separate chargeable criminal offense. 
2. ?Any damages caused or injuries sustained as a result of any violation of this article shall be 
ordered paid as restitution as a part of any conviction for any violation. 
3. ?The court may order the reimbursement of costs of enforcement, investigation, fire suppression 
services, overtime and prosecution related to a violation upon conviction. 
(Code 1982, §§ 15.36.010, 15.36.020; Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 1305, §§ 1, 2, 1990; 
Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1443, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1511, §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. No. 
1619, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 1791, § 2, 8-23-2010) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt the fire code by reference, MCA 7-5-4202(1), 7-33-
4208. 


Sec. 18.02.020. - Fire code board of appeals. 
A. ?Creation. The city commission of the city shall appoint a fire code board of appeals, hereinafter 
referred to as the "board," and designate the board to determine the suitability of alternate materials 
and types of construction under the International Fire Code and to provide reasonable interpretation 
of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the city. 
B. ?Membership; meetings. 
1. ?The board shall consist of five members, appointed by the city commission, who are qualified by 
experience and training to pass upon pertinent matters. Each member may be reappointed 
without limitation on the number of reappointments. The fire chief shall be an ex officio member 
and shall act as secretary of the board. 
2. ?Initial terms of office shall be as follows: one appointed for one year, two appointed for two 
years and two appointed for three years. Succeeding appointments shall be for a period of three 
years. 
3. ?Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments for the balance of the 
term remaining. 
4. ?Persons of legal age may be appointed to the board. A majority of the board shall be residents 
of the city. Nonresident members of the board shall live within the zoning jurisdictional area and 
shall have some interest in the city by virtue of working in the city, owning property in the city or 
entering the city frequently for any lawful purpose. 
5. ?Members shall serve without compensation for their time and services. 
6. ?Meetings of the board shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations 
of the city and the minimum bylaw provisions adopted by the board and approved by the 
commission. 
7. ?The board shall hear appeals not more than 30 days after filing thereof, and render all decisions 
and findings in writing to the fire chief, with a copy to the appellant. 
8. ?Any expenses incurred must first be approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1982, §§ 15.37.010, 15.37.020; Ord. No. 1444, § 1, 1997) 


ARTICLE 3. - OFFENSES CONCERNING FIREFIGHTING OPERATIONS 


Sec. 18.03.010. - False alarms and tampering with fire alarm boxes prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully use any fire alarm box, or telephone, or any means whatsoever for 
transmitting or sending in to the fire department an alarm of fire which such person knows to be false; nor 
shall such person willfully tamper with, or injure or destroy any such fire alarm box or any of the 
equipment thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 9.06.010) 


Sec. 18.03.020. - Taking or damaging fire apparatus prohibited; exception. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to take out or remove from the fire stations of the city, where 
the same are kept, any ladders, trucks, hose, hose cart or any other fire apparatus, except in case of fire, 
or under the direction of the chief of the fire department; nor shall any person or persons mar, deface or in 
any manner injure any of the fire apparatus used by the fire department. Any person violating any of the 
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.010) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, MCA 45-6-101 et seq. 


Sec. 18.03.030. - Taking fire apparatus for private use or outside city prohibited. 
    Any officer in command of the fire department who suffers the engine or other fire apparatus, the 
property of the city, to be taken beyond the city limits, without permission of the city manager, shall be 
guilty of a misdemeanor. If any person having charge of any engine or other fire apparatus, the property 
of the city, suffers the same to be applied to private use without permission of the city manager, such 
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.020) 


Sec. 18.03.040. - Fire area limits; private citizens to help extinguish fires. 
A. ?The chief of the fire department may prescribe limits in the vicinity of a fire within which no person, 
except those residing therein, members of the fire department, members of the police force, or those 
admitted by the chief of the fire department, or the chief's subordinates, shall be permitted to come. 
B. ?The chief of the fire department, when in the chief's judgment the same is necessary, may call upon 
any person present to assist the firefighters in their duties, or to assist in extinguishing any fire, and 
any such person so called upon who refuses or neglects to so assist, unless physically 
incapacitated, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.030) 


Sec. 18.03.050. - Firefighting operations; destruction of property authorized when. 
    The chief of the fire department, or in the chief's absence anyone acting in the chief's capacity, may, 
during the progress of any fire, whenever in the chief's judgment it becomes necessary in order to check 
or control the same, order any fence, building or structure to be cut or torn down and removed. The chief 
of the fire department shall, with the consent of the city manager, have power to cause any building or 
structure to be blown up for the purpose of checking or extinguishing the fire, and may tear down any 
portion of any building which may remain after a fire if, in the chief's judgment, such portion of any 
building so remaining standing shall be dangerous to persons or property. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.040) 


Sec. 18.03.060. - Hindering firefighting operations prohibited. 
    Any person who willfully interferes or hinders any city officer or firefighter in the performance of such 
officer's or firefighter's duty at, going to, or returning from any fire, or while attending to the officer's or 
firefighter's duties as a member of the fire department, or who willfully or negligently drives any dray, 
wagon, streetcar, locomotive, train of cars or other vehicle across, or along or upon any hose, or who 
willfully cuts, defaces, destroys or injures any telegraph wire or pole, or signal box, or any of the property 
belonging to or connected with the fire department, or any fire alarm telegraph, shall be deemed guilty of 
a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.050) 
State Law reference— Obstructing peace officer or other public servant, MCA 45-7-302. 


Sec. 18.03.070. - Abatement of fire hazard nuisances caused by structures. 
A. ?Any and all buildings, ruins, chimneys, flues, boilers, walls, remains of burned buildings or other 
constructions within the city limits which, by reason of their construction or condition, are in danger of 
being set on fire, or are in any manner a menace to adjoining property or to the public generally, are 
each hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to 
examine all such, and, for such purpose, may enter any building within reasonable hours, and if in 
the chief's opinion any nuisance, as defined by this article, shall exist, the chief of the fire department 
shall notify the owner or owners to abate such nuisance forthwith. 
B. ?In case the owner of any premises upon which a nuisance exists fails or refuses to abate such 
nuisance, after being notified as aforesaid, the chief of the fire department shall report the facts in 
relation thereto to the city commission. If the city commission finds that such nuisance exists, it may 
direct the chief of police or city engineer to abate such nuisance. The expense thereof shall be 
reported by such officer so abating same to the commission, to be an item of special assessment, 
which may be assessed against the premises as in case of special assessment of taxes. The owner 
of such premises, permitting any such nuisance to remain after being notified, shall be deemed guilty 
of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.060) 


Sec. 18.03.080. - Abatement of nonstructural fire hazard nuisances. 
A. ?It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department at least once a week to inspect all streets and 
alleys, cellar ways, back lots, woodsheds and all other places within the city limits where shavings, 
straw, waste or other combustible material may or does accumulate, and to order instant removal of 
such material, if any is found, by the person responsible, or by the person upon whose premises the 
same may be located. 
B. ?Upon the refusal of any such person so notified to abate the nuisance created by such combustible 
material so being in such place, the person so refusing shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a 
nuisance, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.08.070) 


ARTICLE 4. - OPEN BURNING 


Sec. 18.04.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Best available control technology" means those techniques and methods of controlling 
emissions of air contaminants from an open burning source and that limits those emissions to 
the maximum degree taking into consideration impacts on energy use, the environment, the 
economy, and any other costs, including the cost to the source, including, but not limited to: 
a. ?Scheduling burning during periods and seasons of good ventilation; 
b. ?Considering atmospheric dispersion forecasts; 
c. ?Utilizing predictive modeling results from the Montana Department of Environmental Quality 
to minimize smoke; 
d. ?Limiting the amount of burning to be performed during any one period of time; 
e. ?Using ignition and burning techniques that minimize smoke production; 
f. ?Selecting fuel preparation methods to minimize dirt and moisture content; 
g. ?Promoting fuel arrangements that create an adequate air to fuel ratio; 
h. ?Prioritizing burns as to air quality impact and assigning control techniques accordingly; and 
i. ?Promoting alternative treatments and uses of materials so that they do not have to be 
burned. 
2. ?"Major open burning" means open burning that, on a statewide basis, will emit more than 500 
tons of carbon monoxide or 50 tons of any other pollutant regulated under title 17, chapter 8, 
Administrative Rules of Montana (ARM), in a calendar year, except hydrocarbons. Major open 
burning requires a permit from the state. 
3. ?"Minor open burning" means open burning that emits less pollutant than "major open burning" 
and must comply with this article, any other applicable state, federal, or county law including the 
ARMs and uses the best available control technology (BACT). 
4. ?"Open burning" means the burning or combustion of any material directly in the open air or in a 
receptacle other than a furnace, multiple chambered incinerator, or a wood waste burner 
commonly used by the wood products industry. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.010; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.020. - Permit; when required; fees. 
A. ?For burning between the periods of March 1 through November 30, a county open burn permit must 
be obtained prior to engaging in any open burning within the city limits. When limits for atmospheric 
conditions or hours restrict burning, these limits will be designated in the permit restrictions. 
B. ?For any major open burning during any time of the year or for open burning during the months of 
December, January, and February a person may make a written application to the state department 
of environmental quality for permission to burn. 
C. ?Where burning is conducted on public property or the property of someone other than the permit 
applicant within the city limits, the permit applicant will obtain a burn permit as well as written 
permission from the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
D. ?The fees for the permits will be set in accordance with a schedule adopted by the Gallatin county 
commission. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.020; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 
State Law reference— Permit for burning required, MCA 76-13-121 et seq. 


Sec. 18.04.030. - Other burning allowed with a permit. 
A. ?Essential agricultural open burning on a farm or ranch is allowed during the months of March 
through November with a burning permit and only for the purposes of eliminating excess vegetative 
matter from irrigation ditches or cultivated fields or improving range conditions or wildlife habitat 
when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
B. ?Prescribed wild land open burning, if conducted on forest land or relatively undeveloped rangeland, 
is allowed with a burning permit only for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or range conditions; 
reducing fire hazards from forestry practices; controlling forest pests and diseases; promoting forest 
regeneration; or promoting other accepted forest practices. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.030; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.040. - Open burning allowed without any permit. 
    From March 1 through November 30, a permit is not required for small recreational fires in controlled 
areas. The fire must not exceed three feet in diameter and two feet in height. However, from September 1 
through November 30, the burner must call to see if there are restrictions. For the purposes of this 
section, a recreation fire is defined as any fire not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue 
grill or pit and which is burned for pleasure, religious, ceremonial cooking or similar purposes. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.040; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.050. - Materials prohibited for open burning. 
A. ?Open burning within the city limits is totally prohibited for: 
1. ?Food wastes; 
2. ?Styrofoam, plastic wastes and other materials generating noxious odors; 
3. ?Poultry litter, animal droppings, dead animals or dead animal parts; 
4. ?Rubber materials including, but not limited to, tires; 
5. ?Treated lumber and timbers; 
6. ?Pathogenic wastes; 
7. ?Asbestos or asbestos-containing materials; 
8. ?Materials resulting from salvage operations to reclaim or salvage any product or material, 
except materials from the forest practice commonly referred to as a salvage cut in timber 
harvesting; 
9. ?Hazardous wastes, which are a waste or combination of wastes that, because of the quantity, 
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristic, if any, cause or significantly 
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating 
reversible illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the 
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed 
as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations; and 
10. ?Any other materials specifically prohibited by Montana Code Annotated and the ARMs. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.050; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.060. - Burn barrels prohibited. 
    The use of burn barrels is totally prohibited within the city limits. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.060; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.070. - Permit holder responsibilities. 
A. ?A permit holder must call the county open burning number each day burning is planned at least 30 
minutes before the planned burn and give the following information: 
1. ?Name, permit number, and phone number; 
2. ?Material to be burned; 
3. ?Starting time of burning, during daylight hours; 
4. ?Location of burn; 
5. ?If on forest service property, the legal description including section, township, and range; and 
6. ?The number of acres to be burned. 
B. ?Before setting a fire, permit holders must ensure that adequate fire suppression equipment and 
personnel are present for fire control for the duration of the burn. The permit holder will not leave the 
immediate fire area until the fire has completely burned out, with no remaining embers or smoke. 
C. ?The permit holder may delegate any of these duties to a designated responsible person; however, 
the permit holder is ultimately responsible for any violations. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.070; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.080. - Safety conditions. 
A. ?No fire shall be set if wind or weather conditions make it hazardous to burn. If wind or other weather 
conditions change making the fire hazardous, the fire must be extinguished as quickly as possible. 
B. ?When there is high fire danger, because winds or other conditions make burning hazardous, or when 
fire suppression resources are not available, permits may be temporarily suspended until good 
ventilation exists and to allow assignment of burn priorities, if others request permission to burn on 
the same day. 
C. ?The city fire chief may close or restrict open burning when necessary. All permit holders must 
extinguish fires upon request of any city or county law enforcement officer or firefighter. Failure to do 
so will be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.080; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


Sec. 18.04.090. - Enforcement; penalties. 
    The city police department has the authority to investigate complaints and issue written notices of 
violation, orders to take corrective action, and citations to enforce this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8.44.090; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 1999) 


ARTICLE 5. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks, MCA 50-37-101 et seq. 


Sec. 18.05.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Fireworks" means and includes any combustible or explosive composition or any substance, 
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible 
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation and includes, but is not limited to, 
sky rockets, roman candles, dago bombs, blank cartridges, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns 
in which explosives other than toy paper caps are used, the type of balloons which require fire 
underneath to propel then, firecrackers, torpedoes, sparklers or other fireworks of like 
construction, any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or 
other device containing any explosive substance. This definition includes items which contain 
even small amounts of silver fulminate, potassium nitrate, ammonium perchlorate, or other 
chemical or pyrotechnical composition intended to produce a pyrotechnic event or effect, even if 
not classified as a "hazardous material" under federal regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.020. - When this article does not apply. 
A. ?This article shall not apply to: 
1. ?Fireworks held or sold to a person possessing a valid permit under MCA 50-37-107, and a valid 
permit issued by the fire chief for the purpose of conducting a supervised public display of such 
fireworks. 
2. ?Fireworks used by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination. 
3. ?The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, for signal or ceremonial purposes in 
athletics or sports, for use by peace officers, or for use by official military organizations or 
organizations composed of veterans of the United States armed forces. 
4. ?Toy paper caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive composition per cap. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 2, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.030. - Public display permitted when. 
A. ?The fire chief and/or chief of police shall review and inspect all supervised public displays of 
fireworks, including "display fireworks," by the municipality, fair associations, amusement parks, or 
other organizations or groups of individuals upon completion of the necessary application and 
submission of appropriate fees as may be established by resolution of the city commission. A visual 
site inspection shall occur before any permit is issued. Submission of the application does not 
guarantee issuance of a permit. All applications under this section shall be made to the fire chief. 
B. ?Each display shall: 
1. ?Be handled by a licensed, bonded pyrotechnic operator to be approved by the fire chief; 
2. ?Be located, discharged, or fired such that the display, in the opinion of the fire chief, shall not be 
hazardous to persons or property; 
3. ?Clearly post a "NO SMOKING" warning within 50 feet of the staging and discharge area 
established for the display, and no one may smoke within the defined area. 
C. ?The application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 15 days prior to the date of the display, 
and shall contain, at a minimum: 
1. ?A map of the proposed display venue, including the temporary storage site, the parking and 
spectator viewing areas, the fireworks discharge point, location of structures and roads, streets, 
and alleys within a 1,000-yard radius, overhead obstructions or other hazards; 
2. ?The name of the licensed and bonded pyrotechnic operator along with the operator's 
qualifications, training and experience, and the names of any assistants for the event; 
3. ?The location of all fire hydrants, water spigots or other access points for water, and all other fire 
retardants or extinguishers available at or near the venue; 
4. ?Proof of general liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city, and which includes the 
city as an additional insured; 
5. ?The name of the association, entity, organization or group and its organizing or supervising 
board or responsible parties for the event; 
6. ?A complete list of the fireworks intended for use in the display together with their projectile 
range, if any; 
7. ?The location, date and time of the display and written consent from the landowner; and 
8. ?A detailed safety plan for the event. 
D. ?Upon inspection and issuance of the permit, and only then, sales, possession and use of fireworks 
for such display as detailed in the permit shall be lawful for that purpose only. 
E. ?Following the public display, the organizers and the pyrotechnic operator shall be responsible for 
clean-up of the display site, including disposal of all discharged fireworks and all non-discharged or 
"dud" fireworks in a safe manner. 
F. ?No permit issued under this article shall be subject to transfer. 
G. ?This permit may be revoked by the fire chief when any of the conditions under which the permit was 
granted change, when a hazardous condition is determined to exist, or when, in the best judgment of 
the fire chief, such permit must be withdrawn in the interests of public safety, and may include 
violation of any rule, regulation or requirement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.040. - Sale and discharge of fireworks. 
A. ?No individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall possess for sale, sell, or offer for 
sale, at retail, or discharge within the city limits, any fireworks, as defined herein, except as 
specifically provided in this article. 
B. ?No parent, guardian or custodian of any child under the age of majority shall knowingly permit or 
consent to the possession or discharge of fireworks by any child under the age of majority without 
proper supervision. Possession or discharge by any child under the age of majority within the city 
limits shall be prima facie evidence of the knowing permission or consent of such parent, guardian or 
custodian. 
C. ?No fireworks may be discharged within the boundaries of or within 300 feet of any public park owned 
or maintained by the city without a public display permit except as otherwise provided in this article. 
No fireworks may be discharged upon any public street, alley, road or right-of-way, except as 
otherwise provided in this article. No fireworks may be discharged within 1,000 feet of any hospital, 
nursing or assisted living facility. No fireworks may be discharged under or upon a motor vehicle, 
whether moving or not, or within 300 feet of any gas station, gas, oil or propane storage facility or 
other area which is highly flammable by nature. 
D. ?Subject to the limitations contained in this article, fireworks, as listed in subsection E of this section, 
may be discharged within the city limits only on private property of the owner, or with the owner's 
permission, or on paved city streets which are not arterial streets or collectors when such discharge 
is in a safe and sane manner, and limited to the July 4 holiday only: 
1. ?Between 12:00 p.m. July 3 and 12:00 a.m. July 4; 
2. ?Between 12:00 p.m. July 4 and 1:00 a.m. July 5; 
3. ?Between 12:00 p.m. July 5 and 12:00 a.m. July 6; 
and for the New Year's Day holiday only from 11:00 p.m. December 31 until 1:00 a.m. January 1. As used 
in this subsection, the phrase "safe and sane manner" refers to actions which do not endanger life, limb or 
property of those in the area of the discharge. Nothing in allowing the discharge of fireworks within the 
city limits relieves the individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of its responsibility for any 
injury or damage caused to individuals or property by the discharge of the fireworks. Any discharge, with 
or without a permit, is at the individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association's own risk, and is not 
sanctioned by this article. 
E. ?Permitted fireworks are the following type of Class C "common fireworks" among those listed in 
federal law: 
1. ?A cardboard or heavy paper cylindrical tube or cone that: 
a. ?Produces a shower of color and sparks that reach a maximum of 15 feet; 
b. ?May whistle or pop; and 
c. ?Is not designed to explode or leave the ground; 
2. ?A pyrotechnic wheel device: 
a. ?May be attached to a post or tree; and 
b. ?Contains up to six "driver" units or tubes; 
3. ?Any device that: 
a. ?Spins, jumps, or emits popping sounds when placed on the ground; 
b. ?Does not exceed a height of 15 feet when discharged; and 
c. ?Does not travel laterally more than ten feet on a smooth surface when discharged; 
4. ?Sparklers under 12 inches in length which do not have a magnesium make-up, glow worms, 
snakes, party poppers, trick noisemakers; and 
5. ?Certain mortar type aerial devices and multi-shot cakes that are found acceptable by the fire 
chief. 
F. ?When, in the opinion of the fire chief, drought or other conditions exist which, when coupled with the 
discharge of fireworks, would pose a hazard to persons or property, the fire chief shall issue a ban 
on the discharge of all fireworks until such time as the condition causing the ban ceases to exist. 
G. ?Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association discharging fireworks under this article 
shall, upon such discharge, be responsible for clean-up of the discharge site, including disposal of all 
discharged fireworks, all non-discharged or "dud" fireworks, and the associated debris from the 
discharged fireworks in a safe manner. 
H. ?The safe and sane discharge of fireworks in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not 
be deemed a violation of chapter 16, article 6. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 4, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.050. - General liability insurance required. 
A. ?An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association planning a public display of fireworks shall 
provide proof of general liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city attorney; and which 
includes the city as an additional insured. 
B. ?Notice to the city shall be given ten days prior to any public display if any insurance policy required 
under this article is cancelled or subject to non-renewal. Notice shall be provided by the insured and 
the insurance carrier. 
C. ?A copy of the insurance policy for any public display shall be filed with the city clerk and shall 
indemnify the city against any damages to private or public property, as well as any injuries to 
persons, which may be caused by or incident to the public display. 
D. ?Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association discharging fireworks without a public 
display permit shall be deemed to be the responsible party and shall be liable for any damages 
incurred as the result of such discharge. The individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association 
insurance policy or policies maintained by the individual or entity discharging the fireworks shall be 
subject to any claim as a result of such discharge resulting in damage or injury. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 5, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.060. - Enforcement. 
A. ?Any police officer or firefighter may, in the enforcement of this article, seize, impound, remove or 
cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered for sale, sold, or in 
the possession of any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association in violation of this 
article. Notice of the seizure and the reasons for the seizure shall be reported to the chief of police 
within 48 hours of the seizure. 
B. ?Fireworks seized under this section may be disposed of in a safe and proper manner by the police 
department ten days after seizure. 
C. ?Appeal of any seizure shall be filed with the chief of police in writing within five working days of the 
seizure. The decision of the chief of police on the appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 6, 5-3-2004) 


Sec. 18.05.070. - Violation; penalty. 
A. ?Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association violating the provisions of this article shall 
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than 
$100.00 or more than $500.00 for a first offense; a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than 
$500.00 for a second offense; and a fine of not less than $300.00 or more than $500.00 for a third or 
subsequent offense. Each day of a violation constitutes a separate offense. In the case of a violation 
by a firm, partnership, corporation or association, the manager or members of the partnership or 
responsible officers or agents shall be deemed to be prima facie responsible, individually, and 
subject to the penalty as provided. 
B. ?Any damages caused or injuries sustained as a result of any violation of this article shall be ordered 
paid as restitution as a part of any conviction for any violation. 
C. ?The court may order the reimbursement of costs of enforcement, investigation, fire suppression 
services, and overtime related to a violation upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 7, 5-3-2004) 


ARTICLE 6. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, MCA 50-6-101 et seq. 


Sec. 18.06.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Ambulance" means a privately or publicly owned motor vehicle or aircraft that is maintained 
and used for transportation of patients. 
2. ?"Emergency medical service" means a pre-hospital or inter-hospital emergency medical 
transportation or treatment service provided by an ambulance or non-transporting medical unit. 
3. ?"Patient" means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or 
helpless. The term does not include a person who is nonambulatory and who needs 
transportation assistance solely because that person is confined to a wheelchair as the person's 
usual mode of mobility. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.010; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.020. - License required. 
A. ?A person may not conduct or operate an emergency medical service within the corporate limits of 
the city without first obtaining a license from the city and otherwise complying with the requirements 
of this article. 
B. ?Applications for a license must be made in writing to the city's department of administrative services 
on forms specified by the department. 
C. ?Each license must be issued for a specific term which shall be concurrent with the term for which the 
applicant is licensed by the state department of public health and human services pursuant to the 
provisions of title 50, chapter 6, part 1, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 50-6-101 et seq.). Renewal 
may be obtained by demonstrating renewal of the required license by the department of public health 
and human services and compliance with the requirements of this article. 
D. ?There must be paid to the city, with each application for a license or for renewal of a license, a 
license fee of $500.00. 
E. ?The license is not transferable. 
F. ?The license is nonexclusive. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.020; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.030. - Criteria for license. 
A. ?Any person desiring to obtain the license required by this article shall demonstrate the ability to meet 
the following requirements: 
1. ?The applicant must possess a current license from the state department of public health and 
human services to provide emergency medical services, both transport and treatment services, 
at the advanced life support level. 
2. ?The applicant must provide emergency medical services at the advanced life support level 
throughout the city, 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
3. ?The applicant must have adequate personnel, vehicles, equipment and facilities to respond at 
the advanced life support level to emergency calls to all locations within the corporate limits of 
the city within eight minutes or less on at least 90 percent of such calls. Ambulance response 
time to an emergency request shall be calculated as the actual elapsed time in minutes and 
seconds from the moment the call is received by the applicant to the moment the first capable 
unit arrives at the scene of the incident. Where multiple ambulances are dispatched to the same 
emergency incident, only the response time of the first ambulance to arrive at the scene shall be 
counted. 
4. ?The applicant must have a commercial general liability policy, in a form acceptable to the city, 
insuring the applicant for not less than the sum of $10,000,000.00, per occurrence, for bodily 
injury or death and $10,000,000.00, per occurrence, for loss or damage to property. Said policy 
shall name the city as an additional insured. The applicant must furnish proof of such insurance 
coverage prior to issuance of the license. 
5. ?The applicant must provide a performance bond, running to the city, in the amount of 
$250,000.00, conditioned upon applicant's full compliance with all provisions of this article 
during the entire period that applicant is licensed by the city. Failure to remain in compliance 
with all requirements of this article for the full license period, without a written variance from the 
city, may result in cancellation of the license and, at the city's sole option, forfeiture of the 
performance bond to the city. 
6. ?The applicant must comply with all rules and regulations governing emergency medical services 
and emergency medical technicians as promulgated by the Montana Department of Public 
Health and Human Services and the Board of Medical Examiners as contained in the 
Administrative Rules of Montana. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.030; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.040. - Exemptions. 
A. ?Applicant shall be exempt from the response time and performance requirements of section 
18.06.030, only as follows: 
1. ?Weather conditions. In the event of an onset of such inclement weather that the city fire chief, in 
the chief's sole discretion, believes that the threat to system-wide patient care outweighs the 
threat to the individual patient care from a delayed response time, the city fire chief may declare 
a weather emergency, thus suspending response time requirements. A weather emergency will 
be declared only in times of unusually hazardous driving conditions. 
2. ?System overload. During periods of unusual system overload, which shall mean that at least two 
emergency responses are occurring simultaneously within the incorporated city limits, 
applicants shall be exempt from the requirements of this article and shall use "best efforts" to 
maintain coverage and performance throughout the incorporated city limits. 
3. ?Declared disaster. During a declared disaster either within the incorporated city limits or in a 
neighboring community, and confirmed by the city fire chief, applicants shall be exempt from the 
requirements of this article and shall use "best efforts" to maintain coverage and performance 
throughout the incorporated city limits. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.040; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.050. - Cancellation of license. 
A. ?The city may cancel a license if it finds that the licensee has: 
1. ?Violated any provision of this article or of the rules promulgated by the state department of 
public health and human services or the board of medical examiners, as contained in the 
Administrative Rules of Montana. 
2. ?Failed or refused to remedy or correct the violation within the time and in the manner directed by 
the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.050; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.060. - Notice and hearing required. 
A. ?The city shall not deny or cancel a license without: 
1. ?Delivery to the applicant or licensee of a written statement of the grounds for denial or 
cancellation or the charge involved. 
2. ?An opportunity to answer at a hearing before the city commission to show cause, if any, why the 
license should not be denied or cancelled. 
After receipt of written notice of grounds for denial or cancellation or charges, any applicant or licensee 
desiring a hearing before the city commission must make written application within ten days. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.060; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.070. - Existing services. 
    Any person providing emergency medical services within the city as of the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this article is derived shall have a period of 120 days to meet the requirements and 
obtain the license required by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.070; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Sec. 18.06.080. - Exemptions. 
A. ?The provisions and requirements of this article shall not apply to: 
1. ?The fire department of the city. 
2. ?Any person providing emergency medical services outside the city who, in the course of 
providing such services, transports a patient from outside the city into or through the city. 
3. ?Any person providing emergency medical services within the city who is providing such services 
at the request of the city pursuant to a written mutual aid agreement between the city and the 
person. 
(Code 1982, § 5.70.080; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 1997) 


Chapter 20 - MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 


ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 


ARTICLE 2. - TRAILER CAMPS AND AUTO COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist campgrounds and trailer courts, MCA 50-52-101 et seq. 


Sec. 20.02.010. - Definitions. 
A. ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. ?"Camping" means the use of tents, recreational vehicles, other vehicles, or other shelter for 
temporary living quarters or sleeping purposes. Camping does not include the occupancy of a 
manufactured home in accordance with chapter 38. 
2. ?"Public camp" means an approved area, lot or parcel of land regularly used or intended 
regularly to be used for temporary camping. 
(Code 1982, § 15.52.010; Ord. No. 1830, § 4, 9-24-2012) 


Sec. 20.02.020. - Camping on city property; permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to camp on any property belonging to or under the control of the city 
without having first secured from the city a written permit so to do. Such camping permits may be issued 
by the city upon such terms and conditions and for such periods of time as in the city judgment shall be 
proper, and shall be revocable by the city at any time. Any area on any property belonging to or under the 
control of the city for camping shall be developed following the procedures and standards of chapter 38 of 
this Code and all relevant standards of the health department. 
(Code 1982, § 15.52.030; Ord. No. 1830, § 4, 9-24-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1830, § 4, adopted Sept. 24, 2012, repealed § 20.02.020 which 
pertained to permit required, application, fee and issuance conditions, and derived from § 
15.52.020 of the 1982 Code. Ord. No. 1830 further renumbered the former § 20.02.030 as § 
20.02.020 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended 
provisions for reference purposes. 


Secs. 20.02.030—20.02.130. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1830, § 4, adopted Sept. 24, 2012, repealed §§ 20.02.040—20.02.130 
which pertained to various trailer camps and auto courts regulations and derived from §§ 
15.52.040—15.52.130 of the 1982 Code. 


Sec. 20.02.140. - Violation; penalty. 
A. ?Any person, as defined herein, who violates any of the provisions of this article, or fails to comply 
with any order or regulation made thereunder, is subject to penalty under 1.01.210. 
B. ?Every such person as defined in this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each 
and every day any provision of this article is violated. 
(Code 1982, § 15.52.140; Ord. No. 1830, § 4, 9-24-2012) 

Chapter 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, MCA 3-6-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22.01.010. - Establishment. 
A.  The municipal court is hereby established pursuant to title 3, chapter 6, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 3-6-101 et seq.). The court is established for all intents and purposes set forth in state law and any reasonable inference therein. 
B.  The municipal court will be a court of record by electronic recording or stenographic transcription and will assume continuing jurisdiction over all pending city court cases. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.010; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.020. - Sessions. 
A.  The municipal court will be in session at times and on days established by the court except nonjudicial days. A judge may set specific hours as necessary. 
B.  Nonjudicial days are defined as any legal holidays, or days appointed by the President of the United States or by the Governor of Montana for a public fast, thanksgiving, or holiday except as set forth in subsection C of this section. 
C.  The municipal court will, on any day: 
1.  Give instructions to a jury when deliberating; 
2.  Receive a verdict or discharge a jury; 
3.  Exercise its powers in a criminal action; and 
4.  Issue writs of prohibition, injunctions and habeas corpus. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.020; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.030. - Office of clerk of the municipal court. 
The position of clerk of the municipal court is established. The clerk will work under the supervision and control of the chief municipal judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.030; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.040. - Duties of the clerk of the municipal court. 
The clerk of the municipal court will establish, maintain, retain and administer all municipal court records by means of electronic filing or storage or both. In any event, the clerk will maintain a paper copy of all records established. The clerk will assist the municipal judge in the recording and signing of court proceedings as well as general operations of the court. The clerk will have all other powers and duties as prescribed in MCA 3-5-501, relevant to a municipal court as well as all other duties assigned by the department of administrative services. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.040; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.050. - Office of municipal judge. 
The office of the municipal judge is hereby established for the city. There will be at least one full-time municipal judge as determined by ordinance of the commission and there may also be one or more part-time assistant judges appointed by the chief municipal judge subject to approval by the commission. If there is only one full-time judge, that judge shall be considered the chief judge. If there is more than one full-time judge, the chief judge shall be determined in accordance with title 3, chapter 6, of the Montana Code Annotated (MCA 3-6-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.050; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.060. - Method of selection and term of office. 
Each person holding the office of full-time municipal judge will be elected at a general election and will hold office for a period of four years. Each assistant part-time judge shall serve for the term of the appointing full-time municipal judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.060; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.070. - Qualifications of municipal judge. 
A municipal judge, at the time of election or appointment, shall be a resident for one year of and registered to vote in the county. The municipal judge must have the same qualifications as a district judge, as set forth in article VII, section 9 of the 1972 Constitution, except that the judge need only be admitted to the practice of law in the state for a minimum of three years prior to the date of election or appointment. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.070; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.080. - Powers and duties of municipal judge. 
A municipal judge will have those powers and duties as are provided by state law and the state supreme court. A judge will also have all duties imposed by city ordinances. A judge will hear and determine all suits, actions and prosecutions instituted in the municipal court pursuant to state law and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.080; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.090. - Compensation and expenses. 
A.  The city commission will establish the annual salary of the municipal judge by resolution. A municipal judge who appoints an assistant judge will set the assistant judge's compensation. 
B.  The municipal judge will receive any actual and necessary expenses as budgeted in the city's annual budget. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.100; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.100. - Oath and deposit of funds. 
A.  The oath of office will be filed with the office of the city clerk. 
B.  The moneys, from whatever source, collected under the jurisdiction of the municipal judge will be deposited and managed in accordance with law. 
C.  All such moneys will be deposited with the treasurer of the city as directed by the director of administrative services. 
D.  In order to establish an appropriate control of moneys deposited temporarily for bonds, appearance bonds, etc., all such moneys will be placed into a trust fund to be maintained and controlled by the clerk of the municipal court. Upon final disposition of the matter to which such a bond pertains by the municipal court, the clerk of the municipal court will disburse such moneys according to the direction of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.110; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.110. - Qualifications of a judge pro tempore. 
A.  When a judge of the municipal court has been disqualified or is sick or for any reason unable to act, the judge will call in a qualified practicing attorney of the city who will be judge pro tempore with the same powers for the purposes of the cause as the judge of the municipal court. 
B.  Any person acting as judge pro tempore must meet the following qualifications: 
1.  Be a sitting judge of a court of record or be an attorney admitted to practice in the state for a period of not less than five years; and 
2.  Be either a resident of the county or have a law practice or other law-related employment whose business address is within the county. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.120; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 3-6-204.  
Sec. 22.01.120. - Vacancy filled by commission. 
Should a vacancy occur in the office of a municipal judge, the city commission will appoint a qualified individual to serve for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.130; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.130. - Appeal to district court. 
A.  A party may appeal a municipal court judgment or order to the district court in either criminal or civil actions. An appeal to the district court is confined to review of the record and questions of law, subject to the supreme court's rulemaking and supervisory authority. 
B.  On appeal, the clerk of the municipal court will transfer the record consisting of an electronic recording or stenographic transcription of the case tried, together with all papers filed in the action. The clerk may charge the requestor a reasonable fee for any copies or transcription made necessary by the appeal. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.140; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 22.01.140. - Limitation on appeals. 
A.  A party in a civil case may appeal a municipal court judgment or order to the district court in cases where the amount in controversy exceeds $1,000.00. 
B.  In criminal actions, a defendant may appeal a municipal court judgment or order to the district court in cases where the amount in controversy exceeds $300.00 or where incarceration has been ordered. The state may appeal in any instance set forth in state law. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the district court may, in the interests of justice, accept appeal jurisdiction upon petition of the aggrieved party. 
(Code 1982, § 2.06.150; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 1999)  
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of 1973, MCA 45-1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24.01.010. - Territorial application of police powers; liberal construction of provisions. 
A.  Territorial application of police powers. Pursuant to state law, Bozeman police officers shall have powers to respond and control disturbances of the peace and have powers of arrest within the city and for three miles outside of the corporate city limits. Nothing herein shall limit the jurisdiction of a police officer pursuant to title 7, title 10, or title 44, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 7-1-101 et seq., 10-1-101 et seq., 44-1-101 et seq.), or any other mutual aid agreement. 
B.  Liberal construction of provisions. The provisions codified in this chapter shall be given a liberal construction. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9.02.010, 9.02.020)  
ARTICLE 2. - MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal infractions, MCA 7-1-4149 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24.02.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Municipal infraction" means any violation of this Code which has been specifically declared to be a municipal infraction under provisions of this Code. 
2.  "Officer" means any employee or official authorized to enforce provisions of this Code or municipal regulations. 
3.  "Repeat violation" means a recurring violation of the same section of this Code. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate and distinct infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.010), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.020. - Civil citations; service and requirements. 
A.  An officer may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The civil citation may be served on the defendant by any one of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; 
2.  By certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant's last known mailing address, return receipt requested; or 
3.  By publication, in the manner described in Rule 4D(5) of the Montana Rules of Civil Procedure. 
B.  A copy of the citation must be retained by the issuing officer and one copy be sent to or filed with the clerk of the municipal court. 
C.  The citation shall serve as notification that a municipal infraction has been committed and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the defendant; 
2.  The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation; 
3.  The location and time of the infraction; 
4.  The amount of the civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both; 
5.  The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid; 
6.  The time and place of court appearance; and 
7.  The penalty for failure to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.020), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.030. - Court proceedings. 
A.  If the total amount of civil penalties do not exceed $3,000.00, the matter shall be tried before the municipal court judge in the same manner as a small claim. If the total amount of civil penalties assessed exceeds $3,000.00, the matter must be tried before a district court judge. 
B.  The city has the burden of proof that the municipal infraction occurred and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof must be by clear and convincing evidence. 
C.  The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy of the charges and that the defendant understands the charges. The defendant may question all witnesses who appear for the municipality and produce evidence or witnesses on the defendant's behalf. 
D.  The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant's own choosing and at the defendant's own expense. 
E.  The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction. 
F.  If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall enter judgment against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the court shall dismiss the charges. 
G.  If the person named in the citation is shown to have been served with the civil citation in the proper manner and, without good cause, fails to appear in response to the citation, judgment shall be entered against the person by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.030), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.040. - Penalties. 
A.  A violation of a municipal infraction is a civil offense and punishable by a civil penalty. 
B.  For a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than $300.00 shall be imposed. 
C.  For each repeat violation, a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 shall be imposed. 
D.  If there is a specific Code provision that provides for a specific penalty, the specific Code provision shall apply provided the penalty does not exceed the civil penalties provided by this section. 
E.  Any statutory surcharges required by state law or this Code must be imposed in addition to the civil penalty. 
F.  All penalties and forfeitures collected by the court for municipal infractions shall be remitted to the city in the same manner as fines and forfeitures collected for criminal offenses. 
G.  Defendant against whom judgment is entered shall pay court costs and fees as in small claims court under title 25, chapter 35 of the Montana Code Annotated (MCA 25-35-501 et seq.) in addition to the penalties imposed by the court. 
H.  In addition to the imposition of civil penalties authorized by law against a defendant, the city may seek alternative relief from the court in the same action. Alternative relief may consist of any of the following: 
1.  Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred under conditions imposed by the court; 
2.  Order the defendant to abate or cease the violation; 
3.  Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation; 
4.  Order the city's costs for abatement or correction of the violation be entered as a judgment against the defendant or assessed against the property where the violation occurred, or both. 
I.  The municipal court may assess or enter judgment for costs of abatement or correction in any amount not to exceed the jurisdictional amount for a money judgment in a civil action under MCA 3-11-103. If the city seeks abatement or correction costs in excess of this amount, the matter shall be referred to district court for hearing and entry of an appropriate order. 
J.  A defendant who willfully violates the terms of an order imposed by the court is guilty of contempt. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.040), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.050. - Appeals. 
A.  The defendant or the city may file a motion for a new trial or may appeal the decision to district court. 
B.  A factual determination made by the trial court, supported by substantial evidence as shown on the record, is binding for purposes of appeal relating to the violation at issue, but is not admissible or binding as to any future violations for the same or similar ordinance provision by the same defendant. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.050), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.060. - Issuance of civil citations not grounds for further legal action. 
Except for willful or wanton misconduct on the part of the city, the issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction or the ensuing court proceedings do not provide an action for false arrest, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.060), 3-5-2007)  
Sec. 24.02.070. - Environmental actions. 
An action brought by the city for an environmental violation does not preclude, and is in addition to, any other enforcement action that may be brought under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1696, § 1(1.24.070), 3-5-2007)  
ARTICLE 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 
 
Sec. 24.03.010. - Interfering with public officials prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with, obstruct or intimidate any official or employee of the city in the performance of the official's or employee's official duty; nor shall any person assault or threaten to assault, nor use any abusive or insulting language toward such official or employee in the official's or employee's presence in connection with or arising out of any business of the city theretofore, then being, or thereafter to be done, transacted or performed by such official or employee for, and as representative of the city, in any capacity. 
(Code 1982, § 9.10.010) 
State Law reference— Obstructing peace officer or other public servant, MCA 45-7-302.  
Sec. 24.03.020. - 911 emergency telephone service. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Emergency" is defined by title 10, chapter 4, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 10-4-101 et seq.) as being any event that requires dispatch of a public or private safety agency. 
2.  "Emergency services" are defined by title 10, chapter 4, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 10-4-101 et seq.) as being services provided by any public or private safety agency, including law enforcement, firefighting, ambulance or medical services, and civil defense services. 
3.  "Knowingly" and "purposely" are defined in title 45, chapter 2, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 45-2-101 et seq.). 
4.  "Misuse" means accessing the 911 telephone number for other than reporting an emergency event. 
5.  "Private safety agency" is defined by title 10, chapter 4, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 10-4-101 et seq.) as being any entity, except a public safety agency, providing emergency fire, ambulance or medical services. 
6.  "Public safety agency" is defined by title 10, chapter 4, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 10-4-101 et seq.) as being the state and any city, county, city-county consolidated government, municipal corporation, chartered organization, public district, or public authority located in whole or in part within this state that provides or has authority to provide emergency services. 
B.  Misuse of the 911 emergency telephone service prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or knowingly misuse the 911 emergency telephone service by accessing the 911 telephone service for a purpose other than an emergency. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9.16.010, 9.16.020; Ord. No. 1327, §§ 1, 2, 1991)  
Sec. 24.03.030. - Hotel guest registers. 
A.  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Hotel" means and includes motels, inns, boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
B.  Guests. 
1.  Within the meaning of this section a "guest" is any person who resorts to a hotel within the limits of the city for refreshment or lodging for any period of time during the day or night. 
2.  Every hotel in the city shall keep and maintain a register in which guests shall enter their name and address upon the day of arrival. 
3.  Failure to provide or maintain such a register, or failure to require any guest to enter their name and address therein on the day of arrival, or to knowingly enter or permit such guest to enter a false or fictitious name or address in such register as the name and address of such guest, shall be a violation of this section. 
C.  Failure to sign register; false entries. Any guest who fails or refuses to enter their name and address in the register provided upon their arrival, or who enters a false or fictitious name or address as the guest's own in such register, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1982, §§ 5.40.010—5.40.030; Ord. No. 1117, § 11, 1982) 
State Law reference— Hotels, motels and roominghouses, MCA 50-51-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, MCA 45-6-101. 
 
Sec. 24.04.010. - Injuring property or plants and trespassing prohibited. 
No person shall, within the city, willfully and/or wantonly destroy, injure or deface the goods or property of another; nor wantonly destroy, break or injure any shade, fruit or ornamental tree, flower, flowers or flower bed, nor habitually trespass upon the lawn, garden or premises of another, nor leave or deposit refuse, rubbish or garbage thereon at any time. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.010)  
Sec. 24.04.020. - Malicious damage to property prohibited. 
Any person who, mischievously or maliciously, hacks, breaks, girdles or injures any tree, or breaks or injures any sign, signboard, window, door, gate, fence, house, outhouse, building, or part thereof, the property of another, shall be deemed guilty of committing a nuisance, and upon conviction shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.020)  
Sec. 24.04.030. - Hurling missiles and injuring property prohibited. 
Any person who, within the city limits, throws any stick, stone, missile or other thing or things whereby any property of another shall become broken, destroyed or injured, shall have committed a nuisance, and upon conviction shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.030)  
Sec. 24.04.040. - Private property—Willful damage to personal property prohibited. 
Any person who maliciously, willfully or unlawfully cuts, burns, destroys, injures, defaces or in any other manner injures any goods, wares, merchandise or other property, without the consent of the owner, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.040)  
Sec. 24.04.050. - Same—Willful damage to real property or fixtures prohibited. 
Any person who willfully, unlawfully or maliciously cuts, breaks, injures, tears down, defaces or in any other manner injures any house, barn, building or other enclosure; or who cuts, tears down, breaks or defaces any window or door of any building or house; or who takes off, severs, breaks in or injures, in any manner, any gate, fence or other enclosure, or any part thereof; or pulls down, interferes with or injures any fence, post or part thereof; or injures or destroys any fruit, shade or ornamental tree, shrub or flowers, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.050)  
Sec. 24.04.060. - Public property—Animals prohibited on streets, parking strips, public grounds. 
No person shall walk upon or across, or drive upon or across, nor shall any person while driving a herd of horses or cattle or other animals upon or through any of the streets or avenues of the city, allow such animals to travel upon or across any parking strips on any of the streets and avenues of the city, or upon or across any of the grounds at or surrounding any public building, school or ecclesiastical building, or ground acquired or dedicated for any of these purposes, within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.060)  
Sec. 24.04.070. - Same—Damage to shrubs, trees, grass or flowers prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to in any way injure or destroy grass, trees, shrubs, or flowers growing upon any parking strips, public, school or ecclesiastical grounds, or anything placed thereon of a useful or ornamental character, within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.070)  
Sec. 24.04.080. - Park property—Damaging fences prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, corporation or association to injure, cut, destroy or do any act which will tend to injure or destroy any fence surrounding any public park within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.080)  
Sec. 24.04.090. - Same—Use of gates required. 
No person shall go through or under, or climb over any fence surrounding any public park of the city, or enter or leave any fenced park except through the gateways provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.090)  
Sec. 24.04.100. - Same—Damaging vegetation and other property prohibited. 
No person shall injure or destroy any plot seeded to grass, flowers, foliage or other vegetation, or cut, mutilate, injure, damage or destroy any growing grass, flowers, shrubs, foliage or trees in any public park of the city, nor shall any person destroy, damage, injure, deface or mutilate any tables, benches, stands, flagpoles, houses or buildings, or any other property that may be used in connection with, or which may be contained in any public park of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.100)  
Sec. 24.04.110. - Fairgrounds—Entrance only through gateways. 
No person shall climb over or go through or under any fence surrounding any fairgrounds or roundup grounds in the city, or enter said grounds by any other means than the entrances provided therefor, without the permission of the owners of such property. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.120)  
Sec. 24.04.120. - Same—Damage to fences or other property prohibited. 
No person shall cut, mutilate, deface or destroy any fairground fence or roundup ground fence in the city, or any building, seats, benches, stands, apartment, or property therein contained of any kind or character. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.130)  
Sec. 24.04.130. - Same—Trespassing prohibited. 
No person shall have the right to trespass upon any roundup grounds for fairgrounds in the city without first obtaining lawful permission for such purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.140)  
Sec. 24.04.140. - Offensive conduct; where prohibited. 
No person shall act in a loud, boisterous or rude manner, or engage in conduct so as to be offensive to those using or being upon or within any of the public parks, or grounds of the city, or within the fairgrounds or roundup grounds in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.150)  
Sec. 24.04.150. - Operating traction engines on paved streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a violation of this section for any person who is the owner of or in charge of any traction engine to run such engine over, upon or across, or permit such engine to stand upon any paved street within the city limits. Every person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9.70.010)  
ARTICLE 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 24.05.010. - Loitering prohibited. 
A person commits a violation if the person loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstance makes it impracticable, a peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the actor to identify himself or herself and explain the actor's presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor with the penalties set forth in section 1.01.210. 
(Code 1982, § 9.54.010) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, MCA 45-8-101.  
Sec. 24.05.020. - Special security service charges at loud or unruly gatherings. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Responsible person" shall mean a person with a right of possession in the property on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited to, an owner or tenant of the property if the gathering is on private property, or a permittee if the gathering is a permitted gathering on public property, or any person accepting responsibility for such a gathering. The term "responsible person" shall additionally include the landlord of another responsible person and the parents and/or legal guardians of responsible persons under the age of 21 years. To incur liability for special security service charges imposed by this section, the responsible person need not be present at the loud or unruly gathering resulting in the emergency response giving rise to the imposition of special security service charges. This section therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon responsible persons. 
2.  "Special security services" shall mean the provision of any police, fire or other emergency response service to a loud or unruly gathering within 12 months of a first response as provided in this section. 
3.  "Loud or unruly gathering" shall mean a gathering of two or more persons on private property or a permitted gathering of two or more persons on public property whose loud or unruly conduct constitutes a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare, including violations of chapter 16, article 2. This term excludes incidents of domestic violence. A loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Response to loud or unruly gatherings. When a police officer responds to a first loud or unruly gathering at premises in the city with a given address, the officer shall inform any responsible person at the scene that: 
1.  The officer has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists; and 
2.  Responsible persons will be charged for the cost of any special security services required for subsequent responses to the scene within the next 12 months. 
Only one warning will be given pursuant to this subsection before the city assesses special security service costs pursuant to subsection C of this section. If a responsible person cannot be identified at the scene, the police department may issue a warning to one of the other responsible persons identified in subsection A of this section or subsequently return to the scene and issue the warning to a then-present responsible person. Warnings given to responsible persons who do not reside at the premises in question shall be delivered by certified mail. 
C.  Cost recovery for special security services. When the police department or fire department or other city emergency responder responds to a loud or unruly gathering at premises with a given address in the city within 12 months of a warning given to a responsible person for those premises pursuant to subsection B of this section, or while any such warning remains in effect pursuant to subsection E of this section, all responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the city's costs of providing special security service for that response and all subsequent responses during that warning period. 
D.  Billing and collection. Charges for special security service shall include a reasonable charge for the emergency responder's time and actual costs of any equipment used or damaged in connection with the response, together with an additional 33 percent of the special security charge for administrative overhead. These charges shall be computed and a bill submitted to the responsible person. The chief of police shall promulgate notice and billing procedures for this purpose. The bill shall be a debt owed to the city and failure to pay that bill within 30 days is a violation of this Code. If the city is obliged to initiate litigation or other proceedings authorized by this Code to recover this debt, the responsible person shall be liable for: 
1.  Costs of suit; 
2.  Attorney's fees; and 
3.  Costs of collection. 
E.  Violations/fines. 
1.  It shall be an infraction for a responsible person to conduct or allow a loud or unruly gathering on premises owned by the responsible person or on premises rented by or to the responsible person. A third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
2.  Fines. 
a.  A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a $100.00 fine. 
b.  A second violation of this section at a given address in the city within a given 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. 
c.  A third or subsequent violation of this section at a given address in the city within a given 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. 
3.  The fines prescribed in subsection E.2 of this section are in addition to any special security service charges that may be assessed pursuant to this section. 
4.  The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed in subsections E.2.b and c of this section are payable whether or not the responsible person at the time of the current loud or unruly gathering is the same person who was the responsible person for any prior loud or unruly gathering at those premises. 
5.  The fine schedule prescribed in subsection E.2 of this section is a "rolling schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable the police department or city attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly gatherings have taken place at the premises in question during the statutory 12-month period. A warning given pursuant to subsection B of this section shall remain in effect for the premises at a given address until a full 12-month period has elapsed during which there have been no loud or unruly gatherings at those premises. 
F.  Service of alcoholic beverages to minors. The city commission hereby finds that the service of alcohol to minors at loud and unruly gatherings and the consumption of alcohol by minors at loud or unruly gatherings has in the past and continues to pose a threat to the health and safety of all persons who reside in the city and also causes significant disruption of city residents' quiet enjoyment of their households, especially in the city's residential neighborhoods. In addition, such conduct on behalf of persons who serve alcohol to minors and minors who consume alcohol at loud or unruly gatherings results in the expenditure of a disproportionate percentage of the city's police, fire and public safety resources which are underwritten primarily by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its taxpayers and residents. It is therefore the policy of the city commission that in responding to loud or unruly gatherings, the city police department shall strictly enforce any and all applicable state laws pertaining to the service of alcohol to minors, and the consumption of alcohol by minors, and with respect to minors in possession of alcohol, the police department shall establish a "no tolerance" protocol by which the police department contacts, or causes the minor's school to contact, the minor's parents or legal guardians whenever the minor is found to be in possession of alcohol or narcotics or found to be intoxicated at a loud or unruly gathering. Where the minor's school has an internal student disciplinary office, any such incident shall likewise be reported to that office. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1(9.72.010—9.72.060), 12-12-2005)  
ARTICLE 6. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 24.06.010. - Public urination and defecation. 
No person within the jurisdictional limits of the city shall publicly defecate or urinate on streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, parking lots or other places open to the public including areas open to the public in buildings unless a sanitary facility capable of and commonly used for disposal of human urine or excrement is used. 
(Code 1982, § 9.46.010; Ord. No. 1233, 1987; Ord. No. 1372, § 2, 1993)  
Sec. 24.06.020. - Lotteries or gambling in streets or public places prohibited. 
The conducting or carrying on of any lottery, raffle, game of chance, or any gambling game of any nature or description, in or upon any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, is prohibited. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.090)  
ARTICLE 7. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24.07.010. - Removal of doors from refrigerators and certain other containers required. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under such person's control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing such door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device. 
(Code 1982, § 8.04.010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 45-8-113.  
Secs. 24.07.020—24.07.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Restriction on local government regulation of firearms, MCA 45-8-351. 
 
Sec. 24.07.150. - Discharge of airguns prohibited when. 
No person shall, within the limits of the city, shoot or discharge any toy air pistol or rifle shooting lead shot, or missile of metal, wood or other hard substance. 
(Code 1982, § 9.90.010)  
Sec. 24.07.160. - Concealed weapons defined; carrying prohibited without permit. 
No person shall carry or bear concealed a dirk, dagger, pistol, revolver, sling-shot, sword, cane, billy, knuckles made of any metal or hard substance, knife having a blade four inches long or longer, razor (not including a safety razor), or other dangerous or deadly weapon, without written permission from the proper authority with legal power to grant such permit. The term "concealed weapons," within the meaning of this section, shall be any weapon mentioned herein which shall be wholly or partially covered by the clothing or wearing apparel of the person carrying or bearing such weapon. 
(Code 1982, § 9.92.010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 45-8-316; permit to carry concealed weapon, MCA 45-8-321 et seq.  
Sec. 24.07.170. - Weapons in public buildings and property. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Destructive device" means: 
a.  A projectile containing an explosive or incendiary material or any other similar chemical substance including, but not limited to, that which is commonly known as tracer or incendiary ammunition, except tracer ammunition manufactured for use in shotguns; 
b.  A bomb, grenade, explosive missile or similar device or a launching device therefor; 
c.  A weapon of a caliber greater than .60 caliber which fires fixed ammunition or any ammunition therefor, other than a shotgun or shotgun ammunition; 
d.  A rocket, rocket-propelled projectile or similar device of a diameter greater than .60 inch or a launching device therefor and a rocket, rocket-propelled projectile or similar device containing an explosive or incendiary material or any other similar chemical substance other than the propellant for the device, except devices designed primarily for emergency or distress signaling purposes; 
e.  A breakable container which contains a flammable liquid with a flashpoint of 150 degrees Fahrenheit or less and which has a wick or similar device capable of being ignited, other than a device which is commercially manufactured primarily for the purpose of illumination. 
2.  "Firearm" means any weapon (including a starter gun) which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of any explosive; the frame or receiver of any such weapon; any firearm muffler or firearm silencer; or any destructive device. 
3.  "Park" means a park, playground, recreation complex or any other area in the city, developed or undeveloped, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
4.  "Weapon" means dirk; dagger; pistol; revolver; rifle; shotgun; firearm; slingshot; sword cane; billy; knuckles made of any metal or hard surface; razor, not including a safety razor; or other deadly weapon or destructive device. 
B.  Prohibition of weapons in city-owned buildings and property. The carrying or possession of a weapon by any person in or on the city-owned buildings and property described in subsection D of this section or in any park is prohibited. 
C.  Exceptions. The provisions of subsection B of this section do not apply to: 
1.  Any peace officer of the state; 
2.  Any officer of the United States government authorized to carry a concealed weapon; 
3.  Any member of the armed services or reserve forces of the United States or National Guard, while in the performance of their official duties; 
4.  A person summoned to the aid of any of the persons named in subsections C.1 through 3 of this section; 
5.  A probation and parole officer authorized to carry a firearm under MCA 46-23-1002; 
6.  An agent of the state department of justice or a criminal investigator in a county attorney's office; 
7.  Sponsored events, gun shows or displays authorized by the city; 
8.  A person who is participating in a public event or program, including but not limited to a gun show or gun safety program which is authorized by the city to occur on city property; or 
9.  A person authorized by the chief of police to carry or possess an unconcealed weapon on city property. 
D.  Areas subject to prohibition. The city-owned property to which the prohibition in subsection B of this section applies includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  City Hall, 121 North Rouse Avenue; 
2.  Alfred Stiff Professional Building, 20 East Olive Street; 
3.  Bozeman Public Library, 626 East Main Street; 
4.  City Shop Complex, 814 North Bozeman Avenue, including all lawns, parking areas and sidewalks leading to the site, as well as all areas inside the perimeter fence; 
5.  Swim Center, 1211 West Main Street; 
6.  Cemetery Building, 340 Golf Way, including all lawns, parking areas and sidewalks leading to the building, and cemetery grounds; 
7.  Landfill Building, 2143 Story Mill Road; 
8.  Lower Yards, 1812 North Rouse Avenue, including all areas inside the perimeter fence; 
9.  Water Treatment Plant, 7220 Sourdough Canyon Road; 
10.  Wastewater Treatment Plant, 2245 Springhill Road, including, but not limited to, all areas inside the perimeter fence; 
11.  All Parks; and 
12.  All city fire stations. 
E.  Signing. Suitable signs shall be posted at each entrance to the facilities listed in subsection D.1 through 10, stating the possession of weapons on the premises is prohibited except for law enforcement personnel. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9.93.010—9.93.050; Ord. No. 1420, § 1, 1996)  
Sec. 24.07.180. - Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall, except in necessary defense of himself/herself or others, or unless duly authorized by law, discharge any firearm. This shall not apply to the discharge of firearms on any legal rifle range of the National Guard or of any branch thereof, nor to the discharge of firearms in any duly licensed shooting gallery, nor by any duly authorized person. 
(Code 1982, § 9.94.010)  
Sec. 24.07.190. - Bows and crossbows and other devices. 
A.  No person shall throw, shoot, fire, or otherwise discharge any arrow, bolt or other projectile through the use of a bow, crossbow or other device within the city limits, except when done in the lawful defense of the person, property or family, or when done either at an organized and established public or private archery shooting range or gallery, or when done at an archery shooting target area on private property or premises under circumstances and in such a manner where any throwing, shooting, firing or other discharge of an arrow, bolt or other projectile can be and is being performed in a manner so as not to endanger person, property, animal or fowl, and also performed in such a manner so as to prevent any arrow, bolt or other projectile from traversing any grounds or air space outside the established boundaries or limits of any organized and established public or private archery shooting range or gallery, or archery shooting target area on private property or premises. 
B.  No person shall throw, shoot, fire or otherwise discharge any arrow, bolt, or other projectile through the use of a bow, crossbow or other device in parks or other public property. 
(Code 1982, § 9.98.010; Ord. No. 1242, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 1256, § 1, 1988)  
ARTICLE 8. - OFFENSES CONCERNING UNDERAGE PERSONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 24.08.010—24.08.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 
 
Sec. 24.08.150. - Loitering by persons under 16 years of age prohibited. 
No minor under the age of 16 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and of entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places or premises, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day and 4:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time, within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any such minor who is involved in any of the activities set out in section 24.08.160, but such activity shall be a matter of defense, and the burden of proof thereof to the satisfaction of the court shall be upon the defendant in any prosecution for violation of this division. Each and every violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1982, § 9.80.010)  
Sec. 24.08.160. - Exceptions. 
A.  The following activities shall be exempt from the curfew requirements of this division where the minor is: 
1.  Accompanied by a parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent as the caretaker for the minor; 
2.  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of a parent, guardian or caretaker; 
3.  In a vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in a certain employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the next-door neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police; 
7.  In attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or from such an activity, without any detour or stop, and supervised by adults; or 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(Code 1982, § 9.80.010)  
Sec. 24.08.170. - Responsibility of parents or guardians. 
It shall be deemed a violation of this division for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of a minor under the age of 16 years to allow or permit such minor, either expressly or by neglect, to duly exercise such care, custody or control, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day and 4:00 a.m. of the following day, official city time, except as provided in section 24.08.160, and the burden of proving such exception shall be on the defendant; provided that in any prosecution under this section it shall not constitute a defense thereto that the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody, or control of any such minor under the age of 16 years, did not have knowledge that such minor did loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon any of the places specified in this section at any time between the hours herein specified. 
(Code 1982, § 9.80.020)  
Sec. 24.08.180. - Violation; penalty. 
Any minor violating the provisions of section 24.08.150 shall be dealt with in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of MCA 41-5-101 et seq., and the Interstate Compact on Juveniles at MCA 41-6-101 et seq. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of a minor violating any of the provisions of section 24.08.150 shall be deemed guilty of a violation of the provisions of section 24.08.170, and upon conviction thereof in the police court, shall be fined in a sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding 25 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense of which such parent, guardian or other adult person shall be so convicted. 
(Code 1982, § 9.80.030)  
ARTICLE 10. - UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— Ord. No. 1890 , adopted June 2, 2014, which added Art. 10, §§ 24.10.010—24.10.080, will become effective on July 2, 2014. 
 
Sec. 24.10.010. - Legislative findings. 
The city commission hereby finds: 
A.  The matter of discrimination against the city's inhabitants and visitors is a matter of concern to the residents, visitors, and businesses of the city. 
B.  The city has a compelling governmental interest in eliminating discrimination within the city and assuring its citizens equal access to publicly available goods and services. This interest includes providing its citizens a community where all persons, regardless of actual or perceived race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, creed, sex, age, martial or familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the business and professional life of the city, and may be unfettered in availing themselves of opportunities for employment, housing, and public accommodations. 
C.  Archaic and overbroad assumptions about the relative needs and capacities of individuals based on sexual orientation or gender identity or expression force those individuals to labor under stereotypical notions that often bear no relationship to their actual abilities. It thereby both deprives persons of their individual dignity and denies society the benefits of wide participation in political, economic, and cultural life. 
D.  Although state and federal laws have been enacted to eliminate discrimination in employment, housing, and public accommodations on the basis of race, creed, religion, color, sex, physical or mental disability, age and national origin, it is evident that lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals within the city have not attained equal opportunity in housing, public accommodations, and employment. A barrier to the advancement of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals in their personal and professional lives within the city is the potential discriminatory practices of employers and providers of public accommodations and housing on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity or expression. While the vast majority of employers, housing providers, and places of public accommodations within the city certainly do not discriminate on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity or expression, evidence of discriminatory practices exists within the city making it difficult for some lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender individuals to find satisfactory housing, obtain employment, and enjoy public accommodations free from discriminatory practices. 
E.  Discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity or expression impacts many citizens of the city and has an especially harmful impact to young residents and visitors to the city who may be lesbian, gay, bisexual, or trans gender, because it may force them to move from the city, not choose to attend university in the city, may impact their participation in the democratic process, and may impact their ability to fully and freely identify themselves as they seek employment, housing and the services and products provided by public accommodations. 
F.  Discrimination in employment has and will prevent the gainful employment of citizens of the city addressed by this article and may create breaches of the peace, impose added burdens upon the public for relief and welfare, and cause citizens, including youth, to seek employment elsewhere. 
G.  Discrimination in housing makes it difficult for persons addressed in this article to find housing in close proximity to urban services, educational facilities, in price ranges that are within their earning ability, and may cause citizens to seek housing outside of the city. 
H.  Discrimination in places of public accommodation is economically harmful to a prosperous community and is otherwise detrimental to the welfare and economic growth of the city and may cause citizens to seek public accommodations outside of the city. 
I.  The recognition of religious liberty and the rights of freedom of association and expression is necessary to balance the civil rights of all residents of the city; as such, provisions within this article related to fraternal, charitable, and religious organizations are intended to ensure a balanced approach to protecting civil rights of all citizens of the city so that the protections afforded by this article do not unreasonably impede upon a fraternal, charitable, or religious organization's ability to engage in activities protected by law or to disseminate its preferred views. 
J.  Creation of a private cause of action in the municipal court is necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article because a private cause of action will have a greater likelihood of ensuring compliance with this article than enforcement by the city due to the lack of available city resources. In addition, a private cause of action creates a viable mechanism for deterring discrimination throughout the city, empowers an individual most affected by a violation of this article to decide for themselves whether to seek relief rather than to rely on the authority of city officials, and promotes the dignity of an individual by assuring that the harmed individual receives the relief they desire for the injuries suffered. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.020. - Policy, purpose and intent. 
A.  It is declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers pursuant to its self governing authority for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good government, to assure equal opportunity to all persons, free from restrictions and discrimination because of his or her actual or perceived race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, creed, sex, age, martial or familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression. 
B.  The city commission declares that, in addition to the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, creed, sex, age, martial or familial status, physical or mental disability, the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or expression is recognized as and hereby declared to be a civil right. Adding such discrimination prohibitions on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or expression to the city's laws is necessary and desirable because existing state and federal laws regarding discrimination do not adequately address all discriminatory acts reported by the city's diverse residents. 
C.  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed for accomplishment of its policies and purposes; provided that, however, nothing in this article is intended to alter or abridge other rights, protections, or privileges secured by state or federal law, including state and federal constitutional protections of freedom of speech, freedom of association, and exercise of religion or to infringe upon or alter the authority vested by law in the Montana Human Rights Commission, the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, or any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over discriminatory practices. 
D.  Pursuant to subsection 7-1-111(3), MCA, the provisions of the article do not apply to or affect the public school system. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.030. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Aggrieved party" means a person who can demonstrate a specific personal and legal interest, as distinguished from a general interest, and who has been or is likely to be specially and injuriously affected by a violation of this article. 
B.  "Discrimination," "discriminate" or "discriminatory" means any act, policy, or practice that has the effect of unfavorably subjecting any person to different or separate treatment because of his or her actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or association with a person or group of people so identified, or on the belief that a person has a particular sexual orientation or gender identity or expression, even if that belief is incorrect. 
C.  "Employee" means an individual employed by an employer. 
D.  "Employer" means an employer of one or more persons or an agent of the employer but excludes a fraternal or religious association, religious school, or religious corporation if the association, school, or corporation is neither organized for private profit nor has as its primary purpose the provision of accommodations or services that are available on a nonmembership basis. 
E.  "Employment agency" means a person undertaking to procure employees or opportunities to work. 
F.  "Gender identity or expression" means a gender-related identity expression, or behavior, regardless of the individual's sex at birth. 
G.  "Housing accommodation" means a building or portion of a building, whether constructed or to be constructed, that is or will be used as the home, domicile, residence, or sleeping quarters of its occupants. It does not include dormitories or other sleeping quarters provided by universities, colleges, or other post-secondary schools. 
H.  "Labor organization" means an organization or an agent of an organization organized for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining, of dealing with employers concerning grievances or terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid and protection of employees. 
I.  "Person" means one or more individuals, labor unions, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated employees' associations, employers, employment agencies, organizations, or labor organizations. 
J.  a.  "Public accommodation" means a place that caters to or offers its services, goods, or facilities to the general public subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable to all persons. It includes without limitation a public inn, restaurant, eating house, hotel, roadhouse, place where food or alcoholic beverages or malt liquors are sold for consumption, motel, soda fountain, soft drink parlor, tavern, nightclub, trailer park, resort, campground, barbering, cosmetology, electrology, esthetics, or manicuring salon or shop, bathroom, resthouse, theater, swimming pool, skating rink, golf course, cafe, ice cream parlor, transportation company, or hospital and all other public amusement and business establishments. 
b.  "Public accommodation" does not include an institution, club, or place of accommodation that proves that it is by its nature distinctly private. An institution, club, or place of accommodation may not be considered by its nature distinctly private if it has more than 100 members, provides regular meal service, and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals, or beverages, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of nonmembers, for the furtherance of trade or business. For the purposes of this definition, any lodge of a recognized national fraternal organization is considered by its nature distinctly private. 
c.  Public accommodation does not include a church or other religious association or corporation or a private educational institution with a curriculum based in whole or in part upon religious faith, except to the extent it maintains a place described in subsection (a), unless the service, goods or facilities are being provided for a purpose which is primarily religious in nature. 
d.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a requirement to construct additional facilities such as bathrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms at any place of public accommodation as defined above. 
K.  "Sexual orientation" means heterosexuality, bisexuality, or homosexuality. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.040. - Employment and labor discrimination prohibited. 
A.  An employer shall not discriminate in the employment, failure to hire, refusal to hire, compensation, work classification, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, including promotion, demotion, or termination of employment. 
B.  An employer shall not fail or refuse to refer for employment, or give negative information to a potential employer of an individual, in such a manner that would deprive or limit an individual's employment opportunities or that would otherwise adversely affect an individual's status as an applicant or prospective employee, for a discriminatory reason. 
C.  A labor organization shall not discriminate in limiting membership, conditions of membership, or termination of membership of any person in any labor union or apprenticeship program. 
D.  An employment agency shall not discriminate in the procurement or recruitment of any person for possible employment with an employer. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.050. - Discrimination in public accommodations prohibited. 
A place of public accommodation shall not deny, directly or indirectly, any person full and equal access or enjoyment of the goods, services, activities, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations for a discriminatory reason. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.060. - Housing discrimination prohibited. 
A person, owner, manager, employee, or any entity whose business includes engaging in any residential real estate related transactions shall not discriminate in the sale, lease or rental of any housing facility, or to otherwise discriminate in the terms, conditions, maintenance, improvement or repair of any housing facility. The rental of individual rooms in a private residence designed as a single dwelling unit in which the owner also resides is excluded from this section provided that the owner rents no more than three rooms within the residence. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.070. - Retaliation prohibited. 
A person shall not coerce, threaten, discharge, expel, blacklist, or otherwise retaliate against another person for opposing any practices prohibited by this article, making a complaint, or assisting in an investigation or proceeding regarding an alleged violation of this article; nor shall any person require, request to conspire with, assist, or coerce another person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation or proceeding under this article. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Sec. 24.10.080. - Violation/civil remedy. 
A.  Any unlawful discrimination addressed by Montana State law shall be submitted to the Montana Department of Labor pursuant to Title 49, Chapters 2 and 3, Montana Code Annotated. 
B.  Violations of sections 24.10.040 through 24.10.070 unless otherwise subject to Montana State law, are to be civil municipal ordinance violations within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Bozeman municipal court. The Montana Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply, except and unless the municipal court establishes alternative rules of civil procedure for matters within the exclusive jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
C.  An aggrieved party or its authorized representative claiming a violation of this article may seek civil remedies, injunctive relief, or other equitable relief against a person alleged to have committed discrimination by petitioning the Bozeman municipal court. The municipal court is hereby authorized to determine appropriate remedies including but not limited to injunctive relief. Any aggrieved party claiming a violation of this article shall seek such relief within: 
1.  One hundred eighty days after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice occurred or was discovered; 
2.  If the aggrieved party has initiated efforts to resolve the dispute addressed in the petition by filing a grievance in accordance with any grievance procedure established by a collective bargaining agreement, contract, or written rule or policy, the petition may be filed within 180 days after the conclusion of the grievance procedure if the grievance procedure concludes within 120 days after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice occurred or was discovered; or 
3.  If the grievance procedure does not conclude within 120 days, the petition must be filed within 300 days after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice occurred or was discovered. 
D.  The initiation of or granting of relief under a grievance procedure shall not preclude or limit any other claims or remedies available under this article. 
E.  The prevailing party in a proceeding pursuant to this article may bring an action in the municipal court for attorney fees and costs and the municipal court may, in its discretion, allow the prevailing party reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
( Ord. No. 1890, § 2, 6-2-2014 )  
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Culture, social services and recreation, MCA 7-16-101 et seq.; parks, MCA 23-1-101 et seq.; recreation, MCA 23-2-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 26.02.010. - Intent. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all park lands in the city, whether dedicated, deed, or otherwise acquired for park purposes, and to all facilities designated for city recreational purposes. Each application for use of a park or recreational facility shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. This article seeks to impose reasonable time, place and manner controls in an appropriate and limited manner upon events and facility uses for which permits are required. This article shall be administered in a manner that seeks to allow for expression, assembly, and the exercise of religious rights in accordance with applicable constitutional and statutory limits and controls. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.010; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 2(12.26.010), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Aggrieved person" means a person who can demonstrate a specific, personal and legal interest in the final decision of an application for a permit issued under this article, as distinguished from a general interest such as is the concern of all members of the community, and which interest would be specifically and personally prejudiced by the decision or benefited by its reversal. 
2.  "Animal" shall have the meaning stated in section 8.02.010. 
3.  "Director" means the director of parks and recreation. 
4.  "Domestic animals" means those animals which live in or about the habitations of people or which contribute to the support of people and include but are not limited to the following: horses, cows, sheep, ducks, geese, chickens, dogs, cats, goats, and other tamed animals. 
5.  "Fireworks" shall have the meaning stated in section 18.05.010. 
6.  "Park" means a park, playground, recreation complex, or any other area in the city, developed or undeveloped, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
7.  "Public assembly" means any meeting, march, demonstration, picket line, rally, or gathering of more than 75 persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that affects or may reasonably be expected to affect the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within a park or recreational facility, or occupies any park or recreational facility in a place open to the general public. 
8.  "Recreational facility" means a building, structure, place or other location within a park or under the management of the city. 
9.  "User group" means any group or organization that is given use of a park for an extended period of time through a park user group agreement. 
10.  "Vehicle" means any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn including snowmobiles. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for bicycles, baby strollers and carriages, wheelchairs, and vehicles in the service of the city parks and recreation division. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.020; Ord. No. 1278, § 2, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 3(12.26.020), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.030. - Park prohibitions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person in a park or in or adjacent to a recreational facility to: 
1.  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, grills, railings, paving or paving material, water lines, equipment, signs, drinking fountains, swimming or wading pools or other park or recreational facility property, improvements or appurtenances whatsoever, real or personal; 
2.  Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex; 
3.  Dump dirt, grass and tree clippings or dig, remove, plant or deposit any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment or other means or agency except as authorized by the director; 
4.  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public utility into, upon or across park or recreational facility property, except on special written permit issued hereunder; 
5.  Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area; 
6.  Climb any tree or walk, climb, stand or sit upon buildings, monuments, statues, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other structure not designated or customarily used for such purpose; 
7.  Attach any rope, cable, structure, device or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench, building or other structure unless otherwise posted. This prohibition does not include locking bicycles to the foregoing mentioned structures as long as no damage is done to the structure and so long as the bicycle does not interfere with the use and enjoyment of the park by others, and so long as the bicycle is not locked to the structure for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours; 
8.  Litter or fail or refuse to deposit litter in provided garbage receptacles. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
9.  Break glass objects and then fail to remove broken glass and safely dispose of the broken glass in such fashion so as not to cause injury to persons or property; 
10.  Cause or permit any domestic animal to run loose, or fail to keep such animal under restraint, in any park or other open space area designated by the commission as an area requiring restraint. Further, every owner or person having custody of said dog or other animal shall remove and properly dispose of the animal's solid waste (fecal material). This subsection shall not apply to service animals authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act.; 
11.  Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant; 
12.  Pasture or pen any animal, domesticated or wild, except as authorized by the director; 
13.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, nor remove from the park or have in his possession any animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any animal. An exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be poisonous may be killed on sight. An exception is further made to fishing where allowed by the state department of fish, wildlife and parks. This regulation does not apply to officers of state or local government duly acting within the course and scope of their duties; 
14.  Ride a horse except on designated horse trails; 
15.  Start a fire except in facilities installed and provided for such purpose, or to fail to completely extinguish a fire upon leaving the park; 
16.  Camp overnight except in designated camping areas; 
17.  Display, offer to sell, or sell any article or service without first obtaining a permit from the director pursuant to this article; 
18.  Bring or discharge any firearm, air gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, atlatl, spear, boomerang or any other form of potentially dangerous weapon into a park or recreational facility (see section 24.07.170); 
19.  Be in a park or recreational facility after being closed, either because of the night closure or closure following public notice or posting; 
20.  Possess or bring fireworks into a park or adjacent to a recreational facility, or cause the fireworks to be ignited or exploded in a park or adjacent to a recreational facility (see chapter 18, article 5); 
21.  Operate a skateboard, roller skate, inline skate, ride a bike or similar recreational device with wheels on any tennis court or in any drained swimming pool; 
22.  Operate a skateboard, rollerskate, inline skate, or ride a bike or similar recreational device with wheels on or against any city-owned table, bench, structure, tennis court, bike rack, parking stop, retaining wall, fountain, statue, railing, stage, or other improvement which may suffer damage by such use; 
23.  Operate a skateboard, rollerskate, inline skate, or ride a bike or similar recreational device with wheels on or in any pavilion, except as authorized by section 26.02.130; 
24.  Practice golf with real golf balls in any park; 
25.  Drive, operate or park any vehicle or trailer on park lands or trails, except as authorized by the director; 
26.  Within any park, paint trees, bushes, buildings, parking lot surfaces, or sidewalks; 
27.  Allow an animal, other than service animals, in a recreational facility. 
B.  The director may create additional prohibitions which may be applicable to one or more parks or recreation facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.030; Ord. No. 1278, § 3, 1989; Ord. No. 1463, § 5, 1998; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1801, § 4(12.26.030), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.040. - Park use/general standards for reserved use of a park or recreational facility. 
A.  The following standards apply to the use, including the reserved use, of all parks and recreational facilities: 
1.  Reservation priority. Unless reserved according to the park reservation procedure, established in section 26.02.050, the use of the park or portion thereof by the public shall be on a first-come, first-served basis. 
2.  Scope. Only parks and recreational facilities designated by the director may be reserved for exclusive use. 
3.  Tents, canopies, inflatable structures. Approval must be granted by the director for the use of, and prior to the assembly of, any tents, canopies, shade structures, inflatable toys, etc., within a park. 
4.  Public address or sound systems. 
a.  Public address and/or sound systems may be used within parks with the approval of the director. The sound system cannot be used for more than three consecutive hours in any park except as provided in subsection A.4.b of this section. The use of amplified sound shall be limited to the hours between 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. 
b.  Bogert Park. Public address and/or sound systems may be used within Bogert Park with the approval of the director. The sound system cannot be used for more than two consecutive hours. The use of a sound amplification system is limited to the hours between 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Amplified sound is prohibited in Bogert Park on Sundays. 
c.  Music may be played inside a structure located in a park or in a recreational facility as long as it cannot be heard outside the structure. All music shall end by 10:00 p.m. 
5.  Marking the grounds. Approval shall be obtained from the director prior to the use of any turf paint within any park. Only water-based turf paint shall be used on any turf. Only chalk shall be used on impervious surfaces such as sidewalks and asphalt. 
6.  Park user group agreements. The director may enter into agreements with various park user groups, with the fee for such agreements established by the director. 
a.  Admission fees may be charged for events held in conjunction with a park user group agreement if approved by the director and listed in the agreement. 
b.  Articles, food, beverages or service may be sold for events held in conjunction with a park user group agreement, if so noted in the agreement. 
7.  Parking. Parking spaces at a park or recreational facility are not reserved with a park reservation permit, and all parking is on a first-come, first-served basis. Park reservation permits may be denied if available parking is inadequate for the number of participants expected. 
8.  Power generators. The director may require a person holding a reservation permit to provide a power generator. The use of a power generator is subject to the restrictions in subsection A.4 of this section. 
9.  Portable toilet facilities. The director may require a person holding a reservation permit to provide portable toilet facilities. The director shall determine how many such facilities are needed and the timeframe in which they must be present. If the facilities are not removed within the timeframe established, the city may remove them and all costs associated with removal shall be charged to the applicant. 
10.  Admission fees. An admission fee to a permitted event cannot be charged without written approval from the director. 
11.  Litter removal. A person holding a reservation permit shall pick up and properly dispose of all types of litter within the buildings and grounds. 
12.  Additional rules. The director may establish additional rules governing the use of a park or recreational facility by the public or a person holding a reserved use permit. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.040; Ord. No. 1278, § 4, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 5(12.26.040), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.050. - Park and recreational facility reservation permits; application; alcohol waiver. 
A.  A person seeking a park or recreational facility reservation permit shall file an application with the director on forms provided by the city. Applicants must be at least 18 years of age. If an open container waiver is requested the applicant must be at least 21 years of age. 
B.  An application for a reservation permit shall be filed with the director no less than 15 working days and not more than 180 days before the event is proposed to commence. The director may waive the minimum filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the event, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the director determines the granting of a waiver will not unduly burden city services or interfere with any other previously approved or applied for event. 
C.  The application shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include all information the director deems relevant to the requested event. 
D.  If 75 or more participants are expected for the event, a public assembly permit shall also be required and may be issued by the director pursuant to the standards and criteria in section 34.08.140. 
E.  Waiver of open alcoholic beverage container. Per section 4.04.030, public drinking or display or exhibition of open alcoholic beverages (open containers) is prohibited in public parks and recreational facilities. A waiver of this requirement may be granted per the provisions of section 4.04.050. A separate application and fee are required. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.050; Ord. No. 1278, § 5, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 6(12.26.050), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.060. - Standards of issuance of reservation permit. 
A.  The director shall issue a permit, subject to any conditions deemed necessary and reasonable, as provided for herein when, from consideration of the application and such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the director finds: 
1.  The application is complete and sets forth accurately and in sufficient detail the information required for consideration; 
2.  The conduct of the event will not unduly inconvenience either the public in using adjacent public areas normally open for general public use or the city in the conduct of governmental operations; 
3.  The possibility of the event causing any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, as further discussed in chapter 16, article 6; 
4.  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the event as to prevent normal police protection of the city; 
5.  The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
6.  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available; 
7.  There is sufficient parking near the site of the event, or other arrangements made for transportation, to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected; 
8.  Such event is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily for private profit, unless a park user agreement is entered into per section 26.02.040.A.6; 
9.  A reservation or public assembly permit for the same time and general location is already granted or has been received and will be granted; 
10.  The conduct of a past event for the same purpose or by the same organizer and/or organization. 
B.  An event may be limited as to the number of participants in the interest of adequacy of facilities. 
C.  Unless otherwise agreed by the applicant, the director shall act on an application within 15 working days after determining that the application is complete. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.060; Ord. No. 1278, § 6, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 7(12.26.060), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.070. - Sale of articles or services within a park or recreational facility/permits. 
A.  For the purpose of maintaining control of park or recreational facility use, the following standards and procedures are adopted in the public interest for issuing permits to sell articles or services in connection with either a community-oriented event approved by the commission or an event established pursuant to a park user group agreement. 
1.  A person seeking issuance of a permit to sell articles or services shall file an application with the director with the following information no less than 15 working days and not more than 180 days prior to the date requested: 
a.  Name, age, telephone number, and address of applicant; 
b.  Name and address of sponsor of activity; 
c.  Day and hours for which permit is desired; 
d.  The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired; 
e.  Purpose of the request for permit or nature of activity; 
f.  Name and address of person responsible for cleanup, if different from applicant or sponsor. 
2.  Standards of issuance of permit to sell articles or services within a park or recreational facility. 
a.  In addition to the standards listed in section 26.02.060, in issuing a permit to sell articles or services the director shall consider whether: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the park or recreational facility is appropriate for the named park or facility and will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public's use and enjoyment of the park; 
(2)  The proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
(3)  The proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense on the city; 
(4)  The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application; and 
(5)  That the sale of articles or services is not primarily for private profit and provides a community benefit. 
b.  Applications meeting these standards will be issued on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.070; Ord. No. 1278, § 7, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 8(12.26.070), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.080. - Requirement for liability insurance, bonding or other security/clean up deposit. 
A.  To avoid interference with protected rights of speech and assembly, any requirement imposed for surety for performance (including but not limited to insurance, bonding, or monetary deposits) shall be based upon needs directly associated with the event and not on the basis of possible disruption of the event by protestors or other persons who might be opposed to the speech or assembly. Such restriction, however, shall not apply where the director determines that the event is being scheduled so as to unduly and unnecessarily create a potential for counter-protest or disruption or interference with public health, safety, welfare, or order. 
B.  A permittee under this article, including a person or entity entering into a park user group agreement, shall obtain commercial general liability insurance covering the permittee and/or the permittee's organization for all activities related to the event or permit, including but not limited to setup, the event itself, and all cleanup activities. The insurance policy shall contain no exceptions or exclusions for activities conducted under or related to the permitted activities. The permittee shall name the city, its officers, and employees as additional insureds on a primary non-contributory basis. The additional insured coverage shall be in a form acceptable to the city. To the extent reasonably possible, such additional insured coverage shall be in the minimum amounts of $750,000.00 per claimant and $1,500,000.00 per occurrence. 
C.  The insurance requirements of this section are in addition to and separate from any other obligations contained in this section or article or in a permit issued under this article. 
D.  Applicants for a permit under this article shall agree in writing to defend, hold the city and its employees and officials harmless and indemnify the city, its employees and officials, for any and all claims, lawsuits or liability, including attorneys' fees and costs allegedly arising out of loss, damage or injury to a person or a person's property occurring during the course of, in preparation of, or in any way pertaining to the permitted event which is caused by the conduct of employees or agents, including guests, of the permit holder. 
E.  The director may grant a waiver to the requirements of this section for city-sponsored events or when the director determines the event does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the city, its officers, agents and employees. The director shall consider the applicant's proven financial inability to obtain the required coverage. When the director considers requests for waivers, the director shall base the decision on the factual circumstances presented by the applicant and decide the specific request on its merits. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.080; Ord. No. 1278, § 8, 1989; Ord. No. 1801, § 11(12.26.080), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.090. - Revocation of permit. 
A.  The director, city manager, the chief of police, or the fire chief shall each have independent authority to instantly revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article: 
1.  Upon a violation of the conditions imposed in the permit; 
2.  Upon violation of this article or any other provision of law; 
3.  When a public emergency arises where the municipal resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of municipal personnel, equipment or services required for the permit would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
B.  Such revocation shall take effect immediately, and the director, city manager, chief of police, or fire chief shall promptly notify the permittee of revocation. After revocation, the permittee may not conduct the event, or if the event has commenced, shall immediately cause the event to be terminated in a safe, proper manner. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 12(12.26.090), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.100. - Fees. 
A nonrefundable fee shall be paid to cover administrative costs of processing permits. All fees under this article shall be set by commission resolution. The director may require a deposit for the rental of any park or recreational facility. If the director requires a deposit for the rental of any park, the director shall establish standards for return and forfeit. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 13(12.26.100), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.110. - Park property; regulations authorized. 
The city commission shall have the right to adopt reasonable regulations for the government of the public parks in the city, and no person shall violate any of such regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 9.66.110; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 1990)  
Sec. 26.02.120. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26.02.130. - Regulations pertaining to wheeled recreational devices. 
A.  No person shall use or place a ramp, jump, or any other device used to force a skateboard, rollerskate, inline skate, bike or similar recreational device with wheels off the pavement on the grounds of any city-owned parking lot, park or sidewalk. 
B.  The city commission may, by resolution, designate areas within city parks in which operation of skateboards, roller-skates, in-line skates, bikes and similar recreational devices with wheels is permitted during specified times. 
C.  The operation of skateboards, rollerskates, inline skates, bikes and similar recreational devices with wheels may also be permitted in designated areas during specially authorized events pursuant to section 26.02.050. 
(Code 1982, § 12.26.075; Ord. No. 1518, § 2, 2000; Ord. No. 1801, § 9(12.26.130), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.140. - Skateboard facility regulations. 
A.  No person shall use or place additional obstacles or other materials, such as ramps, jumps, or any other device onto any city-owned skateboard facility. 
B.  Bicycles, scooters and motorized vehicles are prohibited from using any city-owned skateboard facility. 
C.  The hours of operation for skateboard facilities shall be commensurate with the operation of all other park facilities, and shall be clearly posted. All skateboard facilities will be closed during periods of inclement weather. 
D.  The use of food or drink is prohibited on the skating surface of all skateboard facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1546, § 1(12.26.077), 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1801, § 10(12.26.140), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.150. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26.02.160. - Enforcement. 
This article may be enforced by the director, the city manager, the fire chief, or the police chief. In addition this article may be enforced by injunction, restraining order, declaratory relief, or such other order as may be imposed by a court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 17(12.26.160), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.170. - Violations, penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article or any provision or requirement of a permit issued hereunder shall be guilty of a municipal infraction in accordance with chapter 24, article 2, and shall be fined not more than $500.00. The director or any police officer having jurisdiction may issue a citation for a municipal infraction for a violation of this article. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing an additional action in law or equity to recover unreimbursed costs associated with a permit or unpermitted event. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 18(12.26.170), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.180. - Appeal procedure. 
A.  An aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal the director's decision of a permit to the city manager. Prior to filing of an appeal with the city manager, the appellant shall, within five business days of the director's decision, request the director reconsider the decision. The director shall have five days to issue a decision on the request to reconsider. 
B.  An aggrieved person may, only after complying with subsection A of this section, file a written appeal with the commission through the city clerk with a copy to the city manager not later than five days after the city manager's decision. The appeal to the commission shall state with specificity the grounds for the appeal. The commission shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the accepted notice of appeal, provided that the receipt of the notice is received prior to the deadline for submission of new agenda items. 
1.  The appeal hearing shall be limited to the grounds stated in the appeal unless the commission for good cause determines to hear other issues or concerns. 
2.  The appellant, applicant (if not the appellant), the city manager and other persons directly affected may speak or submit evidence at the hearing. Public comment will be accepted. 
3.  The commission shall make a determination on the appeal at the meeting, unless the applicant agrees to a continuance. The city clerk shall issue the commission's decision in writing to the applicant either by personal delivery, or regular or electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 19(12.26.180), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.190. - Judicial review. 
After complying with the requirements of section 26.02.180, an aggrieved person may file a request for judicial review of a decision by the city commission pursuant to this article. The request for review shall be filed no later than 30 days after the commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 1801, § 20(12.26.190), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.200. - Hours of operation of parks. 
A.  Hours. All parks shall be open to the public every day of the year subject to the exceptions established herein. 
B.  General closure. Any section or part of any park may be closed to the public by the director. Notice of closing shall be posted in a conspicuous manner. 
C.  Night closure. No person without written permission of the director shall be physically present within the boundaries of any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except in designated camping areas. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 1, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.210. - Traffic control. 
A.  No person shall drive any vehicle through the park or upon park roads at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour or at such speeds as may be established by the director. 
B.  Vehicles shall not be driven or parked off designated roads and parking areas without the written permission of the director. 
C.  All persons shall obey the traffic laws of the state and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 26.02.220. - City commission—Park development. 
The city commission shall authorize any conceptual changes, new development, or redevelopment aspects of changes in all city parks proposed by the staff. New buildings, renovations, or conceptual changes will be presented to the city commission before construction or implementation. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 3, 11-7-2011)  
Chapter 28 - SALES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 
 
Sec. 28.02.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Fire and other altered goods sale" means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
2.  "Going-out-of-business sale" means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee, bankrupt, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's, end, executor's, final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvents', last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's and quitting business. 
3.  "Goods" means and includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
4.  "Relocation of business" means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.010; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.020. - License required. 
A.  A license issued by the administrative services director shall be obtained by any person before offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by means to be one of the following kind: 
1.  Going-out-of-business sale; 
2.  Relocation of business sale. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.020; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982; Ord. No. 1273, § 12(A), 1988)  
Sec. 28.02.030. - Established business requisite. 
Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license, except that this minimum may be waived by the administrative services director with concurrence of the city manager and the following proper application of the owner of such business when such application shows that a hardship exists. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.030; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982; Ord. No. 1273, § 12(B), 1988)  
Sec. 28.02.040. - Exception for survivors of businessmen. 
Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, such deceased person's heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.040; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.050. - Denial of future business licenses. 
Any person who had held a sale, or who is directly or indirectly related to the business issued a going-out-of-business license, may be denied a new city business license for the same or similar business for a period of 90 days after the expiration of the going-out-of-business license. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.050; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982; Ord. No. 1273, § 12(C), 1988)  
Sec. 28.02.060. - Location restricted. 
Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store, or branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.060; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.070. - Exemptions from provisions designated. 
A.  The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
1.  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
2.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
3.  Duly licensed auctioneer, selling at an auction; 
4.  Persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, unless such sale is continued for a period of more than 30 days from and after such effective date, in which event such person, at the lapse of the 30-day period, shall comply with the provisions of this article; 
5.  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine, or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.070; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.080. - License—Application requirements. 
A.  A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application a minimum of two weeks prior to the date the sale is to commence to the director of administrative services, setting forth and containing the following information: 
1.  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
2.  The true name and address of the person from whom the applicant purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
3.  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
4.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
5.  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
6.  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
7.  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  Bona fide orders. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment, 
b.  Goods purchased for sale hereunder. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 90 days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.080; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.090. - Same—Fee. 
An applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the director of administrative services an application along with the fee as required in chapter 12. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.090; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.100. - Same—Issuance. 
A.  Licenses shall be issued hereunder on the following terms: 
1.  Upon tender to the director of administrative services to the city of the applicant's business license for revocation; 
2.  Upon issuance of a going-out-of-business license at applicant's business location; 
3.  Upon being revoked and terminated. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.100; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.110. - Same—Period. 
The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days, for inventory valued at under $500,000.00, and 90 days for inventory of $500,000.00 and over, Sundays and legal holidays included, following the issuance thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.110; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982; Ord. No. 1273, § 12 (D), 1988)  
Sec. 28.02.120. - Nature of sale allowed. 
The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.130; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.130. - Saleable goods allowed. 
The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.140; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.140. - License nontransferable. 
Any license herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.150; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.150. - Duties of licensee. 
A.  Adhere to inventory. A licensee shall make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods to be sold. 
B.  Advertise properly. A licensee shall refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
C.  Adhere to advertising. A licensee shall conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out, incident hereto. 
D.  Keep duplicate inventory. A licensee shall keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
E.  Segregate non-inventoried goods. A licensee shall keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the field inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all goods. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.160; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
Sec. 28.02.160. - License display; merchandise examination; advertisement regulations. 
On commencement of any sale, the license issued by the director of administrative services shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant to which the license was issued shall at all times be on the premises and available to the director of administrative services, and the licensee shall permit the director of administrative services to examine all merchandise on the premises at any time during the period of the sale of comparison with such stock list. All advertisements and advertising, and the language contained therein, shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which the license was issued and the wording of such advertisements shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising shall in no manner or form whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, indicate that such sale is held with the approval of the city. Such advertising shall contain a statement in these words and no others: 
Sale held pursuant to License No. _______ issued by the Director of Administrative Services of the City of Bozeman on the ________ day of ________, 20_______ 
and in such blank spaces shall be indicated the license number and the date and issuance of the license. 
(Code 1982, § 5.60.170; Ord. No. 1117, § 14, 1982)  
ARTICLE 3. - MOBILE VENDING 
 
Sec. 28.03.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of street and sidewalk vending activities in downtown Bozeman and in certain zoning districts within the city in order to maintain safe and attractive rights of way while encouraging economic activity and diversity. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.020. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to mobile vendors as defined herein. This article does not apply to: 
A.  Mobile vendors who dispense food from mobile vending units and that move from place to place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 15 minutes at a time, such as ice cream trucks. Such vendors must offer for sale only food and non-alcoholic beverages. 
B.  Mobile caterers who are transporting and delivering, in motor vehicles, food and beverages to residential, business and industrial establishments pursuant to prearranged schedules and dispensing from the vehicles the items for the convenience of the personnel or occupants of such establishments. 
C.  Mobile caterers who are hired for private catering purposes to serve guests of a catered event, so long as: 
1.  The mobile caterer is parked entirely on private property; 
2.  Service is limited to the guests of the catered event only; and 
3.  No payment transaction shall occur for individual orders taken by the mobile caterer. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.030. - Definitions. 
A.  Director means the city's director of community development. 
B.  Downtown business improvement district means the Bozeman Downtown Business Improvement District created by Commission Resolution No. 4263 and Ordinance No. 1790. 
C.  Mobile means the state of being in active, but not necessarily continuous, movement; capable of being moved and not permanently fixed or placed. 
D.  Mobile vending unit includes: 
1.  A motorized vehicle from which a mobile vendor offers for sale or sells goods to the public; or 
2.  A "sidewalk vending cart" as defined in section 34.05.020; or 
3.  A trailer that is pulled by a motorized vehicle and has no power to move on its own from which a mobile vendor offers for sale or sells goods to the public; or 
4.  Any other mobile device or container from which a mobile vendor offers for sale or sells goods to the public. 
E.  Mobile vendor means any person that sells or offers for sale goods from a mobile vending unit within the city. A transient merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in section 12.01.010 is not a mobile vendor for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.040. - License required. 
A.  General. It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city a mobile vending unit, as defined in this article, without having first obtained a mobile vending license. A separate license shall be required for each mobile vending unit. In addition to the provisions set forth in this article, all provisions of chapter 12, business licensing, shall apply to mobile vending businesses unless specifically noted in this article. 
B.  Mobile vending licenses. The city may issue a mobile vending license for: 
1.  Mobile vending in all lawful locations throughout the city including within the boundaries of the downtown business improvement district; or 
2.  Mobile vending in all lawful locations throughout the city excluding the downtown business improvement district. 
C.  Application; inspections. A mobile vendor must complete and submit an application including a signage plan for a mobile vending business license to the department of community development. Prior to issuance of a license, all required inspections by the city fire marshal and, if a food vendor, the health department shall be completed. A mobile vendor serving food must present to the city an approved health department license prior to issuance of a city license under this chapter. 
D.  Insurance. The mobile vendor must provide proof of commercial general liability insurance with the application for mobile vending business license. 
E.  Fees. Mobile vending business license fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.050. - Permitted locations. 
Mobile vendors may operate a mobile vending unit only in the locations described in this section. Mobile vending is prohibited in alleys. 
A.  Zoning districts where operation is permitted. Subject to the provisions of this article, mobile vendors are permitted to operate mobile vending units in the following zoning districts as defined in section 38.07.010: 
1.  Commercial (B-1, B-2, B-2M, B-3). 
2.  Industrial (M-1, M-2, B-P). 
3.  Public land and institutions (PLI). 
4.  Residential emphasis mixed use (REMU). 
5.  Urban mixed use (UMU). 
6.  Historic mixed use (HMU). 
7.  Residential office (R-O). 
B.  Right-of-way designations where operation is prohibited. Within the permitted zoning districts, unless otherwise excepted in subsection C or approved by the director of public works, mobile vending is prohibited on streets designated in the most recently adopted long range transportation plan as: 
1.  Interstate; or 
2.  Principal arterial; or 
3.  Minor arterial; or 
4.  Collector. 
C.  Exception for portions of downtown and midtown. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibitions, subject to the remaining provisions of this article mobile vendors are permitted to operate mobile vending units on either side of the following streets: Main Street between North Broadway Avenue and North 7th Avenue; Mendenhall Street between Rouse Avenue and North 7 th Avenue; Babcock Street between South Wallace Avenue and South 4 th Avenue; Rouse Avenue between Babcock Street and Main Street; South Willson Avenue between Main Street and Babcock Street; and North 7th Avenue between Main Street and Peach Street/Durston Road. 
Nothing herein authorizes use of a designated state highway in contravention of state law. 
D.  Location on private property. 
1.  A mobile vendor must not operate on any private property without written permission from the property owner to do so and must leave the property if asked to leave by the property owner. A copy of the owner's written and notarized permission to operate in a specific location signed by the property owner shall be kept within the mobile unit at all times. 
2.  A mobile vending unit located on private property is subject to the same land use standards applicable to the property as if the unit was a permanent structure and may require approval pursuant to chapter 38. 
3.  A mobile vending unit may not be located on a private parking area unless the area will continue to provide the required off-street parking spaces and circulation for existing uses on the property. 
4.  The wheels of a mobile vending vehicle must not be removed. 
5.  Temporary seating, sandwich board signs and other temporary appurtenances may be allowed with permission of the property owner. 
E.  Operating in city parks and city property. The director of parks and recreation may authorize mobile vending in a city park pursuant to section 26.02.050 notwithstanding the prohibition in subsection A of this section. Subject to subsection F of this section: 
1.  The parking commission may authorize mobile vending on a city-owned parking lot which is subject to the parking commission's authority. 
2.  The city manager may authorize mobile vending on any other real property owned by the city not otherwise prohibited by this article. 
3.  The library board of trustees may authorize mobile vending on the grounds of the public library. 
F.  Special event food vending. Mobile food vendors may vend from a location including public rights-of-way except as prohibited in subsection B of this section in a zone which is not otherwise approved for mobile food vending, including residential zones, under the following conditions: 
1.  In addition to the requirements of subsection D of this section, the owner of the property where such event will occur has invited the mobile food vendor to participate in a special event such as a community event, neighborhood block party, wedding, or birthday party, and mobile food vending is part of the approved special event activities. 
2.  In addition to the requirements of section 28.03.060, the mobile food vending unit may not remain at the location for longer than the duration of the special event and while there must be located so as to avoid creating conflicts with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or creating other public safety problems. 
3.  Mobile vending from the public right-of-way in conjunction with a special event within a public park may be approved as part of the park reservation permit application for such event pursuant to section 26.02.050. 
4.  A mobile vendor may operate on a public right-of-way prohibited in subsection B of this section if the mobile vending occurs pursuant to an approved public assembly permit. 
5.  Mobile food vendors operating pursuant to this exception to the location provisions of this article must comply with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.060. - Hours of operation. 
A.  Mobile vendors are permitted to operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., unless otherwise noted in this section. 
B.  In B2 and B3 zoning districts, mobile vendors may operate from 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m., except that on Main Street between Church Avenue and Grand Avenue mobile vendors may only operate from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. to 2:30 a.m. Mobile vending for non-food retail is authorized between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Main Street and Rouse Avenue immediately adjacent to Soroptimist Park. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B, mobile vendors must comply with all posted parking time restrictions and the time restrictions in chapter 16, article 6 (noise). 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.070. - Mobile vendor requirements. 
The following regulations apply to all mobile vending operations whether on public or private property, unless otherwise stated in section 28.03.050.D: 
A.  Compliance with laws. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the mobile vendor must comply with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to state motor vehicle licensing laws, motor vehicle maximum dimension standards established pursuant to state law, health department permitting requirements, and city requirements for use of public right-of-way. Loss of any required state or county permit or license will result in revocation of the mobile vending license in accordance with section 28.03.080. 
B.  Safety hazards. The mobile vendor acknowledges that the police and fire departments, or any authorized representative thereof, have the right to suspend operations or request the mobile vendor to relocate when the vendor is causing or contributing to an imminent public safety hazard. 
C.  Parking. Mobile vending units are subject to and must comply with all applicable city parking regulations, including time limitations and ADA parking restrictions. Mobile vending units parked in the public right-of-way must be no more than 36 feet in length. 
D.  Vehicular traffic. The mobile vendor may not operate the mobile vending unit in a manner that impedes vehicular traffic. 
E.  Pedestrian access. The mobile vendor may not operate the mobile vending unit in a manner than impedes pedestrian access along the sidewalk or public right-of-way. The mobile vendor must set up and operate the mobile vending unit so as to maintain a clear pedestrian pathway along the public sidewalk at all times. 
1.  Mobile vending units designed to be located on the sidewalk, such as carts, must first obtain an encroachment permit issued by the department of public works pursuant to section 34.05.130. 
2.  A mobile vendor operating a mobile vending unit may not place any item, including chairs, tables, or signage on the sidewalk. 
3.  A mobile vending unit may not be located such that its serving window or customer access door is adjacent to a tree, light pole, sculpture, bike rack, trash can affixed to the sidewalk, newspaper dispenser, publication rack, or any other permanently-mounted fixture on the sidewalk. 
4.  Any obstructions of the public right-of-way deemed unsafe by the city or placed without proper approval will be promptly removed. 
5.  A mobile vending unit may not be located on or adjacent to that portion of the sidewalk for which an exclusive use permit pursuant to section 34.05.080 or a non-substantial encroachment permit for a sidewalk café pursuant to section 34.05.050 has been issued and is actively being used. 
F.  Awnings. Any canopies, awnings or any other attachments must be supported entirely by the mobile vending unit and may not touch the ground. 
G.  Trash. Each mobile vending unit must be equipped with a portable trash receptacle attached to the mobile vending unit and available for use by the mobile vendor's customers. The mobile vendor is responsible for proper disposal of solid waste and waste water in the sanitation facility pursuant to local and state rules, regulations and laws. The mobile vendor must remove and dispose of all trash and refuse within 25 feet of the mobile vending of unit which were originally dispensed from the truck. 
H.  Lighting. The mobile vendor may not use any flashing or blinking lights or strobe lights. The mobile vendor must comply with all requirements of section 38.23.150.D.7. The mobile vendor may provide localized lighting on or in the mobile vending unit for the purpose of illuminating the customer ordering area to ensure customer safety, for the purpose of food preparation, and for the purpose of menu illumination. 
I.  Signage. 
1.  Mobile vendors must submit a sign plan with the application for a mobile vending business license. Mobile vending units do not require a separate sign permit pursuant to chapter 38, article 28. 
2.  Mobile vendors may not use a sign that is prohibited by section 38.28.030. 
3.  Signs may not block pedestrian facilities of the right-of-way and must be flush with the mobile vending unit. 
4.  Signs may not extend above the mobile vending unit. 
5.  Mobile food vending units may only display their menu on the side of the mobile vending unit designed to face the customers. 
6.  Mobile vendors may not hang or display merchandise or any item on trees, umbrellas, walls, or vend from other temporary structures located upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public property. 
7.  No third party advertising is permitted on the mobile vending unit. 
J.  Public utilities. The mobile vending unit must be self-contained and may not connect to city water or power during operation while located on public right-of-way. 
K.  Fire abatement. At least one operational, tagged fire extinguisher shall be kept available and accessible as directed by the city fire marshal or designee. 
L.  Noise and nuisance; exhaust. 
1.  The mobile vendor must comply with the noise provisions of chapter 16, article 6 and all nuisance provisions of this Code. 
2.  Portable generators must be securely affixed to the unit during operation. 
3.  Generators may not exceed a rating of 60 dBA pursuant to industry standard measurements. 
4.  Idling of a mobile vending vehicle is prohibited while preparing or serving food. Exhaust from a generator and all mobile vending operations including food preparation must be directed away from the service window and adjacent sidewalk. 
M.  Display of mobile vending business license. Mobile vendors must display visibly their current mobile vending business license from the city at all times. The licenses will be made available for inspection upon request by the city. 
N.  Sales only to pedestrians on the sidewalk. Vendors are not permitted to sell, offer for sale, solicit or attempt to solicit or sell to occupants of any vehicle or to any person on a public street. A mobile vendor may only sell to persons on a sidewalk and may not sell directly or allow customers to access the mobile vending unit from a public street. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 28.03.080. - Violations; enforcement. 
A.  License suspension or revocation. The city manager may suspend or revoke a license when the licensee commits one or more of the following acts or omissions: 
1.  Failure to comply with any provision of this article or of chapter 12 or 38; 
2.  Conducting the licensed activity in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals, or interfere with the rights of abutting property owners; 
3.  Cancellation of the health department's authorization for a mobile vending unit; or 
4.  The securing of any license by fraud or misrepresentation, to specifically include false or incorrect information on the license application. 
B.  Procedure. Should the city manager decide to suspend or revoke a license, the licensee will be given notice and an opportunity to respond following the procedures in section 12.02.180, except that should the city manager determine the mobile vending unit or the mobile vendor's operations present a safety hazard or require immediate remedy, the city manager may order the mobile vending unit removed immediately by local law enforcement or the code compliance officer. 
C.  Appeal. Licensee will have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager by following the provisions of section 12.02.190. 
D.  Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. In addition to suspension or revocation under subsection A of this section, a knowing violation of this article constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as described in section 1.01.210. 
(Ord. No. 1950 , § 4, 3-20-2017)  
Chapter 30 - SECONDHAND GOODS  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, MCA 31-1-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30.02.010. - License required. 
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer before doing any business in the city shall first procure a license therefor as provided in chapter 12, article 2. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.010; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982)  
Sec. 30.02.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Pawnbroker" means any person whose business it is to take or receive by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, for the repayment or security of money loaned thereon. 
2.  "Secondhand dealer" means any person who engages in the business of buying and selling secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, of any kind whatever. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.020; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982)  
Sec. 30.02.030. - License; application; fee. 
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer desiring to do business in the city shall file with the director of administrative services an application as required in chapter 12, article 2, and pay the fee as required in chapter 12. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.030; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982)  
Sec. 30.02.040. - Register—Required. 
A.  Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall keep a book in which shall be entered, in legible writing, the name of all articles, and the description of each (when practicable), purchased or taken as a pledge, pawn, or security for money paid, advanced, or loaned thereon, and such register and the property so purchased or taken, together with the names and residences of the person from whom such property was purchased or taken, shall at all times be subject to examination as required in section 30.02.050. 
1.  Every pawnbroker shall keep a database of records sufficient to identify each pledge, contract for purchase or purchase transaction, and each forfeiture of property pursuant to the terms of a contract for purchase. Every customer shall provide to the pawnbroker the following information for such records: 
a.  The customer's name and date of birth; 
b.  The current street address, city, state and zip code of the customer's residence; 
c.  The customer's identification from which will be of one or more of the following: 
(1)  A valid state identification card; 
(2)  A valid state driver's license; 
(3)  A military identification card; 
(4)  A valid passport; 
(5)  An alien registration card; 
(6)  An official identification document lawfully issued by a state or federal government. 
2.  All transactions shall be kept in a numerical register in the order in which they occur, which register shall show the printed name and written or electronic signature of the pawnbroker or agent, the purchase price or other monetary amount of the transaction, the date, time and place of the transaction, and an accurate and detailed account and description of each item of tangible personal property involved, including, but not limited to, any and all trademarks, identification numbers, serial numbers, model numbers, owner-applied numbers, brand names or other identifying marks on such property. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.040; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982; Ord. No. 1734, § 1, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.050. - Same—Examination by police. 
No person keeping records as required in section 30.02.040 shall fail, neglect, or refuse to exhibit the same to the chief of police, or any police officer, or any third party accompanied by such officer, or any person brought as a friend to redeem property pledged by another, when requested to do so, or refuse to permit the chief of police, or any police officer, or any third party brought by a pledge or to redeem the property pledged, to inspect any such article purchased or received. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.050; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982; Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.060. - Persons from whom articles shall not be taken. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or valuable article dealer to receive, purchase or trade any article from a person who is under the influence of alcohol, under the influence of drugs, or under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.060; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982; Ord. No. 1734, § 3, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.070. - Duration articles must be held. 
A pawnbroker shall hold all purchases made through a purchase transaction for a period of ten days, during which time the property shall not be disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received. The holding period shall begin on the day the purchase transaction is uploaded into the police department designated database. 
(Code 1982, § 5.32.070; Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 1982; Ord. No. 1734, § 4, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.080. - Internet subscription requirements. 
Every pawnbroker shall own, maintain and operate a computer system with internet access. Every pawn shop or pawnbroker shall file all records electronically on a daily basis directly to the police department and/or to an internet subscription service designated as an agent of the police department as prescribed by the chief of police. The pawn shop or pawnbroker shall enter and upload all information from its database of records regarding contract for purchase, pledges, and purchase transactions. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 5, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.090. - Requirement for records. 
A.  All records required to be kept under this article must be kept in the English language, in a legible manner and shall be preserved and made accessible for inspection for a period of three years after the date of redemption or forfeiture and sale of the property. 
B.  Upon demand of any police department officer or agent, the pawnbroker shall produce and show any tangible personal property given to the pawnbroker in connection with any contract for purchase or purchase transaction. The pawnbroker's database shall list the date on which each contract for purchase was canceled, whether it was redeemed, or forfeited or sold, and, upon demand, such records shall be made available to any police department officer or agent. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 6, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 30.02.100. - Declaration of ownership. 
A.  The pawnbroker shall, at the time of making the loan contract for purchase or purchase transaction, obtain a written declaration of ownership from the customer stating whether the property that is the subject of the transaction is solely owned by the customer and, if not solely owned by the customer, the customer shall attach a power of attorney from all co-owners of the property authorizing the customer to sell or otherwise dispose of the property. 
B.  The pawnbroker shall require the customer to sign the customer's name in the presence of the pawnbroker on the declaration of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 7, 1-14-2008)  
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Waste and litter control, MCA 75-10-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 32.02.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Automated collection service" means solid waste collection by the city through the use of a collection truck which utilizes a mechanical arm to pick up and dump totes. 
2.  "Commercial account" means any place or premise used for nonresidential, business or professional purposes only that utilizes solid waste collection and disposal services provided by the city. 
3.  "Dumpster" means a solid waste container, owned by the city, used in the dumpster collection system. 
4.  "Dumpster collection service" means solid waste collection by the city through the use of a collection vehicle to empty the dumpsters. 
5.  "Solid waste" means all refuse, animal, plant and vegetable matter, ashes, floor sweepings, waste paper and the like; but shall not be construed to include animal or poultry manure, basement, foundation or lawn excavations, or loose earth from excavations of any kind, or trees, except small prunings; debris from the construction or wreckage of buildings which is not a menace to the public health; but this definition shall not be held to exclude as solid waste anything which is commonly known or accepted as such even though not specified herein, and, in case of doubt or dispute, the director of public works shall decide such dispute and the director's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
6.  "Solid waste service" means the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste by, or at the direction of, the city. 
7.  "Tote" means a solid waste container, owned by the city, which is used in the automated collection program system. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.010; Ord. No. 1323, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1478, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1544, § 1, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.020. - City collection of solid waste. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, the director of public works is responsible for the collection and disposal of the solid waste for all residences, buildings or other premises located within the city which accumulates solid waste. 
B.  The city shall provide solid waste service to all persons or properties within city limits requesting such service and as follows: 
1.  When totally undeveloped, vacant lands are annexed, the city shall provide all subsequent solid waste service; or 
2.  When developed lands are annexed that are receiving no solid waste services, the city shall provide all subsequent solid waste services; 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.015; Ord. No. 1323, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1544, § 2, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.030. - Collection and disposal by city; exemptions; article provisions not exclusive. 
A.  All solid waste generated within the city limits which will be disposed of by city solid waste services must be properly disposed of in a container acceptable to the solid waste service. The collection of solid waste will be weekly except as follows: 
1.  35-gallon totes may be collected on a weekly or monthly depending on need; 
2.  Dumpsters may be collected daily or weekly depending on need. 
B.  If at any time, the property owner, occupant or operator fails to properly dispose of solid waste in a container as provided in this article including but not limited to arranging for a special pick up or properly tagging excess solid waste items, the director of public works may place a violation notice on the property owner's, occupant's or operator's container and the violation must be corrected within 24 hours. Should the violation not be corrected as required or another violation occur within six months of the first, the director of public works may, at the director's discretion, require the property owner, occupant or operator to move to the next size container or containers and charge accordingly, charge the property owner, occupant or operator under this article, or both. 
C.  If, at any time, the removal or disposal of the solid waste from any property receiving private solid waste service fails to properly dispose of solid waste as required by this article, including but not limited to proper disposal of excess solid waste items, the director of public works may inform the property owner, occupant or operator, by certified letter of the deficiencies and, if applicable, a date by which the deficiencies must be corrected. If the director's concerns are not addressed within 48 hours of receipt of the letter or reoccur within a period of six months, the director may require the solid waste to be collected by city solid waste service and charge all costs to the property owner, occupant or operator. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.020; Ord. No. 1323, § 3, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 3, 1993; Ord. No. 1478, § 2, 1998; Ord. No. 1544, § 3, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.040. - Containers; type and number required. 
A.  All solid waste for collection by the city shall be placed in containers as follows: 
1.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, for automated collection accounts all solid waste will be placed in a tote provided by the city. 
2.  For dumpster collection accounts, all solid waste will be placed in a dumpster provided by the city. 
B.  Except as provided herein, it is unlawful to cause or allow solid waste to be placed at the designated point of collection without being contained within a suitable container as hereinbefore described. On those occasions when a property's solid waste is too bulky or too large to fit in the containers provided, the property owner, occupant or operator may place the solid waste outside the containers, provided they arrange for a special pickup or place a tag on all items of solid waste to be removed. The property owner, occupant or operate will be charged as set forth in section 32.02.060. 
C.  Containers will be allowed within the street right-of-way the night before and on the day of solid waste collection only, but must be stored off the right-of-way the remainder of the time. Racks for compost only will be allowed along the alley right-of-way, provided they are adequately maintained and do not encroach upon the driving area within the alley. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person or business to dump or place solid waste in a solid waste container belonging to another person or upon any other premises without the consent of the owner of such container or premises. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.030; Ord. No. 1323, § 4, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 4, 1993; Ord. No. 1478, § 3, 1998; Ord. No. 1544, § 4, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.050. - Administration; rules and regulations. 
The execution and administration of the provisions of this article shall be, and are, committed to the department of public works, and to the director of the department of public works, under the supervision and director of the city manager. The city manager, subject to approval of the city commission, is authorized and empowered to make, alter, amend and repeal rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, for operation and administration; and such rules and regulations, as from time to time so adopted, altered, amended, repealed and approved, shall be considered as a part of this article, to be read and construed and observed in connection herewith. The director of the department of public works shall employ all help necessary for such administration, provide all collecting and hauling equipment, stationery, books or account, blank forms and other incidentals necessary or convenient for efficient and economical administration of the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted and approved pursuant hereto and as herein provided. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.040; Ord. No. 1323, § 5, 1991)  
Sec. 32.02.060. - Costs of collection and disposal; collection and payment; solid waste fund. 
A.  The city commission will, on an annual basis, establish the collection rate by resolution. The basis for the collection rate will be set as follows: 
1.  An automated collection system rate which will be based on the size of tote, frequency of pickup, and any applicable special fees. 
2.  A dumpster collection system rate based on a base rate, the size of the dumpster and the frequency of pickup and any applicable special fees. 
3.  A non-subscriber collection system rate for all residential properties within the city which are not serviced by the city and are not serviced by any private contractor licensed by the state public service commission for the collection and transportation based on the monthly fee equivalent to a 65-gallon tote rate. 
4.  A special pick-up rate for additional or excess solid waste based on the type and amount of additional or excess solid waste. 
5.  The rates established by resolution shall be set as monthly fees, and those fees shall be included on the monthly water and sewer statement and will become delinquent if not paid by the 15th of the month in which the bill is received. 
6.  The failure to pay the cost and expense of collecting and disposing of solid waste as established under this article, including but not limited to the cost of equipment, equipment maintenance, salaries, wages, benefits and all general operations costs such as office expenses will be specially assessed annually by resolution against the real property from which solid waste is collected and removed. These shall be in addition to any remedies allowed under section 32.02.110 and the implementation of any lien shall not be interpreted to be the city's only remedy under this section. 
B.  All moneys collected, received or paid under this article shall be kept in a separate fund to be known as the solid waste fund, and shall be paid out only on warrants drawn on such fund and signed as are other warrants of the city for the disbursement of its funds, and upon claims duly executed, presented, audited and allowed, all as required by law. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.050; Ord. No. 1323, § 6, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 5, 1993; Ord. No. 1478, § 4, 1998; Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1544, § 5, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.070. - Outdoor dumping of solid waste prohibited. 
Any deposit of solid waste upon the premises or property of another without the express permission or consent of the owner or occupant of such other property or premises, or the deposit of materials not identified or listed as acceptable materials at any recycling receptacle owned and operated by the city or any private entity is forbidden and prohibited, and any such depositing shall be deemed a violation of this article and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall subject the offender to the penalties provided within this article. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.060; Ord. No. 1323, § 7, 1991; Ord. No. 1367, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1478, § 5, 1998; Ord. No. 1502, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1544, § 6, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.080. - Deposit of highly inflammable material prohibited. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed in or near the receptacle provided for the removal of refuse, any highly inflammable wastes, acids or explosives of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to hot ashes. All such materials will be disposed of by the owner of the inflammable waste in a manner directed by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 1544, § 8, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.090. - Dumping of hazardous materials/wastes prohibited. 
The unauthorized dumping or disposal of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes, as defined under state regulations, into the collection and disposal system or upon any properties within the city limits or upon property owned by the city shall be expressly prohibited. Such unauthorized dumping of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes shall subject the violator to the remedies and penalties set forth in the state statutes. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.065; Ord. No. 1323, § 8, 1991) 
State Law reference— Hazardous waste management, MCA 75-10-401 et seq.  
Sec. 32.02.100. - Infectious waste. 
It is unlawful for any person, with or without a permit, to dispose in the city landfill any infectious waste which has not been treated as required by state law and the department of public works landfill policy. Said infectious waste must be rendered non-infectious and no longer a biological hazard. Infectious waste is that waste defined as "infectious waste" in Montana Code Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 1544, § 9, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.110. - Violation; penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted and approved pursuant thereto, will be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to six months in the county jail, a fine not to exceed $500.00, or both. 
B.  In addition to, or separate from, the provisions set forth in subsection A of this section, the director of public works may, at the director's discretion, chose either or both of the following: 
1.  Refuse to allow any person violating the provisions of this article from using the city's landfill or transfer station; and 
2.  Charge any person any costs incurred by the city in connection with said violation. 
C.  Should the director decide to apply the provisions of subsection B of this section, the director shall adopt an appeal procedure to address any concerns of the individual. 
(Code 1982, § 8.16.070; Ord. No. 1323, § 9, 1991; Ord. No. 1544, § 7, 2-19-2001)  
Sec. 32.02.120. - Contract authority. 
The city shall have the authority to enter into contracts with private haulers to provide service to citizens within city limits as it sees fit. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as to limit this contracting authority. 
(Ord. No. 1544, § 10, 2-19-2001)  
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34.01.010. - Datum line for establishment of street grades and all other city purposes. 
The vertical datum is established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 12.04.010; Ord. No. 2032 , § 1, 12-18-2019)  
ARTICLE 2. - STREET MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 34.02.010. - Street names to be as shown on official map. 
The several streets, avenues, alleys and public places and extensions of the same in the city shall hereafter be known and designated by the name applied thereto respectively on the maps and plats of the city, and additions, filed in the offices of the city clerk and the county clerk and county recorder. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.010)  
Sec. 34.02.020. - Streets and public places to be kept clear of obstructions and debris. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, streets, avenues, alleys and public places of the city, including sidewalks, shall at all times be kept free, clear and clean of all obstructions, debris, encumbrances and encroachments which hamper or interfere with the free and safe use thereof by the public. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.020; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 34.02.030. - Work in streets; permit required; interfering with authorized work prohibited. 
A.  No person shall impede, obstruct, or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or any part thereof; dig any hole, shaft, ditch or drain; or dig or remove any sod, earth, stones, sand or gravel from any street, avenue, alley and public place without first having obtained a permit from the director of public works; or hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public improvement or work ordered or done by, or under the authority of the city. 
B.  Permits for excavations in paved streets or alleys shall be subject to an application fee and a pavement degradation fee as established by resolution. Newly constructed streets, reconstructed streets, or streets that have been repaved shall be considered protected streets for a period of five years following construction. Permits for excavations in protected streets shall be subject to an additional pavement degradation surcharge as established by resolution. 
C.  All applicants requesting permits to excavate in any public right-of-way shall either file or have on file with the director of public works a street opening bond prior to conducting any work in the public right-of-way. The company writing the bonds shall be licensed to do business in the state. 
D.  All applicants requesting permits to excavate in any public right-of-way shall either file or have on file with the director of public works proof of general liability insurance coverage, prior to conducting any work in the public right-of-way. The insurance company shall be licensed to do business in the state. 
E.  The amount of bonding and insurance coverages required shall be as established by resolution. 
F.  Pavement degradation fees or surcharges shall not be required for emergency utility repair work; installation of new fire sprinkler service lines required by the city fire marshal, if no alternate connection point is available; or for infrastructure improvement work being done under the city's capital improvements program. 
G.  Pavement degradation fees shall be deposited into the street maintenance fund. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.030; Ord. No. 1591, § 1, 3-17-2003)  
Sec. 34.02.040. - Obstructing or encumbering streets; permit required. 
No person, association, company or corporation shall encumber or obstruct, or cause to be encumbered or obstructed any street, avenue, alley or other public place in the city by placing therein or thereon any building materials, trash, garbage, rubbish, debris, accumulated snow and ice removed from an adjoining private premises, or any article or thing whatsoever, without first having obtained permission in writing from the director of public works. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.040)  
Sec. 34.02.050. - Structures in streets; permit required. 
No building or other structure, in whole or in part, shall be erected or placed upon any street, avenue, alley or public place within the city without permission in writing of the director of public works first had and obtained. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.050)  
Sec. 34.02.060. - Obstructions; warning signals required. 
When permission shall have been granted, as provided in this article, for the use of any portion of a street, avenue or public place of the city for any purpose whatsoever, the permittee shall cause warning lights to be set in such number and location in and about said street, avenue, alley or public place as will serve to, and give reasonable, proper and timely warning of danger or hazard to all persons lawfully using such street, avenue, alley or public place, or any part thereof, and shall take all other reasonably necessary precautions to prevent accidents to the public. The lights and protection shall be maintained between dusk and dawn of each and every day the street, avenue, alley or public place is rendered hazardous or unsafe for usual and customary use. Failure or omission to protect against accidents, as in this section provided, shall forthwith work a forfeiture of any permit which may have been granted with reference thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.060)  
Sec. 34.02.070. - Removal of litter or obstructions; notice; work performed by city when; costs. 
The director of public works is authorized to order any article or thing whatsoever, including but not limited to accumulated snow and ice removed from an adjoining private premises, which encumbers, litters or obstructs any street, avenue, alley or other public place within the city, to be removed. If such removal is not made within six hours after notice to the owner or person in charge thereof to remove the same, or if the owner cannot be readily found for the purpose of such notice, the director of public works shall cause the same to be removed to some suitable place to be designated by the director, at the expense of the person, corporation or association responsible therefor, and under the pains and penalties as hereinafter provided for violations of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.070)  
Sec. 34.02.080. - Removal of obstructions; time limit; interfering when work performed by city prohibited. 
Any building, fence, porch, steps, gallery or other obstruction now upon or hereafter placed or erected upon any street, avenue, alley or public place within the city, or which may be upon any new street, avenue, alley or public place which may hereafter be opened or created within the city, shall be removed therefrom within such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, and not less than three days after notice in writing has been given to the owner or person responsible for such obstruction shall be given by the director of public works; and if the owner or person responsible for such obstruction cannot be readily found for the purpose of such notice, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause the obstruction to be removed, in the director's discretion; and the expense of such removal shall be recoverable from the owner or person responsible for the obstruction in addition to the penalties herein provided; and every person who interferes with, resists or obstructs by acts or threats, or in any other manner, the removal of such obstruction under the order or direction of the director of public works, is guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.12.080)  
ARTICLE 3. - STREET MAINTENANCE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 34.03.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, sprinkling, graveling, oiling, chip sealing, seal coating, overlaying, treating, general cleaning, sweeping, flushing, snow removal and leaf and debris removal. 
(Code 1982, § 12.16.010; Ord. No. 1310, § 1, 1990)  
Sec. 34.03.020. - Method of maintenance. 
All street, alley and public place maintenance to be done within the district or districts created by the city may be done by contract or by forces employed by the city, or by both, in such manner as the commission may elect. 
(Code 1982, § 12.16.020; Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 1990)  
Sec. 34.03.030. - Method of paying for maintenance. 
A.  The city commission shall estimate, as near as practicable, the cost of the maintenance in each established district annually, not later than the second Monday in August. The commission shall pass and finally adopt a resolution specifying the district assessment option and levying and assessing all the property within each established district with an amount equal to not less than 75 percent of the entire cost of such work. 
B.  The resolution levying the assessment to defray the cost of maintenance shall contain or refer to a list in which shall be described the lot or parcel of land assessed, with the name of the owner thereof, if known, and the amount levied thereon set opposite. 
C.  Such resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
D.  A notice of intent to adopt such resolution, signed by the city clerk, stating that the resolution levying the special assessment to defray the cost of maintenance in each established district is on file in the city clerk's office and subject to inspection for a period of five days, shall be published at least once in a newspaper published in the city. The notice shall state the time and place at which objections to the final adoption of the resolution will be heard by the commission. The time for the hearing shall be not less than five days after the publication of the notice. 
E.  At the time so set, the commission shall meet and hear all objections which may be made to such assessment or any part thereof and may adjourn from time to time for that purpose and may by resolution modify such assessment in whole or in part. 
F.  A copy of the resolution, certified by the city clerk, must be delivered to the city treasurer and the assessments shall be placed upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner as other taxes and assessments. 
(Code 1982, § 12.16.030; Ord. No. 1310, § 3, 1990)  
ARTICLE 4. - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 34.04.010. - City engineer authority; materials, construction and widths. 
A.  All sidewalks and curbs which may hereafter be constructed upon any street or avenue in the city, whether ordered in by the city commission or constructed under the laws governing special improvement districts, or installed by any contractor or property owner, or otherwise, shall be constructed under the supervision, direction and inspection of the city engineer, and out of such materials as may be prescribed by the city engineer. 
B.  All sidewalks constructed in the central business district of the city shall have a minimum width of ten feet unless a variance is granted by majority vote of the city commission. All other sidewalks constructed on any of the streets and avenues of the city shall have a minimum width of five feet. 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.010; Ord. No. 1235, § 1, 1987)  
Sec. 34.04.020. - Repair of sidewalks by abutting owners; failure to repair. 
All owners or agents of owners with property abutting and fronting upon any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city are required to keep the public sidewalks immediately abutting their property in good order and repair. Each such owner shall be liable to the city for all losses to the city or recoveries from the city for damages to person or property of others caused by such owner's failure or that of such owner's agents to repair and keep in good order and reasonably safe condition all such sidewalks abutting and fronting such owner's property within the corporate limits of the city. The city may, at its discretion, through the director of public works, notify such owner that repairs are necessary to put such sidewalk in good order and such owner shall, within 30 days after such notification, under the supervision of the director of public works, complete such repairs, as specified in such notice. If the person fails to make the required repairs, the city may repair same and pay for such repairs. The amount so paid by the city shall be lien upon the lot and may be enforced or the amount may be recovered against the owner by a suit before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.035; Ord. No. 1235, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 1300, § 1, 1990)  
Sec. 34.04.030. - Fees; payments and deposit. 
All fees shall be paid to the director of administrative services and deposited in the general fund. 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.040)  
Sec. 34.04.040. - Permanent concrete sidewalks required; when variance permitted. 
Permanent concrete sidewalks shall be constructed within and upon all of the streets and avenues of the city, provided that the city engineer may issue a permit for the construction of temporary sidewalks of other materials. 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.050)  
Sec. 34.04.050. - Notice to construct curb or sidewalk; form and contents. 
Whenever the city commission orders a sidewalk or curb, or either thereof, constructed in front of any lot or parcel of land within the city, without the formation of a special improvement district, pursuant to the provisions of MCA 7-14-4109, or any acts supplementary thereto or amendatory thereof, notice of such order of the city commission shall be given by the city manager to the owner or agent of such property, by mailing notice to the owner's or agent's last known address, according to the requirements of MCA 7-1-4120, and such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
No._______ Bozeman, Montana, _______, 20_______ 
TO___________ 
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that the city commission of the City of Bozeman, at its meeting, held on the _______ day of _______, ordered the _______ of a cement concrete _______ in front of that certain lot or parcel of land owned by you, situated in the City of Bozeman, Montana, and described as follows, to-wit: 
Lots___________ 
Block ___________ Addition. 
Said improvement to be constructed in accordance with said order and the approved specifications therefor, on file in the office of the City Engineer of said City, and at the established grade of said street. 
You will be allowed 30 days from and after the service of this notice upon you to construct, or cause to be constructed, the said improvement as ordered, and if you shall fail or neglect to construct, or cause same to be constructed, within the said period of time, the City of Bozeman will construct, or cause to be constructed, the said improvement as ordered and will assess the cost thereof against the said property in front of which the same is constructed. 
_____
City Manager 	
 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.060; Ord. No. 1235, § 4, 1987)  
Sec. 34.04.060. - Construction ordered by city; warrant for payment of costs. 
A.  When any such sidewalk and curb, or either thereof, are constructed by or under the direction of the city commission, payment for the construction thereof shall be made by special warrants which shall be drawn upon a fund to be known as the "special sidewalk and curb fund," and such warrants shall be in substantially the following form: 
SPECIAL SIDEWALK AND CURB 
WARRANT 
Bozeman, Montana 
No._____ 20___ $_____ 
Bozeman, Montana, _______, 20___ 
The City of Bozeman, Montana, will pay to _______ OR BEARER HEREOF, the sum of _______ DOLLARS on account of sidewalks and curbs constructed in said city. This Warrant is issued under the provisions of MCA 7-14-4109 and Acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, and under resolutions and ordinances of said city relating to sidewalks and curbs. 
The principal and interest of this warrant are payable at the office of the City Treasurer at Bozeman, Montana. 
This warrant bears interest at the rate or rates designated by the successful bidder and authorized and accepted by the city commission from date of its registration as expressed herein until date called for its redemption by the City Treasurer. The interest on this warrant is payable on the first day of January in each year, until the payment of this warrant, as expressed by the interest coupons hereto attached. 
This warrant is payable from the collection of a special tax or assessment and is redeemable at the option of the City of Bozeman on or before the first day of January, A.D. 20_______, at any time there is money to the credit of the said Sidewalk and Curb Fund for the redemption thereof and in the manner provided for the redemption of the same. The holder of this warrant shall have no claim therefor against said City in any event except from the collection of special assessments made to defray the cost of sidewalks and curbs for which this warrant is issued, but the holder's remedy in case of nonpayment shall be confined to the enforcement of such assessments. 
IT IS HEREBY CERTIFIED AND RECITED that all acts and things required to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this warrant have been properly done, approved and been performed in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State of Montana and the resolutions of the City of Bozeman, Montana, relating to the issuance hereof, and the interest coupons hereto attached are signed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. 
THE CITY OF BOZEMAN, MONTANA 
By:  _____ 	

Attest:  _____ 	
 
_____
City Clerk, as Clerk to the 
City Commission 	
 
Registered in the office of the Director of Administrative Services of the City of Bozeman, Montana, this _______ day of ________, A.D. 20_______, and redeemable at the option of the City of Bozeman on or before the first day of January, A.D. 20___. 
_____
Director of Administrative Services 	
 
B.  Such warrants shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk, and shall bear the corporate seal of the city and shall have attached to them interest coupons, one for each year's interest to become due thereon, and shall bear the facsimile signatures of the mayor and city clerk, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
Coupon No._______. Special Sidewalk and Curb Fund $_______ 
On January 1, 20_______, the Director of Administrative Services of Bozeman, Montana, will, at his office in the City of Bozeman, Montana, pay _______, or bearer, the sum of _______ Dollars, being interest due on said date of payment on its Special Sidewalk and Curb Fund Warrant No. _______ issued on account of sidewalks and curbs. 
THE CITY OF BOZEMAN 
_____
City Clerk, as Clerk to the 
City Commission 	_____ , Mayor 
 
C.  Such special sidewalk and curb warrants shall be issued in the denomination of $100.00 each, or fractions thereof when necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 12.20.070; Ord. No. 1235, § 5, 1987)  
ARTICLE 5. - DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK ENCROACHMENT PERMIT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 34.05.010. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  It is the intent of the city commission, in enacting the ordinance from which this article is derived, to: 
1.  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public; 
2.  Regulate and control private uses and encroachments occurring upon public rights of way in the downtown business district of the city by establishing distinct criteria to permit and/or approve non-substantial encroachments, substantial encroachments, and exclusive uses; 
3.  Develop a fair and equitable program that will enhance the overall appearance, ambiance and environment of the downtown business district; and 
4.  Ensure accessibility for all users as established under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.010), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.010), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Block face" means one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting rights of ways, including alleys. 
2.  "Commercial use" means any activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit. 
3.  "Corner triangle area" means the sidewalk area at street intersections from each building face to where the sidewalk curb meets each of the two crosswalks that contain the accessible ramps at the intersection and the sidewalk area in between the two crosswalks. 
4.  "Director" means the director of public works and includes the director's authorized representative. 
5.  "Downtown business district" means those areas of the B-3 zoning district of the city located on or between the north side of Lamme Street and the south side of Olive Street and on or between the east side of Broadway Avenue and west side of 3rd Avenue. 
6.  "Encroachment" means any fixture or device including but not limited to a showcase, table, bench, rack, handcart, pushcart, sign, portable sign, stall, newspaper dispensers and publication racks, seating area, fence, barrier, or partition which intrudes into or invades the public right-of-way. 
7.  "Exclusive use" means any act undertaken by a private entity upon the public right-of-way of the downtown business district that excludes the public from their normal use and enjoyment of the public right-of-way. 
8.  "Frontage zone" means the space between the building front and the pedestrian zone. The frontage zone provides the shy distance from the building and buffers the pedestrian zone from doorways and other store front uses. The frontage zone generally accommodates benches, portable business signage, merchandise displays, or cafe seating. 
9.  "Furnishings zone" means the space between the curb and the pedestrian zone. The furnishings zone is the area of the sidewalk generally reserved for street furnishings such as street signs, bike racks, garbage or recycling receptacles, or street trees. 
10.  "Non-substantial encroachment" means any encroachment occurring upon the public right-of-way of the downtown business district that is temporary and mobile in nature and does not modify the material components of the public right-of-way. 
11.  "Pedestrian zone" means the primary, accessible pathway that ensures that pedestrians have a safe and adequate place to walk. This zone is generally located in the center of the sidewalk and allows people to move along the sidewalk. The pedestrian zone lies between the frontage zone and the furnishing zone. 
12.  "Permanent" means a period of six months or more. 
13.  "Portable sign" means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels and signs converted to A- or T-frames. 
14.  "Public right-of-way" means any area legally open to public use, including but not limited to, and projecting vertically skyward above, public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, or parks as well as areas surrounding and immediately adjacent to public buildings. 
15.  "Public use" means any normal use of the public right-of-way as distinguished from "exclusive use" as defined under this article. 
16.  "Side street" means all streets within the downtown business district that run in a north-south direction. 
17.  "Sidewalk" means all that area legally open to public use as a pedestrian public way between the curbline and the legal building line of the abutting property. 
18.  "Sidewalk cafe" means any group of tables, chairs, benches, barriers or partitions, trash containers and suitable decorative devices maintained upon any part of the public right-of-way for use by an establishment with a valid food and drink permit in the sale to the public of food, refreshments, and beverages of all kinds and is not a sidewalk vending cart. 
19.  "Sidewalk display" means any showcase, table, bench, rack, sign, stall, kiosk, or any other fixture or device used for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting, carrying, transporting, storing, selling, or offering for sale any food, beverage, goods, wares, merchandise, event, or service upon a sidewalk. 
20.  "Sidewalk vending cart" means any handcart, pushcart, stall, or any other mobile device that is used for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting, carrying, transporting, storing, selling, or offering for sale any food, beverages, goods, wares, or merchandise upon a sidewalk. 
21.  "Special event" means any occasion including but not limited to fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations, and festivals taking place within a specifically defined area of the city. 
22.  "Substantial encroachment" means any encroachment that creates a permanent physical reduction in existing asphalt width to streets in the downtown business district except for intersection curb bulbs installed for traffic calming or pedestrian safety purposes. 
23.  "Temporary" means a period of six months or less. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.020), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1692, § 1, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.020), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 2, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.030. - Encroachment on public right-of-way prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it is unlawful to obstruct the public rights of way of the downtown business district with debris, encumbrances or encroachments of any kind which hamper or interfere with the free and safe use or passage by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.030), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.030), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.040. - Exception for downtown business district. 
Vendors doing business in the downtown business district shall be allowed to use city sidewalk as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.040), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.040), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.050. - Non-substantial encroachments; permit required. 
A.  A non-substantial encroachment may be placed upon sidewalks in the downtown business district only if a permit is issued by the director as described herein, and only during the period authorized by such permit. 
B.  Upon application, the director may authorize, subject to specific conditions as determined by the director, non-substantial encroachments to occur upon sidewalks in the downtown business district. Each permit must be renewed on an annual basis and the director shall have the right to refuse to renew any permits issued. All applications for non-substantial encroachments must include: 
1.  A completed downtown sidewalk encroachment revocable permit form including any necessary supporting materials; 
2.  A letter of support from the owner, operator, or manager of the business immediately adjacent to the sidewalk where the use is requested; 
3.  A sketch depicting, as accurately as possible, the size and location of all requested encroachment items as well as other existing obstructions or improvements which would limit the free use of the sidewalk by pedestrians; 
4.  A certificate of liability insurance which names the city and (if non-substantial encroachment occurring upon a state-designated primary or urban route) the state as additional insureds. The insurance must provide a minimum coverage of $750,000.00 for each claim and $1,500,000.00 for each occurrence; 
5.  The permit holder shall agree in writing to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and (if non-substantial encroachment occurring upon a state-designated primary or urban route) state department of transportation and their employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss, damage, or expense incurred by the city and/or state department of transportation due to any injury to or death of any person or any damage of property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted; and 
6.  A valid city business license corresponding to the use requested. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.050), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.050), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 3, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.060. - Substantial encroachments—Approval required. 
Every substantial encroachment in the downtown business district requires a valid permit issued by the director as described herein. Substantial encroachments in a public right-of-way of the downtown business district may occur only after a project proposal satisfies provisions of chapter 38, is found to be compliant with required regulations of same, and satisfies specific conditions as determined by the director. Projects proposing substantial encroachments shall submit to the city engineer for approval a report certified by a professional engineer addressing the following conditions, both present and future: truck turning movements, vehicular site vision, pedestrian conflicts, and, as directed by the city engineer, intersection level of service. Substantial encroachments affecting state-designated primary and urban routes shall also be approved by the state department of transportation. Substantial encroachment projects shall satisfy all applicable emergency service requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.060), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 4, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.070. - Same—Standards, exceptions and limitations. 
A.  To protect public health, safety and welfare, and provide for the orderly development of the downtown business district, the following standards, exceptions and limitations are hereby placed upon substantial encroachments: 
1.  Substantial encroachments shall not occur within the public right-of-way of Main Street and Rouse Avenue; 
2.  Substantial encroachments shall occur along the entire length of a property; 
3.  Two-way traffic (or two-lane traffic for one-way streets) shall be provided at all times and in all locations; 
4.  A minimum 11-foot-wide vehicular travel lane shall be provided, measured from face of curb or edge of parking lane. 
5.  A minimum seven-foot-wide parking lane shall be provided, measured from face of curb; 
6.  Sidewalk alterations shall provide a minimum six-inch-thick, ten-foot-wide sidewalk for public use and shall be ADA compliant; 
7.  Curb alterations shall provide positive drainage and shall not cause ponding to occur in the gutter line. City curb construction standards shall be adhered to; 
8.  Construction plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer and a pre-construction meeting held prior to initiating construction; 
9.  Substantial encroachments involving the elimination of any on-street parking within that area of the B-3 zoning district regulated under this article shall provide the following: 
a.  Parking commission approval; and 
b.  Compensation shall be provided for each on-street parking space eliminated from the downtown business district parking inventory in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  A one-time payment, equal to the current cash in lieu of parking fee as established by resolution of the city commission per eliminated space. Payment shall be provided prior to final approval of the proposal under chapter 38; or 
(2)  The applicant may elect to pay for the eliminated space over a period of time not more than ten years, making equal monthly payments of principal and interest. Interest will be charged at a rate equal to the current yield of the ten-year U.S. Treasury Note at the time the space is eliminated against a principal amount equal to the cash in lieu of parking fee as established by resolution of the city commission. 
10.  The adjacent property owner shall keep all sidewalk areas, including those areas of exclusive use, free and clear of snow and ice at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.070), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 5, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.080. - Exclusive use of public right-of-way; permit required. 
A.  Upon application, the director may authorize exclusive use of a public right-of-way to occur in the downtown business district subject to specific conditions as determined by the director. The director reserves the right to request the city commission reclaim approval authority over any exclusive use application received. Each approved permit shall be valid for a period determined by the director, which shall not exceed ten years. Each permit shall be reviewed on an annual basis, subject to revocation as provided herein during the entitlement period. The permit shall be issued to the private property owner adjacent to the public right-of-way in which the exclusive use occurs. The permit shall not automatically convey with the adjacent private property and shall not convey any ownership interest in the public right-of-way, regardless of the privileges and exclusive benefits the permit provides the permittee. The permit may be transferred to a new adjacent private property owner upon request and application to the director. If the new property owner fails to make this request to the director within 30 days following final sale or transfer of interest in the property, then the permit shall become null and void and a new permit shall be applied for. 
1.  Any use permitted under section 34.05.130 that is physically barricaded or partitioned from the sidewalk by a fence or other similar means creates an exclusive use of the public right-of-way as defined under this article and requires an exclusive use permit. 
2.  All applications for exclusive use of a public right-of-way must include: 
a.  A completed downtown right-of-way exclusive use permit form including any necessary supporting materials; 
b.  A site plan depicting, as accurately as possible, the size and location of all requested encroachment items necessary to support the exclusive use of the public right-of-way as well as other existing obstructions or improvements which would limit the free use of the sidewalk by pedestrians; 
c.  A certificate of liability insurance which names the city and (if exclusive use occurring upon a state-designated primary or urban route) the state as additional insureds. The insurance must provide a minimum coverage of $750,000.00 for each claim and $1,500,000.00 for each occurrence. The insurance policy shall automatically renew during the permit period and a copy of the current proof of insurance coverage shall be kept on file with the director at all times. Coverage limits may adjust with permit renewals; 
d.  The permit holder shall agree in writing to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and (if exclusive use occurring upon a state-designated primary or urban route) state department of transportation and their employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss, damage, or expense incurred by the city and/or state department of transportation due to any injury to or death of any person or any damage of property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted; 
e.  A valid city business license corresponding to the use requested. 
3.  Exemption for tables and chairs. Tables and chairs not physically separated and/or partitioned from the sidewalk by a fence or other similar means are exempt from this section and are considered non-substantial encroachments approved under provisions of section 34.05.050. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.080), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.090. - License or approval letter required. 
Any applicant intending to sell food or beverages must provide a copy of a food purveyor's license or an approval statement issued by the Gallatin City-County Health Department with the application for a permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.060), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.090), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.100. - Encroachments permitted under this article; additional standards. 
A.  It is the permittee's responsibility to place any encroachments allowed under this article in a manner which ensures safe pedestrian and vehicular travel, complies with any conditions placed upon the permit, and to immediately correct any deficiencies noted by the director. Encroachments shall be placed so as to not interfere with vehicular sight triangles as set forth in chapter 38, and as necessary for safe vehicular traffic. Permittees must build, install, and maintain all encroachments permitted under this article in such as a manner as to ensure the safety of the public. 
B.  To ensure accessibility and to reduce congestion, no encroachments will be allowed in the corner triangle area. 
C.  No encroachment may restrict the pedestrian zone to less than six feet, measured perpendicularly to the building face. 
D.  Pedestrian zone. 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited in the pedestrian zone. 
2.  The pedestrian zone must be a minimum of six feet wide. 
[E.  Reserved.] 
F.  Furnishings zone. Except as otherwise noted, no encroachments other than those listed here shall be permitted in the furnishings zone: 
1.  Traffic control devices and signs authorized by the Montana Department of Transportation and/or the city; 
2.  Items installed and maintained by the Downtown Bozeman Partnership (or successor entity charged with administering the downtown business improvement district) such as garbage receptacles, street lighting, bike racks, planters, signs; 
3.  Additional bike racks placed by businesses with approval of the director and complying with section 34.05.100.G.4; 
4.  Public art installations licensed by the city. 
G.  Frontage zone. Permits may be issued under this article for the following encroachments in the frontage zone only, except as provided otherwise herein: 
1.  Portable signs. These signs must not exceed a height of five feet or a width of three feet, placed adjacent and perpendicular to the corresponding business and within four feet of the business entrance; 
2.  Sidewalk displays. Displays must be placed flush against the building, must not exceed six feet in height, and must be within four feet of the business entrance; 
3.  Bike racks. A single bike rack may be permitted to supplement those installed and maintained by the Downtown Bozeman Partnership (or successor entity charged with administering the downtown business improvement district) and can be located in the frontage zone or in the furnishings zone, but are not permitted in the corner triangle area. Bike racks must not exceed a ten-bike capacity, with five bikes per side, or a width of four feet, whichever is less. Bike racks shall be placed so the parked bikes run parallel with the street; 
4.  Sidewalk vending carts. The cart must be no more than three feet wide, must be placed within four and one-half feet of the store face. All signage must be attached to the cart and shall not exceed six feet in length. Vending carts will be allowed on Mendenhall, Main, and Babcock Streets only and not more than one cart will be allowed per city block face; 
5.  Tables and chairs. Tables used for the primary purpose of consuming food or beverages must be no more than four feet wide and set in a manner such that respective table and chair settings do not occupy more than five feet of total right-of-way width. Tables and chairs while in use shall in no way restrict the pedestrian zone to less than six feet, measured perpendicularly to the building face, subject to the provisions of section 34.05.130; 
6.  Planter Boxes or Hanging pots. Pots for flowers or other miscellaneous items may be hung from the rods extending from the light poles only. The bottoms of all pots must not be lower than seven feet and shall not block street signs in any manner. Planter boxes may be placed flush against the building within 4 feet of the primary business entrance. Planter boxes shall not exceed the dimensions of 24 inches wide by 36 inches long by 36 inches tall. All plantings shall be watered and maintained in good condition; 
7.  Newspaper dispensers and publication racks. Coin-operated newspaper dispensers and media publication racks and displays must be placed flush against the building and may not exceed four feet in height and shall be of a design quality approved by the city; 
8.  Sidewalk cafe serving alcohol. 
a.  All sidewalk cafes having an alcoholic beverage license shall be required to have the staff of the establishments owning such sidewalk cafes serve all food, alcoholic beverages and non-alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe area only. Service of alcoholic beverages in all sidewalk cafes shall be limited to persons seated at tables in the sidewalk cafe site. The serving of alcohol shall be served in glasses and not in paper or plastic products. Any person serving alcohol must have received alcohol server training through a city-approved training program; 
b.  The sidewalk cafe alcoholic beverage license issued by the state must include, as part of the licensed premises floor plan, the sidewalk cafe area. The use and operation of the sidewalk cafe area shall occur in accordance with the state-approved alcoholic beverage license and a copy of the license shall be kept on file with the director of public works and the director of community development; 
c.  Liability insurance required in section 34.05.080.A.2.c will cover the sidewalk cafe area; 
d.  Each sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall be responsible for policing the area of the sidewalk cafe to be sure that customers are of legal drinking age and that alcoholic beverages are not removed from the premises; 
e.  There shall be no sale of alcohol for consumption at a sidewalk cafe after 12:00 midnight until normal opening of business each day. In addition, all containers of intoxicating beverages shall be removed from the tables of the sidewalk cafe and the sidewalk cafe area by 12:00 midnight; 
f.  The sidewalk cafe area must be adjacent to the licensed building and shall be enclosed, except for ingress and egress entry points, by a temporary fence approved by the director of public works. The fence shall be: 
(1)  Black or of a color that matches the adjacent building; 
(2)  At least four feet in height; and 
(3)  Shall be of a design and quality that does not permit children or other persons to crawl under the fence; 
g.  Cafe seating fence must be removed entirely from the sidewalk during winter, between November 1st and April 1st; 
10.  Sidewalk stickers. Temporary sidewalk stickers may be displayed for wayfinding purposes associated with community events. No commercial applications are allowed. Stickers may not exceed 30 inches by 30 inches. Stickers may not be installed longer than seven consecutive calendar days; 
11.  Miscellaneous items. The director of public works may permit other items as deemed appropriate. The director shall place what restrictions and conditions the director deems necessary to ensure the safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Such additional restrictions and conditions will be included in the encroachment permit if issued. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.070), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1692, § 2, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.060), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 6, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.110. - Notification of name or address change. 
All permittees will ensure that a current and correct name, residential address and mailing address are on file with the director of public works. Should either the permittee's name, business name or permittee's address provided on the application change, the permittee must notify the director within five working days of such change and provide the same with the accurate information. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.080), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.110), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.120. - Littering and trash removal. 
A.  Permittees will keep the sidewalks, roadways and other spaces adjacent to their sites or locations clean and free of paper, peelings and refuse of any kind generated from the operation of their business. 
B.  Permittees engaged in food vending will make available a receptacle for litter. The permittee will regularly empty and maintain the receptacle and mark it appropriately to provide proper notice to the public of its purpose. Upon ceasing operations for the day, permittees will ensure the area immediately adjacent to the site is thoroughly clean and free of debris. Finally, permittees must remove all debris and trash from the area and will not use trash receptacles without permission from the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.090), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.120), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.130. - Special event or temporary permits. 
The director of public works may issue a temporary permit for special or temporary events which may take place in the downtown business district, including but not limited to "Crazy Days," "Taste of Bozeman," and "Music on Main." Should the director determine a temporary permit is applicable for any reason, the director may waive any of the requirements set forth in this article the director feels are inapplicable and allow alternative provisions consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.100), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.130), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.140. - Fees. 
A.  Non-substantial encroachments. A $50.00 fee shall be charged for non-substantial encroachments which shall be provided with each new application/renewal of a downtown sidewalk encroachment revocable permit. Fees shall go to the public works administrative account. 
B.  Substantial encroachments. Application fees authorized in chapter 38 shall be provided. 
C.  Exclusive uses. A fee calculated by multiplying the square-foot area of the right-of-way encumbered by the exclusive use of same, by the total final square-foot land value of the adjacent property (as determined in the most recent appraisal by the state department of revenue for ad valorem property taxation purposes), multiplied by the whole-month percentage of the calendar year the exclusive use is occurring, multiplied by a factor of five percent shall be assessed and provided with each downtown right-of-way exclusive use permit application and annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.140), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2027 , § 7, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 34.05.150. - Suspension and revocation of permits for non-substantial encroachments. 
A.  The director of public works may suspend or revoke any permit for non-substantial encroachment issued under section 34.05.050 for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or a knowingly false statement contained in the application for the permit; 
2.  Conducting any activity in any manner contrary to the conditions of the permit; 
3.  Conducting any permit activity in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals, or interfere with the rights of abutting property owners; 
4.  Failure to regularly empty and maintain a litter receptacle; 
5.  Cancellation of the Gallatin City-County Health Department's authorization for a food or beverage vending unit; or 
6.  Failure to comply with any provision in this article or any condition of approval required by the director. 
B.  Should the director of public works decide to exercise the rights given under this article, notice may be delivered in person or mailed to the address provided on the application. The director shall state all reasons for the decision to revoke or suspend the permit and the length of the suspension, if any; 
C.  The permittee will have three days from the date of receipt of the letter to file a written response to the director's letter or to remove all items from the city's sidewalk. Failure to respond to the director's letter or to remove the items from the city's sidewalk will be cause for the director to order the property removed by local law enforcement or the code compliance officer. The property shall be considered evidence and will not be returned until the resolution of any citation issued under this Code; 
D.  Should the permittee fail to pick up the letter for a period of five working days after it has been mailed, the director may then direct the code compliance officer or law enforcement to remove the permittee's property from the city's sidewalks; 
E.  Should the director determine the permittee's property presents a safety hazard or requires immediate remedy, including but limited to sidewalk maintenance, then in that event, the director may order the property removed immediately by local law enforcement or the code compliance officer. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.110), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.150), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.160. - Suspension or revocation of exclusive uses of public right-of-way. 
A.  The director of public works may suspend any permit for exclusive use issued under section 34.05.080 for any of the reasons listed under section 34.05.150 by providing written notice to the permittee stating all reasons to suspend the permit. The permittee will have three days from the date of receipt of the letter to remedy the deficiencies stated in the notice to the satisfaction of the director. In the absence of remedy, the director shall schedule a permit revocation hearing with the city commission which has sole power to revoke any permit issued under section 34.05.080. 
1.  Upon revocation of any permit issued under section 34.05.080, the city commission can order any substantial encroachments, features, improvements and/or alterations made to the public right-of-way installed to support an exclusive use be removed at the permit holder's sole expense upon their finding of said substantial encroachments, features, improvements and/or alterations posing a threat to the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
a.  Failure to remove, or failure to cause the removal of any substantial encroachments, features, improvements and/or alterations to the public right-of-way ordered by the city commission within 15 days following said order will result in the city removing the ordered items and charging the permittee for all expenses. In removing the ordered items, the city may call upon any city department or division for whatever assistance deemed necessary or may by private contract cause the removal of the ordered items. 
b.  The city, after completing the removal of the ordered items, shall file a statement of costs with the administrative services department which shall mail to the permittee a notice that contains the amount set forth in the statement and a declaration that the city will assess against the property the amount set forth in the notice and shall enter that amount in the city liens docket which shall therefore constitute a lien against the property. 
2.  The determination of the city commission is a final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.160), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.170. - Appeal procedure. 
Any permittee will have the right to appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of any permit issued under chapter 34, article 5 to the city manager. The permittee will make the appeal within ten days after receiving notice of the denial, suspension or revocation by filing a written notice with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2(12.22.130), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1785, § 1(12.22.170), 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 34.05.180. - Enforcement; penalties; designated a municipal infraction. 
A.  In addition to suspension or revocation under section 34.05.150 or 34.05.160, a violation of this article is a municipal infraction punishable by the following civil penalties: 
1.  For a first violation, a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 or more than $300.00 shall be imposed; 
2.  For each repeat violation, a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 shall be imposed; 
3.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  The court may order the permit revoked in addition to any other penalty imposed by the court. 
(Ord. 1567, § 2(12.22.140), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 1700, § 1, 5-21-2007)  
ARTICLE 6. - SNOW REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 34.06.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Lot" means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building together with its accessory buildings and which may include more than one platted lot. 
2.  "Front lot line" means the front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street and, in the case of a corner lot, may be either frontage. 
3.  "Rear lot line" means the rear boundary line or lines of a lot located opposite its front lot line. 
4.  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the exterior boundary lines of every publicly maintained way or other public or private place adapted and fitted for the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
5.  "Arterial street" means any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by the city as part of its major arterial system. 
6.  "Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel or parking, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
7.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line paved and intended for the use of pedestrians. 
8.  "Business day" is any day not a Sunday or a national holiday. 
9.  "Business district" includes all lots located with an R-0, B-1, B-2 or B-3 district as defined in chapter 38, excepting however, those lots which are occupied solely by one or more dwelling units. 
10.  "Business hours" are the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any business day. 
11.  "Director" is the director of public works or the director's duly designated and acting representative. 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.010; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 34.06.020. - Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks. 
A.  Every owner of land within the city fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any snow and ice from that portion of the sidewalk in front of or abutting the building or lot of land. 
1.  A double frontage lot that has a sidewalk which fronts on or abuts an arterial street as well as a sidewalk which fronts on or abuts another street on the direct opposite lot line shall not be required to remove snow on the arterial street sidewalk. 
2.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section and regardless of the manner in which the snow or ice is deposited on sidewalks, all snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks in all business districts within the city by 9:00 a.m. of the next business day, by 12:00 noon of the next non-business day or within four business hours after any snow or ice deposit, whichever period is shorter. 
3.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section and regardless of the manner in which the snow and ice are deposited, all snow and ice shall be removed from all other sidewalks within the city within the first 24 hours after any snow or ice deposit. 
B.  However, in the event the director of public works determines the snow and ice on a sidewalk cannot be reasonably removed, the director may require the use of sand or other suitable substance to make pedestrian travel reasonably safe. This request will be complied with within the time set forth in subsection A of this section. In that event, however, the sidewalk will be thoroughly cleaned as soon as the weather permits. 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.020; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 2000)  
Sec. 34.06.030. - Depositing of snow and ice restricted. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any accumulation of snow or ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, curb or gutter, any loading and unloading area of a public transportation system or any area designated for use by emergency vehicles for access. 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.030; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 34.06.040. - Violations; civil penalty and collection. 
A.  Should any person fail to clear away or treat with abrasives and subsequently clear away any snow and ice from any sidewalk as required, the director may, as soon as practicable after such failure, have the sidewalks cleared. 
B.  The director shall record the name of the property owner, the legal description and street address of the lot, the exact dates and costs of all snow removal done in accordance with this section including but not limited to the costs of private contractors hired for such purpose, and administrative costs. 
C.  Each person who fails to clear the sidewalk as required herein and thus requires the city to perform the work in accordance with this section shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work plus a civil penalty of $30.00 or 20 percent of such costs, whichever is greater. 
D.  The director or a designated representative shall give the property owner written notice of the amount owed to the city as soon as practicable following the completion of the work. The payment of such amount may be enforced through suit for collection or by levying an assessment on the premises or both. 
E.  In the event of assessment, the city commission shall annually adopt a resolution levying an assessment and tax against each lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting on the sidewalks ordered cleared by the director in accordance with the provisions of this article. All assessments levied shall be charged simple interest at the rate of ten percent per year from the date the work is performed until the assessment is fully paid and satisfied. 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.040; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1529, § 2, 2000)  
Sec. 34.06.050. - Appeals. 
The director of public works shall develop a program allowing all landowners assessed in accordance with this article to appeal the assessment. Property owners wishing to appeal the assessment will submit their appeal to the director of public works or a designated representative within 30 days of the date of the first notice required in section 34.06.040.D or five working days prior to the city commission meeting at which the assessment is being considered, whichever is sooner. 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.045; Ord. No. 1529, § 3, 2000)  
Sec. 34.06.060. - Legislative intent. 
It is the intent of the city commission that the criminal offenses listed in this article be offenses involving absolute liability. Those offenses shall not require proof of any one of the mental states described in MCA 45-2-101(33), (37), and (58). 
(Code 1982, § 12.24.060; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 1985)  
ARTICLE 7. - ADVERTISEMENT SPACE ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 34.07.010. - Legislative findings. 
A.  The city commission finds that: 
1.  The selling of advertisement space on municipal vehicles, equipment, solid waste containers, and other property will bring in needed revenue and will assist in relieving the tax burden of the city's citizens. 
2.  The city has and will continue to have vehicles, equipment, solid waste containers, and other property suitable for advertisement space. 
3.  It is appropriate to sell advertisement space from time to time on specific municipal property. 
4.  The vehicles, equipment, solid waste containers, and other property to be used for advertisement space are not public forums and therefore all advertisement will be commercial in nature. 
5.  Limiting advertisement only to certain commercial advertisement: 
a.  Maintains a position of neutrality on political and religious issues; 
b.  Protects municipal property from vandalism and destruction; 
c.  Prevents a reduction of income that occurs when political and religious messages are utilized; and 
d.  Prevents the violation of the establishment clause. 
6.  Entering into agreements to manage advertising programs on certain city property is in the best interest of the city as management of an advertising program by a contracted party will reduce the city's administrative overhead in managing an advertising program. 
(Ord. No. 1657, § 1(3.28.010), 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 1797, § 1(3.28.010), 11-29-2010)  
Sec. 34.07.020. - Application for individual advertisements. 
A.  Any person seeking to commercially advertise on city property other than under section 34.07.030 must submit an application with the proposed advertisement to the city manager for approval to ensure compliance with this chapter, and must enter into an agreement acceptable to the city. The term of the agreement shall not exceed 180 days. 
B.  The application must contain a full advertising graphic design in sufficient detail to determine content and final general appearance, including the scaled location of the advertisement on the subject property. 
C.  The city manager shall reject an application: 
1.  That is incomplete; 
2.  That does not comply with the standards set forth in section 34.07.040; or 
3.  When there are no appropriate advertising spaces available. 
(Ord. No. 1657, § 1(3.28.020), 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 1797, § 1(3.28.020), 11-29-2010)  
Sec. 34.07.030. - Advertising programs; contract authorized. 
The city commission may authorize the city manager to enter into a contract for a term not to exceed three years for the purpose of administering a program to advertise on city property. Each advertisement installed under an adopted program must comply with the standards in section 34.07.040 and this Code. Each advertisement must be reviewed and approved by a city employee designated in the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1797, § 2(3.28.030), 11-29-2010)  
Sec. 34.07.040. - Advertising standards. 
A.  The subject matter of all advertisement shall be limited to speech that proposes a commercial transaction. 
B.  Prohibited advertising copy and graphics. 
1.  Advertisement that is unlawful or relates to illegal activity. 
2.  Advertisement that is obscene or would be in violation of MCA 45-8-206 (public display or dissemination of obscene material to minors). 
3.  Advertising of alcohol or tobacco products. 
4.  Advertising of commercial advertisements by political candidates for public office and advertisements concerning ballot issues. 
5.  Advertising of contraception products or hygiene products of an intimate personal nature. 
6.  Advertising of products or services with sexual overtones such as escort services, or establishments featuring X-rated or pornographic movies or products. 
7.  Advertisement that depicts violence and/or anti-social behavior. 
8.  Advertisement that is false, misleading, or deceptive. 
9.  Advertisement using threatening, obscene, profane, vulgar, or abusive language. 
10.  Advertisement that holds up individuals or groups of people to public ridicule, derision, or embarrassment. 
11.  Advertisement that supports or opposes a candidate, issue, or cause, or which advocates or opposes a religion, denomination, religious creed, tenet, or belief. 
12.  Advertisements may not be placed on park or trail benches or picnic tables that currently contain "In Memoriam" plaques. 
13.  No advertisements shall be placed on the exterior of any city-owned structures. 
14.  Advertisements that portray or depict any activities, products, or services related to marijuana as authorized pursuant to and defined in the Montana Marijuana Act (MCA 50-46-301 et seq.). 
C.  The applicant and the business or person represented by the applicant must be in compliance with all city ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 1657, § 1(3.28.030), 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 1797, § 1(3.28.040), 11-29-2010; Ord. No. 1869 , § 4, 7-22-2013)  
Sec. 34.07.050. - Exemption from Uniform Development Code sign provisions. 
Any advertisement installed under this article is exempt from complying with the sign provisions of chapter 38. 
(Ord. No. 1657, § 1(3.28.040), 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 1797, § 1(3.28.050), 11-29-2010)  
ARTICLE 8. - PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 
 
Sec. 34.08.010. - Purpose and intent. 
The city recognizes and supports the public's right of assembly and free speech and use of designated public facilities for such purposes. At the same time, the city has an important and compelling governmental interest in protecting property, public safety, health, and welfare, and controlling the use of streets and other public facilities and venues. This article seeks to accommodate public rights of speech and assembly consistent with that governmental interest by establishing procedures, terms, and conditions for use of public areas and facilities for such purposes. A second purpose of this article is to facilitate and manage the manner in which public facilities that are not otherwise required for governmental operations may be made available for use on a temporary basis for non-governmental operations. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 2(12.32.010), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.020. - Scope; authority. 
This article applies to all public parades and assemblies that may be expected to affect the public, the property or services of the city, or otherwise require an expenditure of time and expense or create the potential for liability or public disturbance or other substantial concern. This article also applies to requests for the use of public facilities for purposes other than governmental operations, except as provided in chapter 26, article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 3(12.32.020), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.030. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Aggrieved person" means a person who can demonstrate a specific, personal and legal interest in the final decision of an application for a permit issued under this article, as distinguished from a general interest such as is the concern of all members of the community, and which interest would be specifically and personally prejudiced by the decision or benefited by its reversal. 
2.  "Certified traffic control person" means a person who has completed a course or program of training for regulating the flow of traffic upon a street, which has been approved by the chief of police, the state department of transportation, or the city streets superintendent. 
3.  "Parade" means any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, bicycles, runners/joggers/walkers or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets, or other public facilities within the city with an intent of attracting public attention that affects or may reasonably be expected to affect the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, or other public facilities. 
4.  "Permit" means permission for assembly, parade, or use of public facilities issued pursuant to this article. 
5.  "Public assembly" means any meeting, march, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of 75 or more persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that affects or may reasonably be expected to affect the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets or other public facility, other than a park or recreational building or facility, as defined in chapter 26, article 2. 
6.  "Public facility" means a building, structure, place or other location or area which a person may seek to utilize for purposes other than the normal and usual governmental operations of the city, but excludes a public park and recreational facilities, as the public assembly and use of all parks and recreational facilities are regulated under chapter 26, article 2. 
7.  "Sidewalk" means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
8.  "Street" means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.010; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 4(12.32.030), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.040. - Administration; permit required. 
A.  This article shall be administered by the city manager. 
B.  Except as provided in this article, no person shall engage in or conduct any parade or public assembly or use any public facility, including public rights-of-way, for purposes other than governmental operations unless a person has a current and valid permit therefor issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.020; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 5(12.32.040), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.050. - Exceptions. 
A.  This article shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Funeral processions. 
2.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
3.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function. 
4.  Spontaneous events resulting in a public assembly occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such public assembly, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city at least 24 hours prior to such public assembly or other such notice as may be reasonable under the circumstances. 
5.  The reserved use of parks or other recreational buildings and facilities. Parks and recreational buildings and facilities are regulated under chapter 26, article 2. 
B.  Exceptions and waivers from requirements for payment of fees and expenses, proof of insurance, or other security may be approved solely in accordance with applicable sections of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.030; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 6(12.32.050), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.060. - Parades and public assemblies open to public/private for-profit activities. 
A.  Public assembly and parade events must be free and open to the general public. An organizer, permittee, or participant in an event authorized under this article shall not restrict the general public from access to sidewalks, businesses and residences. 
B.  Parades or public assembly permits that seek to utilize public facilities where the primary purpose of the event is to advertise or promote any products, goods, or services, or an event that is primarily for private profit-making purposes may be approved only if: 
1.  The public facility requested is not otherwise required for use for public purposes. 
2.  All costs to the city, direct and indirect, are reimbursed in full by the sponsor of the event. 
3.  The application satisfies all requirements of this article. 
C.  The only signs permissible on city property during a parade or public assembly conducted primarily for private for-profit purposes are signs which identify organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in a parade or assembly. 
D.  Participant fees may be charged, if so noted on the application and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 7(12.32.060), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.070. - Requirements for insurance, indemnification, bonding or other security. 
A.  To avoid interference with protected rights of speech and assembly, any requirement imposed for surety for performance (including but not limited to insurance, indemnification, bonding, or monetary deposits) shall be based upon needs directly associated with the event and not on the basis of possible disruption of the event by protestors or other persons who might be opposed to the speech or assembly. Such restriction, however, shall not apply where the city manager determines that the event is being scheduled so as to unduly and unnecessarily create a potential for counter-protest or disruption or interference with public health, safety, welfare, or order. 
B.  A permittee under this article shall obtain commercial general liability insurance covering the permittee and/or the permittee's organization for all activities related to the parade and/or public assembly, including but not limited to setup, the public assembly or parade itself, and all cleanup and takedown activities. The insurance policy shall contain no exceptions or exclusions for activities conducted under or related to the permitted activities. The permittee shall name the city, its officers, and employees as additional insureds on a primary non-contributory basis. The additional insured coverage shall be in a form acceptable to the city. To the extent reasonably possible, such additional insured coverage shall be in the minimum amounts of $750,000.00 per claimant and $1,500,000.00 per occurrence. 
C.  The insurance requirements of this section are in addition to and separate from any other obligations contained in this section or article or in a permit issued under this article. 
D.  Any liability insurance requirements for residential block parties shall be governed by section 34.08.100, pertaining to residential block parties. 
E.  Applicants for a permit under this article shall agree in writing to defend, hold the city and its employees and officials harmless and indemnify the city, its employees and officials for any and all claims, lawsuits or liability including attorneys' fees and costs allegedly arising out of loss, damage or injury to a person or a person's property occurring during the course of, in preparation of, or in any way pertaining to the parade or public assembly which are caused by the conduct of employees or agents of the permit holder. 
F.  The city manager may grant a waiver to the requirements of this section for city-sponsored events or when the city manager determines the parade or public assembly does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the city, its officers, agents and employees. The city manager shall consider the applicant's proven financial inability to obtain the required coverage. When the city manager considers requests for waivers, the city manager shall base the decision on the factual circumstances presented by the applicant and decide the specific request on its merits. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.070; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 8(12.32.070), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.080. - Application. 
A.  A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the city manager on forms provided by the city, and the application shall be signed by the applicant. 
B.  For single, nonrecurring parades or public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed with the city manager at least 15 working days and not more than 180 days before the parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The city manager may waive the minimum filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the city manager determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety, or if the required timeframe would substantially burden protected rights, including speech and assembly, as to matters of public concern, and the expedited review process would allow reasonable review to address substantial matters of public safety, welfare, and convenience. 
C.  For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may receive approval of all recurring events within that calendar year on one application, but a separate application fee for each occurrence must be paid. These applications shall be filed with the city manager at least 60 days and not more than 180 days before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The city manager may waive the minimum 60-day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection B of this section. 
D.  The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include all information deemed relevant to the requested event. 
E.  If an application for a permit is denied, the city assumes no liability for expenses incurred by the applicant. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.040; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 9(12.32.080), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.090. - Traffic control plan/city equipment. 
A.  Applications for parades, public assemblies, residential block parties, fun runs and other similar events that include a street closure must provide a complete traffic control plan that complies with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Permittees of events requiring a traffic control plan must ensure requirements of the traffic control and barricade plan are met. Automobiles, trucks or other large, heavy objects are not acceptable barricades. Barricades in place at night must have lights. This plan shall include a map or sketch of the route, identify individuals who will be present at intersections, including their affiliation and proof of traffic control certification, if applicable, types of personal safety equipment, and types of barricades. If a street is not closed, but traffic will be stopped for participants to cross, certified traffic control persons must be used. 
B.  The requirement in subsection A of this section may be waived by the city manager if it is determined that the closure can safely be done by the organizer using approved barricades/signage. At the discretion of the city manager, barricades and signage may be obtained from the city streets division only upon submittal of a deposit in an amount to be established by the city manager. The applicant shall pay for any signage and barricades that are damaged or not returned to the city streets division. If signage and barricades are not available from the city streets division, the permittee must obtain them from a private sign company. 
C.  The requirement in subsection A of this section may be waived by the city manager if it is determined the closure will be done by the city streets division, with or without a fee for the service. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 11(12.32.090), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.100. - Temporary closures for residential block parties. 
A.  Residential block parties may be permitted by the city manager pursuant to the criteria in section 34.08.140 at residential locations not involving closure of any arterial or collector streets and only during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant shall contact in writing all abutting or adjacent property owners and residents (if a property is not owner-occupied) within the area to be closed as well as the property owners on the corner lots immediately across the intersection on the opposite side of the street closure. The applicant shall provide written documentation to the city manager at the time of application indicating each of the above-described property owners/residents consent to or oppose the application. 
2.  The applicant must have an approved traffic control plan in accordance with section 34.08.090 and shall be solely physically and financially responsible for obtaining, placing and removing any required barricades or traffic control devices. 
3.  The applicant to the extent reasonably possible shall provide liability insurance protecting themselves as well as naming the city, its officers and employees, as additional insureds. 
4.  The applicant and participants shall comply with any conditions imposed on the permit. 
5.  Applicants for a permit under this article shall agree in writing to defend, hold the city and its employees and officials harmless and indemnify the city pursuant to section 34.08.070.E. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 12(12.32.100), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.110. - Fees/cost recovery. 
A.  A nonrefundable fee shall be paid to the city at the time of application to cover administrative costs of processing permits. All fees under this article shall be set by resolution of the commission. If the city manager requires a deposit for the parade or public assembly the city manager shall establish standards for return and forfeit. 
B.  If the application is for the use of any city property, or if any city services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the costs for those services in accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the commission by resolution, or assessed by the city manager as authorized under this article. 
C.  If a permittee fails to pay costs or take actions required under this article, the city, after requesting the permittee for payment, may draw upon any deposit provided under subsection A of this section or may seek to recover such costs from the permittee or other responsible person by appropriate legal action. If the city prevails in any such action for recovery, it shall be entitled to reimbursement of any costs incurred in seeking such recovery, including court costs and attorneys' fees. Cost recovery from permittees and participants shall be focused upon the conduct of the permittees and authorized participants and not on conduct of observers or others over whom permittee cannot reasonably be expected to exercise control. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.050; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 13(12.32.120), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.120. - Police protection; public services and other expenses. 
A.  Police protection. 
1.  If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety and welfare, regularly scheduled on-duty police personnel shall police the event. 
2.  The city manager, with advice from the chief of police, shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the parade or public assembly for traffic control and public safety and welfare, including public convenience. The city manager shall base a decision regarding required police protection on relevant criteria including, but not limited to, the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. 
3.  The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary, except when the applicant's speech is determined to have reasonable potential to cause, or will have the result of causing, public alarm, disruption, falsehood, or which will constitute any form of expression that is not protected under the laws or constitution of Montana or the United States. 
4.  If additional police protection for the public assembly is deemed necessary by the city manager, the city manager shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed necessary by the city manager at the sole expense of the applicant. 
B.  Public services. The city manager shall determine if the applicant shall be required to pay for or provide additional public services-related actions such as lighting, refuse receptacles and pickup, traffic control signs, devices or personnel. 
C.  Other expenses. In circumstances where the event itself may be expected to cause the city to incur additional, extraordinary expenses, the city manager shall identify such expenses and the basis for determining them to be extraordinary. Such expenses may be imposed upon the applicant as a condition of approval of the permit. 
D.  Exception. Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment are not required to pay for any police protection or public services or other expenses provided by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.060; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1537, §§ 24, 25, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 9, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 1798, § 14(12.32.130), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.130. - Public hearing. 
A.  At any time during consideration of an application, the city manager may determine it is necessary to conduct a public hearing to the extent possible on the application to determine the nature of public concerns with the proposed event and whether such concerns should require denial of the application or imposition of conditions. The public hearing shall be limited to concerns that are unrelated to content of speech or purposes of the assembly or event except to the extent that concerns address matters such as those specified as appropriate for consideration in this article. 
B.  A public hearing, if held, shall be scheduled to allow action on the application within the timeframes established under this article. If a hearing cannot be scheduled within the timeframes established by this article, the city manager may suspend such timeframes only for the time necessary to allow for scheduling, noticing, and conducting of a public hearing. The city manager shall provide notice of the hearing to the applicant and the public by normal posting/publication requirements and such additional notice to potentially affected persons as is reasonably determined to be appropriate. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.140; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 15(12.32.140), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.140. - Standards for issuance. 
A.  Each application shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. This article seeks to impose reasonable time, place and manner controls in an appropriate and limited manner upon events and facility uses for which permits are required. This article shall be administered in a manner that seeks to allow for expression, assembly, and the exercise of religious rights in accordance with applicable constitutional and statutory limits and controls. 
1.  The city manager shall issue a permit, subject to any conditions deemed necessary and reasonable, as provided for herein when, from consideration of the application and such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the city manager finds: 
a.  The application is complete and sets forth accurately and in sufficient detail the information required for consideration; 
b.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not unduly inconvenience either the public in using public areas normally open for general public use or the city in the conduct of governmental operations; 
c.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the vicinity of its route or location; 
d.  The possibility of the event causing any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, pursuant to chapter 16, article 6; 
e.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the city; 
f.  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly points of the parade or public assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas; 
g.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
h.  The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
i.  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; 
j.  There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected; 
k.  The applicant has secured the police protection, or otherwise arranged for event security if required pursuant to section 34.08.120; 
l.  The applicant has paid or provided for payment of any expenses or costs as may be required under the provisions of this article; 
m.  Except as the city manager may determine pursuant to section 34.08.060, such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade or public assembly itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to the signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the parade; 
n.  No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time and general location is already granted or has been received and will be granted; 
o.  A parade or public assembly permit application for the same time but for a different location is already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the police resources or other public services required for that prior parade or public assembly are so great that, in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of police or other public services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; 
p.  The conduct of a past parade or public assembly for the same purpose or by the same organizer/organization was acceptable; 
q.  The event has no significant financial impact on city resources for events scheduled on holidays and weekends; 
r.  The number of hours a street is requested to be closed will not significantly affect vehicular and pedestrian access to commercial and residential properties; 
s.  A new event that requests the closure of a collector and/or arterial street(s) would benefit more than just a limited number of individuals; 
t.  A street closure is necessary for the safety of the event participants, rather than just for the convenience of the event; and 
u.  For events which seek the closure of any portion of Main Street, the applicant must demonstrate a nexus between the event and the need for use of Main Street as opposed to use of another location. 
2.  An event may be limited as to the number of participants in the interest of safety, health, public order, and adequacy of facilities and security by order of the city manager, chief of police or fire chief. 
3.  No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.080; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 16(12.32.150), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.150. - Action on application. 
A.  Within five working days upon receiving an application, the city manager shall determine if the application is complete or if any additional preliminary information is required. An incomplete or insufficient application suspends the review times provided in this section until the information requested is provided to the city. If additional information is required, the city manager shall so inform the applicant, and the applicant shall provide such required information prior to further consideration of the application. The requirement to supplement the application at this stage does not prevent the city from requiring additional information during its review and action on the application. 
B.  After accepting an application as complete, the city manager shall forward it for review and recommendation to the chief of police, streets division, any other municipal employee, official, or board deemed appropriate. The application shall also be referred to the state department of transportation and the county road superintendent if the event could affect the state or county transportation system. Applications for events in the downtown area shall also be forwarded to the Downtown Bozeman Association. Such review and recommendation shall occur within five business days unless that period is extended by the city manager. 
C.  After receiving comments and recommendations from the reviewing agencies and after considering such other information as deemed appropriate, the city manager may require the applicant to submit additional information or respond to the reviews and recommendations or impose such conditions as are appropriate under the circumstances. 
D.  If the city manager determines an event has the potential of adversely affecting the public or a substantial number of persons, the city manager may determine that a public hearing is required, in which case section 34.08.130 shall apply. In such a case, the timelines for review as established in this section shall be suspended until completion of the public hearing. 
E.  Upon completion of the foregoing, the city manager shall act on the application. The city manager may approve, amend, approve with conditions or deny the application. For any action other than approval as submitted, the city manager shall include a brief summary of the reasons for the decision. 
F.  Unless otherwise provided in this article or agreed to by the applicant, the city manager shall act on an application within 15 working days after determining that the application is complete. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 17(12.32.160), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.160. - Alternative permit. 
A.  The city manager, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the city manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager. 
B.  An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or public assembly permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.110; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 18(12.32.170), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.170. - Nondiscrimination. 
A.  The city manager shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this article based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender-related grounds or other criteria that would constitute a violation of state or federal law. 
B.  To achieve the purposes of this article without undue interference with protected rights of speech and assembly, decisions to issue, deny, or conditionally approve permits shall not be based on the content of a message associated with the event absent a compelling governmental interest. Notwithstanding that general standard, protections otherwise applicable to speech and assembly are limited and may not extend to speech or assembly that is intended to or has the result of causing public alarm, disruption, falsehood, or other form of expression that is not protected under the laws or constitution of Montana or the United States. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.090; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 19(12.32.180), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.180. - Notice of decision on application. 
The city manager shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a parade or public assembly permit, but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than 48 hours prior to the event. If the city manager disapproves, approves with conditions, or otherwise modifies the application, the city manager shall notify the applicant of the decision either by personal delivery or regular or electronic mail at least 48 hours prior to the event and state the reasons for such action. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.100; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 20(12.32.190), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.190. - Appeal procedure. 
A.  An aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal the city manager's decision on a parade or public assembly permit to the commission. Prior to filing of an appeal with the commission, the appellant shall, within five business days of the city manager's decision, request the city manager reconsider the decision. The city manager shall have five days to issue a decision on the request to reconsider. 
B.  An aggrieved person may, only after complying with subsection A of this section, file a written appeal with the commission through the city clerk with a copy to the city manager not later than five days after the city manager's decision on the request for reconsideration. The appeal shall state with specificity the grounds for the appeal. 
1.  The commission shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the accepted notice of appeal, provided that the receipt of the notice is received prior to the deadline for submission of new agenda items. 
a.  The appeal hearing shall be limited to the grounds stated in the appeal unless the commission for good cause determines to hear other issues or concerns. 
b.  The appellant, applicant (if not the appellant), the city manager and other persons directly affected may speak or submit evidence at the hearing. Public comment will be accepted. 
c.  The commission shall make a determination on the appeal at the meeting, unless the applicant agrees to a continuance. The city clerk shall issue the commission's decision in writing to the applicant either by personal delivery, or regular or electronic mail. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.120; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 21(12.32.200), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.200. - Notice to city and other officials. 
A.  Immediately upon issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the city manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
1.  The mayor; 
2.  The city attorney; 
3.  The fire chief; 
4.  The director of public works; 
5.  The chief of police; and 
6.  Any other entity determined by the city manager to be affected by the permit. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.130; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1537, § 26, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1798, § 22(12.32.210), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.210. - Duties of permittee. 
A.  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all requirements of this article, permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of the event. 
B.  The parade or public assembly chair or other person heading such activity shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon the chair's person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
C.  The permittee or parade or public assembly chair or other person heading such activity shall notify all parade or public assembly participants of the conditions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.150; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 23(12.32.220), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.220. - Prohibitions. 
A.  In addition to any other prohibitions set forth in this article, the following prohibitions shall apply to all permits for parades and public assemblies: 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public assembly for which a permit is required without first having obtained a permit as herein provided. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which a permit is required if the person knows a permit has not been granted. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit. 
4.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property. 
5.  It is unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material. 
6.  It is unlawful for any person participating in a parade or public assembly to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that exceed those limits imposed by this Code. 
7.  It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
8.  It is unlawful for any person in a parade or public assembly to deviate from the approved parade route. 
9.  No parade participant shall throw, cast, or drop candy, trinkets, or any other articles from a moving vehicle. This provision does not prohibit a parade participant from providing candy or other articles directly to the spectators, provided the participant is walking. 
10.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in public drinking, public display, or exhibition of open alcoholic beverages (open container) during parades and public assemblies unless an open container waiver has been granted pursuant to chapter 4, article 4. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.160; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 24(12.32.230), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.230. - Public conduct during parades or public assemblies. 
A.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly. 
B.  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. 
C.  No person shall advance toward or go between the vehicles comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. 
D.  The city manager shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public assembly. The city manager may require the applicant to post signs to that effect, and, if so, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street that was not posted in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.170; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 25(12.32.240), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.240. - Revocation of permit. 
A.  The city manager, the chief of police, and the fire chief shall each have the independent authority to revoke or suspend a parade or public assembly permit instantly: 
1.  Upon a violation of the conditions imposed in the permit; 
2.  Upon violation of this article; or 
3.  When a public emergency arises where the municipal resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of municipal personnel, equipment or services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
B.  Such revocation shall take effect immediately, and the city manager, chief of police or fire chief shall promptly notify the permittee of revocation. After revocation, the permittee may not conduct the event, or if the event has commenced, shall immediately cause the event to be terminated in a safe, proper manner. 
(Code 1982, § 12.32.180; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1798, § 26(12.32.250), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.250. - Enforcement. 
This article may be enforced by the city manager, the fire chief, or the police chief. In addition, this article may be enforced by injunction, restraining order, declaratory relief, or such other order as may be imposed by a court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 27(12.32.260), 4-25-2011)  
Sec. 34.08.260. - Judicial review. 
After complying with the requirements of section 34.08.190, an aggrieved person may file a request for judicial review of a decision by the city commission made pursuant to this article. The request for review shall be filed no later than 30 days after the commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 28(12.32.270), 4-25-2011)  
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, MCA 61-1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36.01.010. - Title for citation. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the "traffic ordinance." 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.010)  
Sec. 36.01.020. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Authorized emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the director of public works. 
2.  "Bicycle" means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. 
3.  "Commercial vehicle" means every vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
4.  "Crosswalk" means: 
a.  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway; 
b.  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
5.  "Curb loading zone" means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
6.  "Driver" or "operator" means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
7.  "Freight curb loading zone" means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
8.  "Intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation or connections of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
9.  "Laned roadway" means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
10.  "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
11.  "Motor-driven cycle" means every motorcycle, including every motorscooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five horse-power, and every bicycle with motor attached. 
12.  "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
13.  "Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
14.  "Park," when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
15.  "Passenger curb loading zone" means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
16.  "Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
17.  "Police officer" means every officer of the municipal police department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
18.  "Private road" or "driveway" means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
19.  "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
20.  "Railroad train" means a stream engine, electric, or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
21.  "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
22.  "Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
23.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
24.  "Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
25.  "Stop," "stopping," or "standing," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
26.  "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
27.  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, including avenues and alleys. 
28.  "Through or arterial highway" means every street or highway, or portion thereof, at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same, and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
29.  "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
30.  "Traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
31.  "Traffic division" means the traffic division of the police department of this city; or, in the event a traffic division is not established, then the term "division" whenever used in this chapter, shall be deemed to refer to the police department. 
32.  "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
33.  "Ways of this city open to the public" means any highway, road, alley, lane, parking area or other public or private place adapted and fitted for public travel that is in common use by the public. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.020; Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 36.01.030. - Official time standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.030)  
Sec. 36.01.040. - District boundaries incorporated. 
The provisions of chapter 38, as amended, the short title of which is the unified development ordinance, are by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof, the same as if fully set forth herein, for the purpose of designating and specifying the boundaries of the various districts within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.040)  
Sec. 36.01.050. - Administration and enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city, and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with the violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents, to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties specially imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.050; Ord. No. 1537, § 19, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 3, 6-6-2005)  
Sec. 36.01.060. - Emergency and experimental regulations authorized when. 
The director of public works is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.060)  
Sec. 36.01.070. - Obedience to traffic code required. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.070)  
Sec. 36.01.080. - State license plates required. 
The owner of a motor vehicle shall register such vehicle with the state motor vehicle department, and shall further comply with all provisions of the Motor Vehicle Registration Act. The owner shall display in a conspicuous place on such registered vehicle the proper license plates, which must be legible at all times for a distance of 100 feet. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.080)  
Sec. 36.01.090. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.090)  
Sec. 36.01.100. - Obedience by public employees. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, the county, or the city, and it is unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, or by state statute. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.100)  
Sec. 36.01.110. - Operating without driver's license or permit prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on the streets or roadways of the city without all licenses or permits now or hereafter required by this chapter, or required by the Montana Uniform Motor Vehicle Operator's and Chauffeurs' License Act (MCA 61-5-101 et seq.) and any amendments thereto. It is unlawful for any person learning to drive a motor vehicle to operate the same upon any arterial or through street of the city. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to arrest any person violating the provisions of this section, and take possession of the vehicle so unlawfully operated until satisfaction of any penalty imposed for such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 10.04.110)  
Sec. 36.01.120. - Licensing and regulation of for-hire vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any taxicab, bus, or other vehicle for hire for the purpose of carrying passengers within the city without first obtaining a license for such operation, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city, and any amendments thereto, regulating the licensing of taxicabs and buses, and without fully complying with all the applicable provisions of the laws of the state governing the licensing and regulation of motor carriers. 
(Code 1982, § 10.40.010) 
State Law reference— Motor carriers, MCA 69-12-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE 2. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 36.02.010. - Authority of police and fire officials. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the city's police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
B.  Police officers, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
C.  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.010; Ord. No. 1537, § 23, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 7, 6-6-2005)  
Sec. 36.02.020. - Impoundment of vehicles authorized when; procedures required. 
A.  Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street, highway or public parking lot to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
1.  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
2.  When a vehicle upon a street or highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are, by reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
3.  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or highway and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
4.  When any vehicle is parked in a two-away zone; 
5.  When any vehicle is parked illegally for a period of more than six hours; 
6.  When any vehicle is abandoned on any street, highway or public parking lot operated by the city by not being moved or used for more than seven consecutive days, and such a vehicle is apparently deserted. 
B.  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street, highway or public parking lot as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall, within a reasonable time, make every reasonable effort to ascertain the identity of and to locate the owner of the vehicle and to give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor, and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
C.  Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any vehicle removed and impounded, as provided herein, is permitted to remove the same from the custody of the city, the owner shall furnish evidence of such owner's identity and ownership of the vehicle, or right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay any towing charges incurred by the city in towing said vehicle, and shall pay such charges for the storage of the vehicle as shall have been incurred by the city. 
D.  The payment of such fees and charges, as provided in this article, shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator of such vehicle from liability from any fine or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which such vehicle was removed and impounded. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.020; Ord. No. 1141, 1983; Ord. No. 1537, § 24, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 8, 6-6-2005)  
Sec. 36.02.030. - Violation of chapter; penalty. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rule or regulation made by the director of public works pursuant thereto, shall unless otherwise specifically designated herein, upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any person violating the provisions of section 36.04.040 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $15.00 nor more than $100.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.030; Ord. No. 1104 § 1, 1982)  
Sec. 36.02.040. - Procedure upon arrest. 
Any person, except a minor under 18 years of age, arrested for violation of this chapter, shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city concerning and relating to process and execution of sentence. Minors under 18 years of age shall be dealt with as provided in the laws of the state relating to juvenile delinquency. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.040)  
Sec. 36.02.050. - Fine or imprisonment authorized. 
A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that the defendant be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied, in the proportion of one day's imprisonment for each two dollars of the fine. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.050)  
Sec. 36.02.060. - Fines and forfeitures; disposition. 
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the director of administrative services, and shall be credited to the several funds as by ordinance provided. 
(Code 1982, § 10.60.060)  
ARTICLE 3. - RULES OF THE ROAD  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36.03.010. - Safe, properly equipped vehicle required. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this article, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this section and sections 36.03.020 through 36.03.040, 36.03.120, 36.03.220 and 36.03.230, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under said sections. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.010)  
Sec. 36.03.020. - Horns and warning devices required. 
A.  Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a street, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of 200 feet or more; and it is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this section and sections 36.03.010, 36.03.030, 36.03.040, 36.03.130, 36.03.200, 36.03.230 and 36.03.240, for any vehicle to be equipped with, or for any person to use on a vehicle any siren, bell, musical horn or any compression or sparkplug whistle, or for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning, or to make any unnecessary or unreasonable continued loud or offensive sound by means of a horn or other warning device. 
B.  Every authorized emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a bell, siren or exhaust whistle of a type approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.020)  
Sec. 36.03.030. - Brake equipment and lighting equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, or cause to be operated, upon any of the streets, avenues or alleys of the city any motor vehicle, trailer or towed vehicle not complying with the laws of the state and the rules and regulations of the state highway patrol as to brake equipment and lighting equipment on such vehicles. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.030)  
Sec. 36.03.040. - Flag or red light at end of load. 
Whenever the load on any vehicle extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such load in such a position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag not less than 12 inches, both in length and width; except that between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed at the end of such load a red light, visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of such vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.040)  
Sec. 36.03.050. - Size and weight of vehicles, trailers, loads and tires; state regulations applicable. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or cause to be operated upon any of the streets, avenues or alleys of the city any motor vehicle, trailer or towed vehicle not complying with the laws of the state and the rules and regulations of the Montana State Highway Commission as to the regulations and restriction of size and weight of motor vehicles and loads, trailers and towed vehicles and tire equipment. 
B.  The director of public works shall have authority to impose such emergency regulations as to weight of motor vehicles and loads as the director of public works, in the director's discretion, deems necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.050)  
Sec. 36.03.060. - Driving on right side of street required. 
A.  Upon all streets except upon one-way streets, the operator of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the street only, and the operator of a slow-moving vehicle shall drive the same as close as possible to the right-hand curb of the street unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the street, and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to the limitations applicable by law in overtaking and passing. 
B.  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prevent the marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the allocation of designated lanes to traffic moving in a particular direction or at designated speeds. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.060)  
Sec. 36.03.070. - Right-of-way at intersections and when entering street. 
A.  Vehicles approaching or entering intersection. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway or street. 
2.  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
3.  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections A.1 and 2 of this section are modified at through or arterial highways and streets and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this section. 
B.  Vehicle turning left at intersection. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
C.  Vehicle entering through or arterial highway or street or stop intersection. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this chapter at the entrance to a through or arterial highway or street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through or arterial highway or street or which are approaching so closely on the through or arterial highway or street as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the through or arterial highway or street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the through or arterial highway or street. 
2.  The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign, as required in this chapter, at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto although not a part of the through or arterial highway or street, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. 
D.  Vehicle entering highway or street from private road or driveway. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway or street from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway or street. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.070)  
Sec. 36.03.080. - Meeting of vehicles from opposite directions. 
Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.080)  
Sec. 36.03.090. - Crossing intersections or railroads on right side required. 
In crossing an intersection of streets or the intersection of a street by a railroad right-of-way, except upon a one-way street, the operator of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right half of the street, unless such right half is obstructed or impassable. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.090)  
Sec. 36.03.100. - Following, overtaking and passing vehicles. 
A.  General rule. The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, and shall not again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle, except where traffic lanes are plainly marked. 
B.  Limitations on privilege of overtaking and passing. 
1.  The operator of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the centerline of a street in overtaking and passing other vehicles proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. Subsection A of this section shall not apply upon one-way streets or upon streets laned for traffic, in which later event vehicles traveling in lanes shall move in the direction permitted in such lanes. 
2.  The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any steam or electric railroad grade crossing, nor at any intersection of streets. 
C.  Operator to give way to overtaking vehicles. The operator of a vehicle upon a street about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of the vehicle being passed until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
D.  Following too closely. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the street. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.100)  
Sec. 36.03.110. - Procedure on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell: 
1.  The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer; 
2.  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.110)  
Sec. 36.03.120. - Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
B.  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
1.  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
3.  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as the driver of the emergency vehicle does not endanger life or property; 
4.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
C.  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
D.  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of such driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.120)  
Sec. 36.03.130. - Unattended vehicle; brakes to be set and engines stopped. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle, and when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.130)  
Sec. 36.03.140. - Starting parked vehicles; right-of-way. 
A.  No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
B.  Any person starting a vehicle from a parallel parked position at the curb or edge of a roadway, before making such movement, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded and having given a signal as required by this chapter for a left-turn movement, may proceed from said parked position into the nearest lane for moving traffic, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching and proceeding in the same direction shall yield the right-of-way to such vehicle. 
C.  Any person backing a vehicle from a parked position at the curb or edge of a roadway, before making such movement, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed from the parked position into the nearest lane for moving traffic, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching and proceeding in the same direction shall yield the right-of-way to such vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.140)  
Sec. 36.03.150. - Unobstructed view while driving required. 
A.  It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is so loaded or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
B.  It is unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a position as to interfere with the operator's view ahead, or to the sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
C.  It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is equipped with cardboard or other opaque material as a substitute for window glass, or when the windshield or windows are so covered with frost, snow, ice, dirt or mud as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front, sides or rear thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.150)  
Sec. 36.03.160. - Processions. 
A.  Procedures for drivers. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical, and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
B.  Driving between vehicles; when prohibited. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where the traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.08.160, 10.08.170)  
Sec. 36.03.170. - Driving through safety zones prohibited. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone when occupied by a pedestrian. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.180)  
Sec. 36.03.180. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 200 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.190)  
Sec. 36.03.190. - Crossing fire hose prohibited; exception. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or railway track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.200)  
Sec. 36.03.200. - Excessive noise or smoke prohibited. 
A.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a street unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. 
B.  It is unlawful to use a muffler cutout on any motor vehicle on a street. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.220)  
Sec. 36.03.210. - Riding restrictions for drivers and passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle, nor shall any driver or operator permit riding on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers, and no person operating a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or bicycle shall ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person nor shall any other person ride other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.230)  
Sec. 36.03.220. - Driving on sidewalks prohibited; exceptions. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway, except authorized vehicles of the city engaged in rendering public services. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.240)  
Sec. 36.03.230. - Driving vehicles with leaking loads prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.250)  
Sec. 36.03.240. - Loose material in transit. 
Any person, firm, business, corporation or agent thereof, transporting a load of loose material to the city's landfill or other installation established for disposing of said loose material which has not been covered or contained in a secured and covered container shall pay, in addition to the established dumping fee, an anti-litter assessment of $25.00 per load for vehicles smaller than a one-ton truck and small trailers, which include pickup boxes converted to trailers and smaller; and $50.00 per load for one-ton trucks and larger. 
(Code 1982, § 8.40.010; Ord. No. 1386, § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 1988)  
Sec. 36.03.250. - Red or green lights in front of vehicle prohibited; exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle upon a highway with any red or green light thereon visible from directly in front thereof. This section shall not apply to police or fire department or fire patrol vehicles, nor to any vehicles required or permitted by state law or regulation to display small red or green clearance lamps on the front. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.260)  
Sec. 36.03.260. - Careless driving prohibited; penalty. 
A.  A person operating or driving a vehicle of any character on the ways of the city open to the public shall drive it in a careful and prudent manner so as not to unduly or unreasonably endanger the life, limb, property or other rights of a person entitled to the use of the way. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount of not less than $25.00 or more than $500.00. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.270; Ord. No. 1179, § 2, 1985)  
Sec. 36.03.270. - Reckless driving prohibited; penalty for violation. 
A.  Any person who drives any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. 
B.  Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by a fine not exceeding $300.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and on a second or subsequent conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than six months, or by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1982, § 10.08.280)  
Sec. 36.03.275. - Electronic communications device usage while driving prohibited; municipal infraction penalty. 
A.  No person shall use or have in their immediate physical possession a hand held electronic communication device while operating a motor vehicle, motorcycle, quadricycle, or a bicycle on a public highway, as defined in MCA 61-1-101(27), within the city limits. 
B.  "Hand held electronic communications device" includes wireless or cellular phones, Blackberries, smart phones, i-phones, laptop and notebook computers utilizing VOIP (voice over internet protocol) technology, navigational systems, and any other mobile communications device that uses short-wave analog or digital radio transmissions between the device and a transmitter to permit wireless communications to and from the user of the device. 
C.  "Immediate physical possession" means touching the hand held electronic communications device, or physically holding the device in one's hand or up to one's ear. Simply having the electronic communications device on one's person or in a motor vehicle does not constitute immediate physical possession. 
D.  Exceptions: 
1.  This section shall not apply to any person reporting a health, fire, safety, or police emergency. 
2.  This section shall not apply to governmental fire agencies, ambulance services, law enforcement agencies, emergency responders, or any person operating an "authorized emergency vehicle" as defined in MCA 61-8-102(2)(a) while in the performance and scope of their work related duties. 
3.  This section shall not apply to passengers in a motor vehicle, or persons using a hand held electronic communications device while maintaining a motor vehicle in a stationary position, not in gear, while in a parking lane or space out of moving traffic lanes. 
4.  This section shall not apply to persons using a hands free device. A "hands free device" shall mean an electronic communication device that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, by which a user engages the device and by which the continual or repeated use of either hand is not required to activate, deactivate, initiate, or maintain a function of the device. A hands free device does not include a device where touching the device is necessary to dial a phone number or enter text. Use of a device's internal speaker alone does not constitute a hands free device. 
5.  This section does not apply to drivers using two-way radios while in the performance and scope of their work-related duties. 
6.  This section shall not apply to drivers holding a valid amateur radio operator license issued by the Federal Communications Commission while using a two-way radio. 
7.  This section shall not apply to a driver operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle on all portions of Interstate 90 considered controlled access including the entirety of the exit and entrance ramps. 
E.  Violation; Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction, a civil offense, and for each violation a civil penalty of $100.00 shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1818, § 1, 11-28-2011) 
Note— This § 36.03.275 becomes effective on Jan. 17, 2012.  
Sec. 36.03.280. - Stepping on or off moving vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any streetcar or vehicle while such streetcar or vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1982, § 10.44.010)  
Sec. 36.03.290. - Railroad trains blocking streets. 
It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1982, § 10.44.020)  
Sec. 36.03.300. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself/herself to any street car or moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.44.030)  
Sec. 36.03.310. - Riding animals, animal-drawn vehicles and pushcarts. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1982, § 10.44.040)  
Sec. 36.03.320. - Toy vehicles, skateboards, rollerblades, and roller skates. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, within the downtown business district, to ride any skateboard, rollerblades, roller skates, or other similar devices or operate any coaster, toy vehicle or radio controlled vehicle upon any sidewalk or roadway. 
B.  It shall also be unlawful for any person, within the city limits, to ride or operate any device referenced in subsection A of this section, within any city-owned parking garage, parking lot, facility or structure. 
C.  The downtown business district is defined as that portion of all streets, avenues, and sidewalks fronting the streets along Mendenhall, Main, and Babcock, including avenues running in a north-south direction between Third and Broadway. 
D.  A person operating a skateboard or similar device upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable except when necessary to avoid a condition that makes it unsafe to continue along the right side of the roadway, including but not limited to a fixed or moving object, parked or moving vehicle, pedestrian, animal, surface hazard, or a lane that is too narrow for a skateboard and another bicycle or vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. A person operating a skateboard or similar device upon a one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as close to the left side of the roadway as practicable. 
E.  The operator utilizing any device referenced in subsection D of this section, if not previously required, must utilize protective visibility gear during hours of darkness, as defined in chapter 9, title 61, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 61-9-101 et seq.), that renders the operator clearly visible to others utilizing the same roadway and any intersecting roadways. 
F.  Every person operating a skateboard or similar device shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle by chapter 7, 8 and 9, title 61, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 61-7-101 et seq., MCA 61-9-101 et seq.), except as to those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
G.  This section shall not apply upon any street or avenue while it is set aside as a play street as authorized by city ordinance, or to any skateboard facility approved in accordance with section 26.02.090. 
(Code 1982, § 10.44.050; Ord. No. 1762, §1(10.44.050), 6-15-2009)  
Secs. 36.03.330—36.03.440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 36.03.450. - Turning at intersections; position and method. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
1.  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
2.  Approach for a lefthand turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. 
3.  Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
4.  Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the lefthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.010)  
Sec. 36.03.460. - Signals required for turning. 
A.  The operator of any vehicle upon a highway, street or roadway, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct line or moving out from a parking place, shall first see that such movement can be made in safety, and whenever the safety of any pedestrian or the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give a signal as required in this section, plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle of the intention to make such movement. 
B.  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
C.  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
D.  Signals by hand and arm or signal device. Any stop or turn signal, when required in this chapter, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal-device of a type approved by the police department, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then said signals must be given by such lamp or signal device. 
E.  For the method of giving hand and arm signals, see section 36.03.470. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.020)  
Sec. 36.03.470. - Hand and arm signals described. 
A.  All signals required in this chapter given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
1.  Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally. 
2.  Right turn: hand and arm extended upward. 
3.  Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.030)  
Sec. 36.03.480. - Mechanical signaling devices required when. 
Any stop or turn signal, when required in this chapter, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal-device of a type approved by the police department, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then the signals must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.040)  
Sec. 36.03.490. - Turning markers; placement authorized; driver obedience required. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
B.  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.050)  
Sec. 36.03.500. - Restricted right, left or U-turns; signs authorized. 
The director of public works is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.060)  
Sec. 36.03.510. - No-turn signs; driver obedience required. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.070)  
Sec. 36.03.520. Turning around; restrictions. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the main business district, and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1982, § 10.12.080)  
ARTICLE 4. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36.04.010. - Parking time limits; article provisions not exclusive. 
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.010; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.020. - Exceptions to restrictions. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times, specified in this article, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.020; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.030. - Locations where prohibited. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places (no signs are required): 
1.  On a sidewalk; 
2.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
3.  Within an intersection; 
4.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except where parking areas are designated and plainly marked by direction of the director of public works; 
5.  On a crosswalk; 
6.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except where parking areas are designated and plainly marked by direction of the director of public works; 
7.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway, except where parking areas are designated and plainly marked by direction of the director of public works; 
8.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the director of public works has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
9.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except where parking areas are designated and plainly marked by direction of the director of public works; 
10.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance when properly signposted, except where parking areas are designated and plainly marked by direction of the director of public works; 
11.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
12.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
13.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or within a highway tunnel; 
14.  In front of a mailbox or similar receptacle utilized for curbside postal delivery, except where such receptacle is solely owned by the person stopping, standing or parking the vehicle; 
15.  At any place where official signs or markings prohibit stopping or parking; 
16.  At any place where street maintenance signs or barricades are posted. 
B.  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.030; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 1995; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1870, § 5, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 36.04.040. - Prohibited near hazardous or congested areas. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to determine, and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
B.  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.040; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.050. - Procedure generally; distance from curb. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand or left-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.050; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.060. - Standing or parking—One-way streets. 
The director of public works is authorized to erect signs upon either or both sides of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.060; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.070. - Same—One-way roadways. 
In the event a highway or street includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The director of public works is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway, and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.070; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.080. - Additional or temporary parking regulations. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to make and enforce such regulations, relative to parking: 
1.  In front of buildings in which any considerable number of persons have assembled or are expected to assemble, as may seem necessary to ensure rapid and safe exit of the assemblage from such building; 
2.  On any street, highway or city-operated parking lot for the purpose of permitting construction, maintenance or any other work on or use of the street, highway or city-operated parking lot. 
B.  The parking program manager is authorized to administer the temporary on-street parking permit program within the B-3 zoning district in accordance with guidelines established by the parking commission, and reviewed by the city commission. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.080; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 1, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.090. - Parking signs required. 
Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or public parking lots, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and such regulations shall be effective, unless otherwise specifically provided, when said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.090; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1154, 1984)  
Sec. 36.04.100. - Angle parking. 
A.  The director of public works shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted, subject to the approval of the city commission, and shall mark or sign such streets. 
B.  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
C.  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the direction of the director of public works for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.100; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.110. - Parking prohibited between curb and sidewalk. 
It is unlawful to park any vehicle on that portion of any streets lying between the back of the curbline and the sidewalk edge nearest the curbline, or on any landscaped portion of the city streets. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.110; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.120. - Parking restrictions on private property. 
A.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. 
B.  Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley, indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.120; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.130. - Private parking signs prohibited without permit. 
No person shall erect any temporary or permanent sign or use any other marking or device for the purpose of limiting, prohibiting or restricting parking upon any public street or highway in this city unless a permit to so do is first had and obtained from the director of public works. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.130; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.140. - Obstructing traffic prohibited. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.140; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.150. - Narrow street parking restrictions. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs where, in the opinion of the director of public works, traffic conditions create a traffic hazard. 
B.  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.150; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.160. - Alley restrictions. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle at any time, whether occupied or not, within any alley in the district which includes and is bounded on the north by Lamme Street, on the east by Wallace Avenue, on the south by Olive Street and on the west by Seventh Avenue, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, whether occupied or not, within any alley in the city other than in the district described in subsection A of this section, in such a manner as to prevent the free movement of vehicular traffic, or in such a position as to block the driving entrance to any abutting property except than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.160; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 2, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.170. - Parking restrictions near schools. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the director's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.170; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.180. - Fire lanes; establishment; parking restrictions. 
A.  The fire chief of the city is authorized to designate, lay out and establish fire lanes not to exceed 20 feet in width over and across public and private property for access by fire equipment to buildings within and to post no parking signs thereon. 
B.  Parking of motor vehicles within a designated and posted fire lane is prohibited and motor vehicles in such fire lanes shall be subject to removal there-from at the owner's expense. 
C.  Upon application and review by the fire chief of the city, a special needs bus loading and unloading only area may be designated within a fire lane. The designation must be posted by appropriate signs. The driver of the bus must remain, at all times, with the bus, and the bus must vacate the fire lane to emergency response vehicles. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.180; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1404, § 1, 1995)  
Sec. 36.04.190. - Special needs bus loading/unloading zones; establishment; parking restrictions. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to designate, lay out and establish special needs bus loading and unloading zones and to post proper signs thereon. 
B.  Parking of motor vehicles so as to block the designated special needs bus loading or unloading area is prohibited, and the motor vehicle is subject to being towed at the owner's expense. The owner or operator of a vehicle violating this provision is subject to a fine of not less than $100.00. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.185; Ord. No. 1404, § 2, 1995)  
Sec. 36.04.200. - Tow-away zones; establishment; parking restrictions. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to designate, lay out and establish tow-away zones and to post proper signs thereon. 
B.  Parking of vehicles within a designated and posted tow-away zone is prohibited and vehicles in such tow-away zones shall be subject to removal therefrom at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.190; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.210. - Commercial vehicles; parking restrictions. 
It is unlawful to park any commercial vehicle upon any street for a period of time longer than one hour; provided, however, that when lawfully and continuously loading or unloading, such commercial vehicles may remain parked for such time as is necessary to complete such loading or unloading. Such parking shall be subject to all other and more restrictive provisions of this chapter prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.200; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.220. - Vehicles transporting flammable liquids; parking restrictions. 
No tank truck, tank trailer or like vehicle containing or used for the transportation of gasoline, butane, fuel oil or other highly flammable liquid shall be parked on any street, alley, park or other public place, nor upon any private property in this city where it would create a hazard to life or adjacent property, for a period longer than 30 minutes; but this restriction upon such parking shall not be construed so as to prevent the delivery of such liquid to retail gas stations or to private residences or business property, and only for so long as is reasonably necessary to complete such delivery. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.210; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.230. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle upon any street, roadway or public parking lot for the principal purpose of: 
1.  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
2.  Displaying advertising; 
3.  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.220; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.240. - Large vehicles; parking restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle with a width greater than 84 inches, or a total length exceeding 20 feet, including load, and any vehicle carrying or used for carrying livestock, upon any street where angle parking is designated unless such driver shall hold a special permit from the director of public works authorizing such parking. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.230; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.250. - Parking limitations on certain streets/city parking facilities. 
A.  The director of public services is authorized to erect signs or markings upon either or both sides of any street or highway to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles or to restrict such standing or parking. 
B.  The parking commission may, by resolution, erect signs or marking upon any city parking facility to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles or to restrict such standing or parking. 
C.  When official signs are erected in each block or markings are placed along a street, highway, or within a city parking facility, indicating that parking is prohibited or restricted, no person shall park any vehicle in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.240; Ord. No. 1188, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1849, § 1, 12-3-2012)  
Sec. 36.04.260. - Maximum parking duration designated. 
A.  When signs are erected on any street, alley, highway, or city parking facility, within the city designating a maximum duration for parking, no person shall park any vehicle for longer than the maximum duration posted. 
B.  A vehicle may not return to a parking space in the same block face or within 500 feet of where previously parked on the same block face or to the same city parking facility for a three-hour period. 
C.  Upon expiration of the maximum parking duration as posted, a citation may be issued, in accordance with section 36.04.380, to any vehicle which remains parked or stopped on the same block face unless for vehicles parked on streets, alleys, and highways: 
1.  The vehicle has moved more than 500 lineal feet, measured along the curb or edge line; 
2.  The vehicle has moved to an unregulated area in the same block face; or 
3.  The vehicle has vacated the block face for a minimum of three hours. 
D.  Upon expiration of the maximum parking duration as posted for a city parking facility, a citation may be issued, in accordance with 36.04.380, to any vehicle which remains parked or stopped in the same city parking facility. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than 72 consecutive hours at any time upon a street, alley or highway within the city or within a city parking facility, without a valid surface lot or facility permit for such surface lot or facility. Signs may be erected by the director of public services giving notice thereof. However, the signs are not required. 
F.  The city, or authorized agent of the city, is authorized to remove or tow a vehicle from a street, alley or highway within the city or within a city parking facility pursuant to section 36.02.020. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.250; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1154, 1984; Ord. No. 1579, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 3, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.270. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1849, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, repealed § 36.04.270 which pertained to § 10.32.260 of the 1982 Code; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; and Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 1995.  
Sec. 36.04.280. - Loading zones. 
A.  Designation authority. The director of public works shall have authority to determine the location of loading zones, and shall erect and maintain, or cause to be maintained, appropriate signs indicating the same. 
B.  Public use. Any loading zone established by the director of public works as authorized in this article shall be for the use of the general public, and shall not be restricted to the exclusive use of the occupants of property adjacent to any such loading zone. 
C.  Use restrictions. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes, or for such period of time as established by the director of public works. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.32.270—10.32.290; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 4, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.290. - Loading and unloading; backing into curb permitted when. 
A.  At every pickup and delivery point in the main business district of the city where there is an accessible rear entrance, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise and materials shall use such rear entrance. 
B.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle at an angle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading, or for any purpose, when such vehicle so parked or standing extends into the street or roadway so as to impair the normal flow of traffic, unless a special permit for such parking or standing is issued by the director of public works to cover emergency conditions. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.30; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.300. - Buses; parking restrictions. 
The driver of a public bus shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a public bus stop, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.310; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.310. - Bus stops and taxi stands. 
A.  Designation authority. The director of public works shall have authority to determine the location of public bus stops and taxi stands, and shall erect and maintain or cause to be maintained, appropriate signs indicating the same. 
B.  Use restrictions. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a public bus in a public bus stop or stand, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any public bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.32.320, 10.32.330; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983)  
Sec. 36.04.320. - Illegal parking; vehicle owner responsibility. 
If any vehicle is found in violation of this article or any rule, regulation, sign or marking in force pursuant thereto, controlling stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, any person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be responsible for such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.340; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1188, § 2, 1985)  
Sec. 36.04.330. - Procedure for the establishment of a residential on-street parking permit regulation program. 
A.  Pursuant to the powers granted to local governments pursuant to state law to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles on public streets, the use of public streets and traffic upon public streets, the city commission may, after holding a public hearing on any residential parking permit proposal, create, pursuant to ordinance, areas of the city to be designated as residential parking permit areas during specified times of the day and week if the city commission finds that the residential area under consideration for such a designation is: 
1.  Predominantly residential in character; 
2.  An area the streets of which are regularly congested with vehicles parked by persons not residing in the area; and 
3.  An area where limiting the parking of vehicles along the public streets better provides adequate motor vehicle parking for residents of the area; and finds that the creation of a residential parking permit area in the residential area under consideration would further one or more of the following objectives: 
a.  Promoting tranquility among commuters and residents; 
b.  Reducing noise; 
c.  Reducing traffic hazards; or 
d.  Reducing litter. 
B.  Any ordinance designating an area of the city as a residential permit parking area shall describe: 
1.  The designated public street area along which parking will be limited to vehicles registered to or controlled and exclusively used by persons residing in the area; 
2.  Hours of each day and days of each week that the residential parking permit regulations shall be in effect; 
3.  The individuals eligible to purchase a permit; 
4.  Effective dates of annual permits; 
5.  Any special provisions or exceptions applicable to schools, churches, businesses, public park use, etc. within the residential area; and 
6.  Visitor permit or special gathering provisions for the residential area. 
C.  Upon adoption of any ordinance by the city commission designating an area for residential permit parking only, signs shall be erected along the streets identified in the ordinance prior to any enforcement of the residential parking permit regulation pursuant to section 36.04.090. The parking signs erected shall give notice of the general nature of the parking limitation and shall indicate the hours and days when such parking limitations shall be in effect. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.350; Ord. No. 1345, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 1993)  
Sec. 36.04.340. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1870, § 4, adopted Dec. 16, 2013 , repealed § 36.04.340 which pertained to limitations on parking in a residential parking permit only area and derived from § 10.32.360 of the 1982 Code and Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 1992.  
Sec. 36.04.350. - Residential parking permits. 
A.  Application procedure. Applications for residential parking permits shall be submitted to the city on a prescribed form and shall be accompanied by proof in a form satisfactory to the city of the applicant's place of residence within the residential parking permit only area, as well as proof of registration of use and control of each vehicle for which a residential parking permit is sought. Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee for each vehicle for which a parking permit is sought. No part of the parking permit fees shall be refundable. The amount of the fees shall be established by resolution at the level that covers the cost of administration and enforcement of the residential parking permit regulations in the residential area. Residential parking permits will not be issued for vehicles with outstanding parking citations, or other fines, fees, or penalties owed to the city. 
B.  Form and issuance. 
1.  Upon approval by the city of the application of any person residing in a residential parking permit only area, a residential parking permit shall be issued for each vehicle receiving approval. Upon approval by the city of the application of any person residing in a residential parking permit only area for a temporary visitor's permit, such permit shall be issued by the city. No more than two temporary visitor's parking permits shall be issued annually for a single residential dwelling unit. Temporary visitors' parking permits shall be used only by visitors of the dwelling unit to which the permits were issued and are valid only while visiting that dwelling unit. 
2.  Each residential parking permit issued by the city for a vehicle shall set forth at least the date of issuance and the license number of the vehicle for which it is issued. Each temporary visitor's permit issued by the city shall set forth at least the date of issuance and the address of the resident to which it is issued. Annual permits shall be required. A permit shall be valid for no longer than the permit year of issuance and is not transferrable. The issuance of a residential parking permit does not serve as a guarantee that there will always be a parking space available for the permit holder on the public streets within the designated residential parking permit area. 
C.  Lawful display required. 
1.  Unless otherwise agreed to by a city parking control officer in writing, residential parking permits shall be affixed to the left rear bumper and temporary visitors' permits and employee permits shall be hung from the interior rearview mirror facing the windshield. It is unlawful to either fail to display or improperly display a residential parking permit, or to attempt to use a residential parking permit from another area in a designated residential area. 
2.  It is unlawful for the holder of a residential parking permit to fail to surrender it when directed to do so. 
3.  It is unlawful for any person to represent in any fashion that a vehicle is entitled to a residential parking permit authorized by subsection A of this section or other applicable provisions when it is not so entitled. The display of a residential parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such a permit shall constitute such a representation. 
4.  It is unlawful for any person to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized by subsection A of this section or other applicable provisions. It is also unlawful for any person to display on any vehicle such a duplicate parking permit. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.32.370—10.32.390; Ord. No. 1345, §§ 3—5, 1992; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 1401, §§ 1, 2, 1995; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 5, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.360. - Montana State University Residential On-Street Parking Permit Regulation Program. 
A.  The area designated, pursuant to this article, as the Montana State University Residential On-Street Parking Permit Program, and hereinafter referred to as "MSU Residential District," shall be as follows, and as depicted on Exhibit "A" attached hereto, (listed streets and avenues include the full right-of-way unless specifically noted): 
EXHIBIT A 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of South 12th Avenue and West Dickerson Street, thence southerly along the west right-of-way of South 12th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Alderson Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Alderson Street to the west right-of-way of South 13th Avenue, thence southerly along the west right-of-way of South 13th Avenue to the centerline of West College Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West College Street to the centerline of South 8th Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of West 8th Avenue to the centerline of West Harrison Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Harrison Street to the centerline of South 6th Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of South 6th Avenue to the centerline of West Grant Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Grant Street to the centerline of the alley between South 5th Avenue and South 6th Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of the alley between South 5th Avenue and South 6th Avenue to the south right-of-way of West Grant Street, thence easterly along the south right-of-way of West Grant Street to the west right-of-way of South 5th Avenue, thence southerly along the west right-of-way of South 5th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Lincoln Street, thence easterly along the north right-of-way of West Lincoln Street to the centerline of South 3rd Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of South 3rd Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Kagy Boulevard, thence easterly along the north right-of-way of West Kagy Boulevard to the east right-of-way of South 3rd Avenue, thence northerly along the east right-of-way of South 3rd Avenue to the south right-of-way of South Grand Avenue, thence northerly along the south/east right-of-way of South Grand Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Lincoln Street, thence easterly along the north right-of-way of West Lincoln Street to the west right-of-way of South Willson Avenue, thence northerly along the west right-of-way of South Willson Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Cleveland Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Cleveland Street to the east right-of-way of South 3rd Avenue, thence northerly along the east right-of-way of South 3rd Avenue to the south right-of-way of West Harrison Street, thence easterly along the south right-of-way of West Harrison Street to the west right-of South Grand Avenue, thence northerly along the west right-of-way of South Grand Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Harrison Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Harrison Street to the east right-of-way of South 5th Avenue, thence northerly along the east right-of-way of South 5th Avenue to the south right-of-way of West College Street, thence easterly along the south right-of-way of West College Street to the west right-of-way South 4th Avenue, thence northerly along the west right-of-way of South 4th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West College Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West College Street to the centerline of South 5th Avenue, thence northerly along the centerline of South 5th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Alderson Street, thence easterly along the north right-of-way of West Alderson Street to the east right-of-way of South 5th Avenue, thence northerly along the east right-of-way of South 5th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street to the east right-of-way of South 7th Avenue, thence northerly along the east right-of-way of South 7th Avenue to the south right-of-way of West Story Street, thence easterly along the south right-of-way of West Story Street to the west right-of-way of South 7th Avenue, thence southerly along the west right-of-way of South 7th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street to the centerline of South 8th Avenue, thence northerly along the centerline of South 8th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Koch Street, thence westerly to the west right-of-way of South 8th Avenue, thence southerly to the north right-of-way of West Story Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Story Street to the east right-of-way of South 10th Avenue, thence southerly along the east right-of-way of South 10th Avenue to the centerline of West Story Street, thence easterly along the centerline of West Story Street to the centerline of South 9th Avenue, thence southerly along the centerline of South 9th Avenue to the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street, thence westerly along the north right-of-way of West Dickerson Street to the Point of Beginning. 
The district shall also include South 14th Avenue from West Dickerson Street to West College Street, the western half of South 15th Avenue from West Dickerson Street to West Alderson Street, South 15th from West Alderson Street to West College Street, West Alderson Street from South 13th Avenue to South 15th Avenue, and 900 block of South Grand Avenue. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street within the area listed in 36.04.360.A between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except for legal holidays, except for the following circumstances: 
1.  Those vehicles displaying a valid MSU residential parking permit, a temporary MSU visitor's permit for that location, or a MSU service provider permit; 
2.  An emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to an ambulance, fire engine or police vehicle; or 
3.  A clearly marked business vehicle which is under the control of a person providing a service to persons or property located in the MSU residential district, including but not limited to delivery vehicles. 
C.  These regulations will be enforced by the city police department and parking services division. 
D.  The department of public works will post signs in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices that indicate the general nature of the restrictions and the hours and days when the restrictions are in effect. 
E.  Permits shall be issued for an annual permit year beginning September 1. 
F.  The amount of the permit fees shall be established by resolution. 
G.  Permits shall be issued by the city finance department. Permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon application by a legal resident within the MSU residential district who has a motor vehicle registered in the applicant's name, or who has a motor vehicle for the applicant's exclusive use and under the applicant's control; and satisfying the requirements of section 36.04.350.A and B. 
H.  No more than two visitor permits shall be issued annually to each single residential dwelling unit for use by visitor vehicles. 
I.  Nonresidential uses may be provided with posted time limit parking as approved by the director of public works. 
J.  Each business owner or individual employed within the MSU residential district is eligible to purchase one residential permit. 
K.  Annual visitor permits may be issued to nonresidential uses located within the district for circumstances not otherwise provided for within this section. 
L.  Upon request by a resident or employer within the MSU residential district, the police department may issue special gathering permits. 
M.  Residential permits shall become void if either the owner/operator of the vehicle moves out of the MSU residential district or the owner/operator of the vehicle sells the vehicle. A permit holder who moves within the MSU residential district or purchases another vehicle and desires to transfer the permit must apply for such transfer and pay the fee as established by resolution. 
N.  The MSU residential district boundaries may be revised by ordinance. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.395; Ord. No. 1377, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1384, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1391, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1393, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1395, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1401, § 3, 1995; Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 1995; Ord. No. 1415, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1536, § 2, 4-30-2001; Ord. No. 1537, § 20, 5-29-2002; Ord. No. 1640, § 4, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 1705, § 2, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 1715, § 2, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 1716, § 2, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 1870, § 2, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 1892, § 1, 7-7-2014 ; Ord. No. 2010 , § 1, 10-1-2018; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 6, 7, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.365. - Bozeman Senior High School Residential On-Street Parking Permit Regulation Program. 
A.  The streets designated, pursuant to this section, as the Bozeman Senior High School Residential On-Street Parking Permit Program, and hereinafter referred to as "BSHS Residential District," shall be as follows: 
East side of N. 11th between Mendenhall and Durston; 
Both sides of N. 10th between Mendenhall and Durston; 
Both sides of N. 9th between Mendenhall and Villard; 
Both sides of W. Villard from N. 9th to N. 11th; 
Both sides of W. Beall from N. 9th to N. 11th; 
Both sides of W. Lamme from N. 9th to N. 11th; 
North side of W. Mendenhall from N. 9th to N. 11th; 
West side of N. 15th from W. Beall to Durston; 
Portions of the east side of N. 15th including the 100 and 200 blocks and from 410 N. 15th north to Durston; 
West side of S. 11th from Babcock to Curtiss; 
East side of S. 11th from Babcock to Olive; 
Both sides of S. 10th from Main to Olive; 
West side of S. 9th from Babcock to Olive; 
Both sides of West Babcock from S. 9th to S. 11th; 
North side of West Olive from S. 9th to S. 11th; 
Both sides of West Beall from N. 15th to N. 16th, including the street frontage adjacent to 1602 West Beall, and 
The east side of South Ninth Avenue, from West Babcock Street south to the alley between West Babcock and West Olive Street. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street within the area listed in 36.04.365.A between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, from August 15 to June 15, except for legal holidays, except for the following circumstances: 
1.  Those vehicles displaying a valid Bozeman Senior High School residential parking permit, a temporary HS visitor's permit for that location, or a HS service provider permit; 
2.  An emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to an ambulance, fire engine or police vehicle; or 
3.  A clearly marked business vehicle which is under the control of a person providing a service to persons or property located in the BSHS Residential District, including but not limited to delivery vehicles. 
C.  These regulations will be enforced by the city police department and parking services division. 
D.  The department of public works will post signs in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices that indicate the general nature of the restrictions and the hours and days when the restrictions are in effect. 
E.  Permits shall be issued for an annual permit year beginning August 1. 
F.  The amount of the permit fees shall be established by resolution. 
G.  Permits shall be issued by the city finance department. Permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon application by a legal resident within the BSHS Residential District who has a motor vehicle registered in the applicant's name, or who has a motor vehicle for the applicant's exclusive use and under the applicant's control; and satisfying the requirements of section 36.04.350.A and B. 
H.  No more than two visitor permits shall be issued annually to each single residential dwelling unit for use by visitor vehicles. 
I.  Nonresidential uses may be provided with posted time limit parking as approved by the director of public works. 
J.  Each business owner or individual employed within the BSHS Residential District is eligible to purchase one residential permit. 
K.  Annual visitor permits may be issued to nonresidential uses located within the district for circumstances not otherwise provided for within this section. 
L.  Upon request by a resident or employer within the BSHS Residential District, the city police department may issue special gathering permits. 
M.  Residential permits shall become void if either the owner/operator of the vehicle moves out of the BSHS Residential District or the owner/operator of the vehicle sells the vehicle. A permit holder who moves within the BSHS Residential District or purchases another vehicle and desires to transfer the permit must apply for such transfer and pay the fee as established by resolution. 
N.  The BSHS Residential District boundaries may be revised by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1542, § 2(10.32.396), 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 1568, § 2, 7-22-2002; Ord. No. 1870, § 3, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 8, 9, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.370. - Legislative intent. 
It is the intent of the city commission that the violations listed in this article, except for a violation of section 36.04.390, are offenses involving absolute liability. It is also the intent of the city commission that a violation of section 36.04.390 is a misdemeanor criminal offense of absolute liability and shall not require proof of any of the mental states described in MCA 45-2-101(33), (37) and (58). 
(Ord. 1126 § 2, 1983; Ord. 1140, § 1(part), 1983; Ord. 134, §6, 1992; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 1781, § 1(10.32.400), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 10, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.380. - Enforcement; penalty for violations. 
A.  Fines. A violation of this article shall be punishable by a penalty and the penalties shall be imposed as follows: 
1.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.180 shall be a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00. 
2.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.260.E shall be a fine of not less than $30.00 or more than $300.00. 
3.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.030.A.1—15 shall be a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00. 
4.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.050 shall be a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00. 
5.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.250 shall be a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00. 
6.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of section 36.04.360 shall be a fine of not less than $60.00 or more than $300.00. 
7.  The minimum penalty for parking in violation of other sections of this article shall be a fine of not less than $20.00 or more than $300.00. 
B.  Failure to pay. The determining factor with respect to the penalty is the issuance of the citation and not the judgment. Failure to pay a citation for violation of this article within seven days of issuance of the citation results in an additional administrative charge, in addition to the penalty, of $20.00. 
C.  Violation for improperly parked vehicle. 
1.  If any motor vehicle is found to be in violation of any provision of this article, the vehicle may be cited for the appropriate parking violation. The notice of violation shall be in the form of a citation authorized by the city. The city employee issuing the notice of violation shall note the vehicle's license plate or vehicle identification number and any other information concerning the vehicle that will identify it and, if the driver is not present, shall serve the citation by placing on the vehicle a notice of the parking violation, or alternatively serve directly on the owner/operator of the vehicle in person or serve the citation by regular mail. 
2.  The registered owner of a vehicle at the time the violation occurred shall be liable for all fines, fees and penalties related to the specific violation. 
3.  The registered owner at the time a vehicle is found to be in violation of any provisions of this article shall remain liable for all violations despite having subsequently sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed the vehicle. 
D.  Notice of Violation. Employees under the supervision of the parking manager and under the supervision of the chief of police are authorized to provide enforcement of parking regulations and issue related notices of violation for parking violations as set forth in this article or violations of MCA Title 61 and MCA 49-4-302. Employees under the supervision of the parking manager and under the supervision of the chief of police are authorized to immobilize and/or impound a vehicle in accordance with this section. 
1.  The form of the notice of the violation shall be designated by the city, but shall contain in substance the following information: 
a.  A statement that the notice of the violation represents a determination that a violation of this article or other parking prohibition has been committed by the owner or user of the vehicle and that the determination shall be final unless contested as provided by this article; 
b.  A statement that failure to pay a violation may result in immobilization and/or impoundment of the vehicle for which the owner may be liable for a penalty, administrative fees, including towing, handling and storage costs; 
c.  A statement of the specific provision of this article violated and for which the citation was issued; 
d.  A statement of the monetary penalty established for the parking violation, including that the violation may subject the owner to additional administrative fees if not paid within ten working days of the date of issuance of the citation; and 
e.  Information advising the owner of the vehicle that he or she must admit the violation and pay the penalty set forth in section 36.04.380.A, or deny the violation and request an appeal pursuant to section 36.04.380.F. 
2.  The notice of violation represents a determination that a violation has been committed, and such determination shall be final unless contested as provided herein. 
3.  Nothing herein shall be deemed to invalidate any previous notice or citation issued by the city regarding a violation under this article or other parking prohibition. 
The original citation must be filed with the city finance department and may be disposed of only by official action of the city or by payment of a fine to the finance department. 
E.  Response to notice of violation required. 
1.  Any person who receives notice of a violation of this article shall respond to such notice as provided herein within ten business days of the date of the issuance of the notice, by either paying the penalty set forth in the notice or requesting an administrative appeal pursuant to subsection F of this section. If the person receiving notice fails to either pay the penalty or request an administrative appeal within ten business days, said failure shall result in the assessment of a $20.00 administrative fee which shall be in addition to the penalty. 
2.  If the owner of a vehicle cited for a parking violation has not responded to the notice of violation within ten business days as provided in subsection E.1 of this section, the city shall send a written notice by regular mail to the last known address of the registered owner of the vehicle. Such notice shall state that if the owner of the vehicle does not respond to the notice by either paying the penalty and administrative fee or by requesting in writing an administrative appeal pursuant to these procedures within ten business days of the date of the notice, the owner shall be deemed to have waived the owner's right to an administrative appeal and the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final. Any person who fails to request an administrative appeal or pay the fine within the ten business days of the notice described in this subsection shall be deemed to have refused to pay the fine levied by the citation and shall authorize the city to proceed to collect the fine and all administrative fees in any manner available to the city. 
3.  All payments made by a person regarding a notice of a violation under this article shall be paid only to the city finance department. 
F.  Administrative appeal of parking citation. Any person cited for a violation of this article may contest the determination that a violation occurred by submitting to the city a notice of administrative appeal of parking citation. The notice of appeal must contain a written statement detailing the appellant's argument that the citation was issued in error and may include photographs, or any other information the appellant wishes to rely upon. The citing employee's supervisor ("administrative reviewer") shall review the information submitted and, within 21 days of submittal of the notice of appeal, the city shall inform the appellant via regular mail or other communication approved by the appellant, whether the citation is affirmed, modified, or dismissed. If the citing officer's decision is affirmed or modified, the petitioner shall have ten business days from the date of mailing or other approved communication of the decision to pay the penalty. Failure to pay within ten business day period shall result in the assessment of a $20.00 administrative fee which shall be in addition to the penalty, and shall authorize the city to proceed to collect the fine and all administrative fees in any manner available to the city. 
G.  Rehearing and judicial review. 
1.  There shall be a review board within the parking commission which shall consist of three hearing examiners, but in no event shall the administrative reviewer whose decision is being reviewed be included in the panel. 
2.  A request for review of a decision of an appellate reviewer shall be submitted to the review board within 15 days of the administrative reviewer's determination. The review board shall have the power to review the facts and the law in order to affirm, reverse, or modify any original decision for error of fact or law. 
3.  Procedure. The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for person(s) to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence that the citation was invalid or unjustified. The review board shall establish the necessary rules and regulations regarding the conduct of such hearings. 
4.  Appearance of officer. The officer or other person authorized by the city who issued the notice of violation shall not be required to appear at the hearing unless the review board determines that the officer's presence is required. The review board may grant one postponement if the officer is not available at the time of the hearing. 
5.  Determination. At the conclusion of the hearing, the review board shall immediately render a decision, either finding the person liable and assessing a fine pursuant to Section 36.04.380.A or declaring the violation unproven. 
6.  Failure to appear. Failure of the appellant to appear at a hearing when required to appear shall constitute an admission of the parking violation and shall subject the person charged with the violation to the appropriate fines and costs assessed by the city acting through the review board and shall authorize the city to proceed to collect the fine and all administrative fees in any manner available to the city. 
7.  The decision of the review board shall be the final decision by the city. Any person aggrieved by a decision may file a petition for judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction. An appeal must be brought within 30 days from the date of the decision of the review board, and confined to review of the record and questions of law. 
H.  Immobilization of vehicle. 
1.  Actions under this subsection H.1 to immobilize a vehicle are for the purpose of collection and are not considered a penalty. The city may immobilize using any immobilization device (i.e., a "boot") any vehicle while parked legally or illegally upon the ways of the city open to the public when: 
a.  The vehicle is subject to six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section regarding that vehicle; 
b.  An owner of the vehicle has six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section and those violations were issued for any vehicle the person currently owns or has owned; or 
c.  A municipal judge has ordered the vehicle immobilized or impounded. 
If immobilization is conducted pursuant to subsections H.1.a or b of this section, a judgment or order of the municipal court is not required. 
2.  Prior to immobilization, the city shall send via regular mail with delivery confirmation requested a notice to the last known address of the owner of any vehicle having six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section that the vehicle may be impounded or immobilized when located upon the ways of the city open to the public. The notice must reference all the unpaid violations of this article against the vehicle or the owner and allow the person ten business days from the date of mailing of the notice to pay all unpaid violations of this article or contest the determination the vehicle is subject to immobilization in the municipal court. If the vehicle owner does not respond within ten business days of the date of the mailing, the city may immobilize or impound the vehicle. 
3.  Only the following violations of this article may be considered in determining the number of violations that subject a vehicle to immobilization: 
a.  All violation occurring after July 1, 2007; 
b.  Any violation occurring prior to July 1, 2007, wherein a summons and compliant has been lawfully served on the vehicle owner; and 
c.  Any violation of this article for which a judgment has been entered by the municipal court as long as the judgment occurred no more than ten years prior to the date the notice of a pending immobilization is sent pursuant to subsection H.2 of this section. 
4.  A $150.00 immobilization fee and costs of costs of immobilization or impoundment, including a $150.00 immobilization fee (when immobilization occurs), will be assessed against the owner and must be paid prior to release. 
5.  At the time a vehicle is immobilized, the city shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a written notice via a highly visible sticker or other material with an adhesive backing that can be fastened to the driver-side window containing the following information: 
This vehicle has been immobilized for six or more unpaid violations of Chapter 36, Article 4 of the Bozeman Municipal Code or by Order of the Municipal Court. Release from immobilization may be obtained by paying all unpaid violations at City Hall, 121 N. Rouse Ave., Bozeman, or by appearing in Bozeman Municipal Court, Law & Justice Center, 615 S. 16th Ave., Suite 123, to answer to the unpaid violations. All assessed fees, including a $150.00 fee for immobilization, must be paid prior to release of this vehicle. If the vehicle remains immobilized for more than 24 hours, the vehicle is subject to being towed and impounded as provided in section 36.04.380.I, with additional fees assessed at that time. Removal or attempted removal of the immobilization device before a release is obtained is unlawful and may be punishable as a criminal offense as provided in section 36.04.390. The owner may contest the action of immobilization and/or impoundment by filing a request for a hearing with the Bozeman Municipal Court within ten business days of the immobilization impoundment. Please call 406-582-2303 during normal business hours for information on how to release this vehicle. After hours, please call 406-582-2000. 
If the vehicle has been immobilized, and has remained immobilized for a period of 24 hours or longer, and a release has not been obtained from the city or the municipal court, then the city may impound the vehicle as provided for in subsection I of this section. 
6.  Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from providing alternative methods of notice that a vehicle is subject to immobilization or that a vehicle has been immobilized. 
I.  Removal/impoundment of vehicle. 
1.  The city, or authorized agent of the city, is authorized to remove or tow a vehicle from the ways of the city open to the public pursuant to section 36.02.020 or this section to the city impound lot or to a location associated with the tow company where the vehicle will be stored until the owner of such vehicle appears and claims the same or the vehicle is sold at auction in compliance with MCA 25-13-701 through 25-13-709, under the following circumstances: 
a.  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge/viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
b.  When a vehicle is left unattended and that vehicle constitutes an obstruction to the safe and efficient removal of snow, ice, other weather caused obstructions or the vehicle must be removed to facilitate the repairs or replacement of city services; 
c.  When a vehicle upon a street constitutes an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle fails to or is unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
d.  Upon issuance of a judicial order for any reason include any offenses under this chapter or title 61, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 61-1-101 et seq.); 
e.  In conjunction with an investigation in which the vehicle is seized pursuant to provisions allowed under MCA 46-5-311, or seized pursuant to a court order; or 
f.  Whenever any vehicle is found by the city parked or left standing in the ways of the city open to the public streets or alleys of the city and: 
(1)  The vehicle is subject to six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section regarding that vehicle; 
(2)  An owner of the vehicle has six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section and those violations were issued for any vehicle the person currently owns or has owned; or 
(3)  A municipal judge has ordered the vehicle immobilized or impounded. 
Prior to towing a vehicle under subsection I.1.f of this section, the city must have immobilized the vehicle and following served service upon the last known registered owner of the vehicle of a final written notice in a similar form to that required in subsection H of this section. 
2.  Whenever a city employee authorizes the removal of a vehicle from the ways of the city open to the public as authorized in this subsection I and the employee removing the vehicle knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records on the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, and in compliance with MCA 61-12-402, such officer shall send a notice by certified mail within 72 hours to such owner and lien-holder, if applicable, of the fact of such removal and the reasons thereof and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage or other storage facility, a copy of such notice shall be given to the attendant or owner of the facility. Further, a city employee authorizing the removal of the vehicle, shall adequately update written or electronic records of the immobilization and/or tow to provide for later identification of all fees relative to the release of the vehicle to the registered owner. 
3.  Impound fee. The cost of towing or removing such vehicle, administrative fees related to notification of the removal, and costs of storing the vehicle shall be chargeable against the vehicle as the impound fee and shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle before the vehicle shall be released pursuant to subsection J of this section. 
4.  Storage fee. The vehicle may be stored in a public or a private place; if a private place, the storage charges shall be the amount charged for such private storage; if stored on public property, the storage fee shall be $75.00 for each month, or any part thereof, up to a maximum of $225.00, the storage shall be as prescribed from time to time by city commission resolution. Storage fees for vehicles impounded pursuant to this section shall not begin to accrue until five business days following mailing of a certified letter notifying the registered owner of the impoundment or the owner has been directly advised. In addition, storage fees shall not be assessed against the owner of a vehicle impounded pursuant to subsection I.1 of this section until the vehicle has been cleared for release and five business days have passed after the owner has been advised of the release directly or by sending notice of the release by certified mail. The owner of a vehicle impounded and towed due to unpaid parking tickets must secure the release of the vehicle as required by subsection J of this section. The city assumes no responsibility for the condition of the vehicle upon towing to impound or a facility provided by a private towing entity. 
J.  Release of vehicle to owner for immobilization or impoundment. 
1.  An immobilized or impounded vehicle may be released from immobilization or impoundment only after evidence of ownership or right to possession to the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the vehicle is furnished provided to the city. 
2.  The owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle may secure its release: 
a.  Prior to impoundment. By paying all unpaid violations of this article and all administrative costs, including the costs of immobilization as stated in subsection J.2.c of this section with the city administrative services department; 
b.  Impoundment due to court order. By paying the unpaid violations of this article and all administrative costs, including the costs of immobilization and/or impoundment as stated in subsection H.4 of this section, to the city administrative services department, or as determined by the municipal court; or 
c.  After impoundment. By posting a bond with the city administrative services department in an amount equal to: 
(1)  All outstanding violations of this article and all administrative costs; 
(2)  The immobilization fee of $150.00; and 
(3)  A sum equal to the impound fee if the vehicle was impounded. 
d.  After normal business hours. By posting cash bond with the police department that includes all costs listed in subsection J.2.c of this section for emergency exceptions, as necessary. 
3.  At the time the vehicle is released, the owner or the authorized agent of the owner may challenge the immobilization or impoundment in writing within the municipal court. The owner shall state in writing whether the payments made are in full satisfaction of all debts and judgments or whether the owner is making payment as a bond and will challenge the immobilization or impoundment with the municipal court. If at the time of vehicle release the owner posts a bond pursuant to subsection E.1.b of this section and yet fails to challenge the immobilization or impoundment pursuant to subsection K of this section, the bond shall be forfeit and considered as final payment for all debts and judgments listed in subsection J.2.c of this section. 
K.  Hearing for vehicle immobilization or towing/impoundment. 
1.  Within ten business days of notification of a pending immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section, or within ten business days after an immobilization or impoundment the owner or operator of a vehicle which is the subject of the notice or the action may file a written petition to challenge the notice or action in municipal court. 
2.  Upon receipt of a petition, the municipal court has jurisdiction and shall set the matter for hearing on an expedited schedule. The court shall give at least 48 hours written notice of the hearing date to the citing city employee or designated representative, the city attorney's office, and the petitioner. 
3.  Upon filing the petition, if the petition is filed based upon the notice, and an immobilization or impoundment action has not yet taken place, then any future immobilization or impoundment will be stayed pending the outcome of the hearing. An appropriate order shall issue from the court. 
4.  The court shall not require a response to the petition from the city, but shall take testimony and examine the facts of the case, except that the issues are limited to: 
a.  For immobilization under subsection H of this section: 
(1)  Whether at the time of an immobilization the vehicle was either the subject of six or more unpaid violations of this article, an owner of the vehicle has six or more unpaid violations of this article as determined by subsection H.3 of this section and those violations were issued for any vehicle the person currently owns or has owned, or the vehicle or owner is the subject of an order of immobilization in the municipal court; and 
(2)  Whether a representative of the city had sent, prior to immobilization, to the registered owner of the vehicle a written notice complying with subsection H.2 of this section. 
b.  For impoundment: Whether the vehicle was properly the subject of an act of immobilization or towing as provided in under subsection I of this section. 
5.  Based upon the issues in subsection K.4 of this section the court shall determine whether the petitioner is entitled to rescission of the notice or action of immobilization or impoundment. If the petitioner is entitled to rescission, then the court may order the city to pay or reimburse the fees for immobilization or impoundment. If the petition is denied, then the petitioner is subject to the action of immobilization or impoundment and must pay the costs of such action, if taken, together with any costs associated with the hearing should the court find the petition was without merit. 
6.  If the immobilization or impoundment was deemed justified by court, the court shall forfeit the bond. Any fines or fees remaining in excess of the amount of the bond posted shall be ordered by the court to be paid by the owner of the vehicle to the court. 
7.  The court may consider a parking citation and any other written report made under oath by the issuing city employee in lieu of the issuing employee's appearance at the hearing. 
8.  The petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing may result in a judgment against the petitioner pursuant to procedures established by law and an order may be issued by the court requiring all debts, judgments, and administrative costs, including costs related to immobilization or impoundment and costs of the court, and said order shall be complied with prior to release of the vehicle. 
L.  Sale of impounded vehicles. 
1.  Vehicles that are not reclaimed within 30 days after notification by certified mail or prescribed publication, in accordance with subsection I.2 of this section, or any vehicles seized and held as evidence where the vehicle no longer has any evidentiary value and for which an order for disposal for the vehicle has been signed by a judge in accordance MCA 46-5-307 and 46-5-308, may be sold at public auction in the manner provided in MCA 25-13-701 et seq. 
2.  Proceeds from a sale involving vehicles seized pursuant to this article shall be applied first to pay for costs and charges as listed in subsection J.2.c of this section, with any additional balance deposited in the city general fund except when the city is required by law to deposit the balance or any part thereof with another party. In the event of a sale resulting in recovery of costs less than those listed in subsection J.2.c of this section, any unpaid violations or costs may form the basis for additional enforcement under this article. 
M.  Statute of limitations. Enforcement and collection actions, to include issuing a notice of immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section, may not be issued if the following time periods have been exceeded: 
1.  Civil citation only: For citations issued after July 1, 2007, for which a summons has not been issued in accordance with subsection G.1 of this section, one year from the date of issuance of the citation and prior to the date of notice of immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section; 
2.  Court summons issued for civil citation: For citations issued after July 1, 2007, for which a summons has been issued in accordance with subsection G.1 of this section, but a judgment has not been entered, three years after issuance of the summons and prior to the date of notice of immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section; 
3.  Court summons issued for criminal citation: For any citation issued prior to July 1, 2007, that was issued as a criminal citation and where a summons and complaint had been filed with the municipal court, three years from the date of filing with the court and prior to the date of notice of immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section; 
4.  Judgment entered: For any violation, whether occurring prior to July 1, 2007, or later, if a judgment has been entered by a court, ten years after judgment and prior to the date of notice of immobilization under subsection H.2 of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 10.32.410; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1345, § 7, 1992; Ord. No. 1383, § 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1469, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 1998; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 1699, § 1, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 1771, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 1770, § 2, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 1781, § 2(10.32.410), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 1849, § 4, 13-2-2012; Ord. No. 1870, § 1, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 11, 12-17-2018)  
Sec. 36.04.390. - Tampering with or removal of immobilization device prohibited; penalty. 
A.  A person commits the offense of tampering with or removal of an immobilization device if, before a release of the immobilization device is authorized by the city or the municipal court, the person: 
1.  Removes or attempts to remove an immobilization device from a vehicle; 
2.  Relocates the immobilization device from its original installation position; 
3.  Causes damage of any kind or amount to the immobilization device; or 
4.  Removes an immobilized vehicle with or without the immobilization device attached from the vehicles location at the time the immobilization device was attached. 
B.  A person convicted of this offense is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not to exceed $500.00 or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  As an alternative to incarceration, the person may be ordered to participate in a supervised community corrections program or community service pursuant to MCA 46-18-201. 
D.  In addition, the person so convicted shall be ordered to pay restitution for the damages caused in an amount to be determined and set by the court. The court shall give full and due consideration to the person's ability to pay the restitution, and may modify the order upon good cause shown by the person. Restitution must be paid in full prior to release from jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 3(10.32.420), 5-17-2010)  
Secs. 36.04.400—36.04.540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING FOR THE DISABLED 
 
Sec. 36.04.550. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application the provisions of this division shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted as an exercise of the general police powers of the city for the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the physically disabled citizens of the community. 
(Code 1982, § 10.34.020; Ord. No. 1116 § 1, 1982)  
Sec. 36.04.560. - Definitions; regulations. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
1.  "Physically disabled" means one who holds a valid driver's license and owns a motor vehicle, other than a commercial vehicle, and has a permanent physical disability that impairs their mobility when not in a motor vehicle; or regardless of whether they hold a driver's license or own a motor vehicle, have a permanent physical disability that impairs their driving ability and impairs their mobility when not in a motor vehicle to such an extent that they need to be driven by another person to a destination. 
2.  "Disabled parking stall" means one so designated by the use of the nationally recognized disabled sign or symbol. 
All other definitions applicable to this division shall be found in section 36.01.020. 
B.  Parking in designated disabled stalls. Pursuant to the provisions of title 49, chapter 4, part 3, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 49-4-301 et seq.), it is unlawful for anyone to park, stop or stand at a designated disabled parking shall as defined in this division, whether on the public right-of-way or in public parking lots, except those displaying a disabled symbol issued by the division of motor vehicles or other competent jurisdiction. 
C.  Display of disabled symbol; privileges. 
1.  Disabled persons, as defined in this division, shall be granted the privilege of parking at the designated disabled locations, as listed in this section, subject to all other limitations of this chapter such as time limit, parking close to curb, etc., only when the disabled symbol has been prominently displayed in the windshield of the vehicle. 
2.  Exception. The privilege shall not be extended to those persons not disabled, displaying the disabled symbol while they are not engaged in transporting, delivering or picking up the disabled. 
D.  Duties to enforce. It shall be the duty of the police department and parking services division to enforce the provisions of this division, issue citations for the violation thereof, and assist in the prosecution of those persons violating this division. 
E.  Duties of other public employees. The provisions of this division shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owner by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, the county or the city, and it is unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this division, except those vehicles designated as emergency vehicles. 
F.  Designated municipal infraction. Violation of this division is a municipal infraction and shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $15.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.34.030—10.34.100; Ord. No. 1116, §§ 2—4, 1982; Ord. No. 1699, § 1, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. > 2013 , § 12, 12-17-2018)  
ARTICLE 5. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 36.05.010. - Installation; director of public works authority. 
The director of public works shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as the director may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.010)  
Sec. 36.05.020. - Manuals and specifications for official devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manuals and specifications approved by the city commission. All sign and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.020)  
Sec. 36.05.030. - Driver obedience required; exceptions. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.030)  
Sec. 36.05.040. - Traffic control signals described; effect. 
A.  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution" or "stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
1.  Green alone or "Go." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn; but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
2.  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
3.  Red alone or "Stop." Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. 
B.  In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.040)  
Sec. 36.05.050. - Pedestrian walk and don't walk signals. 
A.  Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "don't walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
1.  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
2.  Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed the pedestrian's crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the don't walk signal is showing. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.050)  
Sec. 36.05.060. - Flashing red or yellow signals. 
A.  Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
1.  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
2.  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.060)  
Sec. 36.05.070. - Traffic lanes, crosswalks, and safety zones; when designation authorized. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized: 
1.  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in the director's opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as the director may deem necessary; 
2.  To designate and maintain, by appropriate signs or other marking devices, school crossing zones; 
3.  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as the director may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
4.  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as the director may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of the city; 
5.  When authorized by the city commission and pending adoption of amendments to this article or new ordinances repealing this article or parts thereof, to issue orders to change, increase or decrease the streets, zones, public places or other areas described in this chapter, and to erect or install such signs, pavement-markings or other devices as may be required by such orders. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.070)  
Sec. 36.05.080. - Unauthorized signs, signals or markings described; public nuisance; removal. 
A.  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
B.  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.080)  
Sec. 36.05.090. - Interference with traffic controls or railroad signals prohibited. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 10.16.090)  
ARTICLE 6. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 36.06.010. - Designation; sign placement; traffic movement restricted. 
A.  Whenever any city ordinance designates any one-way street or alley, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
B.  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in Schedule V attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1982, § 10.20.010)  
Sec. 36.06.020. - One-way streets designated. 
A.  In accordance with section 36.06.010 and when properly signed, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following described alley: 
1.  All that part of the dedicated alley between Main Street and Babcock Street from the east right-of-way line of Ninth Avenue to the west right-of-way line of Eighth Avenue. 
(Code 1982, § 10.20.020; Ord. No. 1210, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1231, 1987)  
ARTICLE 7. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 36.07.010. - General rule. 
A.  Every person operating or driving a vehicle of any character on a public street or roadway in the city limits shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner, and at a rate of speed no greater or less than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point and time of operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, condition of brakes, width of vehicle, grade, and width of street or roadway, condition of surface, freedom of obstruction to view ahead, and all other conditions then existing, and so as not to unduly endanger the life, limb, property, or other rights of any person entitled to the use of the street or roadway. 
1.  The prima facie speed limits set forth herein may be altered upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that finds that any prima facie speed set forth in this article is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street or highway within the city's jurisdiction. Such investigation shall be conducted by the director of public works, in consultation with the chief of police, and upon concurrence with the recommendation of the director of public works, the city commission shall adopt a resolution to determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit which shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersections or other place or part of the street or highway. Upon adoption of such a resolution, the resolution shall be posted in the office of the city clerk and in such other locations as may be designated by the city clerk. 
2.  It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations set out in this article or in subsequent commission resolutions which may be adopted from time to time as set out in subsection 1 of this section when such speed limits are properly posted. In every charge of violation of this article or subsequent commission resolution, the complaint shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and the speed applicable at the time and place of the alleged violation, as posted. 
3.  The director of public works, together with the chief of police and the city engineer, are hereby authorized to establish temporary speed zones, including school or park zones, after conducting a preliminary visual and engineering review of any proposed street, school or park location, which may require a temporary designation. Such temporary designation, when properly signed, shall be effective at all times until a complete traffic and engineering study is completed or until the city commission makes an alternate determination. 
(Code 1982, § 10.24.010; Ord. No. 1758, § 1(10.24.010), 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 36.07.020. - Specific speed restriction areas. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of section 36.07.010, and except in those instances where a lower speed is specified in this article, it shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following, except in any case when such speed would be unsafe due to presently existing conditions: 
1.  General limit. The speed limit is 25 miles an hour on all streets within the city limits unless otherwise posted. 
2.  Maximum speed. The maximum speed limit is 40 miles an hour on any street within the city limits, unless otherwise posted and as excepted by subsection 3 of this section. 
3.  Highways. There are various highways within the city limits of the city over which the state transportation commission has authority to establish speed limits. These speed limits are posted by the state department of transportation as authorized in MCA 61-8-310. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at a speed less than 15 miles an hour on any through or arterial highway. 
4.  Intersections. Speed limits at intersections are 15 miles per hour when: 
a.  Making a right or left hand turn at any intersection of streets; 
b.  Approaching within 50 feet of any intersection of streets when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when, at any time during the last 50 feet of the approach to such intersection, the driver does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the streets entering such intersection for a distance of 200 feet from such intersection; and 
c.  At any uncontrolled intersection. 
5.  Graduated speed zones. There are created in the city graduated speed zones, the limits of which are more particularly described in section 36.07.050, wherein it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than the speed stipulated in said section. As provided in section 36.07.010.A.1, graduated speed zones may be established by the city commission by commission resolution. 
6.  Railway grade crossings. Speed limit is 15 miles an hour when approaching within 15 feet of a grade crossing of any railway when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last 200 feet of the driver's approach to such crossing, the driver does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such railway crossing and of any traffic on such railway crossing, and of any traffic on such railway for a distance of 400 feet in each direction from such crossing. 
7.  School speed zones. There are created in the city school speed zones, the limits of which are more particularly described in section 36.07.030, wherein it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than the speed established in said section between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days or parts of days when school is in session. 
8.  Public park speed zones. There are created in the city, park speed zones, the limits of which are more particularly described in section 36.07.040, wherein it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than the speed established in said section, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., on streets immediately adjacent to public parks, when signs are posted giving notice thereof. 
9.  Curves, grades, alleys and in cemetery. Speed limit is 15 miles an hour when traversing or going around curves, or traversing a grade upon a street when the driver's view is obstructed within a distance of 100 feet along such street or highway in the direction in which the driver is proceeding, in all alleys within the city, and within the Sunset Hills Cemetery. 
(Code 1982, § 10.24.020; Ord. No. 1758, § 2(10.24.020), 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 36.07.030. - School speed zones designated. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of section 36.07.020.A.5, it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than that designated below or as designed by a commission resolution pursuant to section 36.07.010.A.1, when such speed limit is properly posted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days or parts of days when school is in session, on the streets or parts of streets specified in the following school speed zones: 
1.  Bozeman Senior High School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of North Eleventh Avenue between West Main Street and a line 300 feet south of the south line of Durston Road; and all that part of West Villard Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of North Eleventh Avenue and the east line of North Eleventh Avenue; 
2.  Hawthorne School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of East Lamme Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of North Church Avenue and a line 150 feet west of the west line of North Rouse Avenue; all that part of East Mendenhall Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of North Church Avenue and a line 150 feet west of the west line of North Rouse Avenue; all that part of North Church Avenue between a line 150 feet south of the south line of East Mendenhall Street and a line 150 feet north of the north line of East Lamme Street; 
3.  Irving School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of South Eighth Avenue between a line 150 feet south of the south line of West Alderson Street and a line 150 feet north of the north line of West Dickerson Street; all that part of South Ninth Avenue between a line 150 feet south of the south line of West Alderson Street and a line 150 feet north of the north line of West Dickerson Street; all that part of West Alderson Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of South Eighth Avenue and a line 150 feet west of the west line of South Ninth Avenue; all that part of West Dickerson Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of South Eighth Avenue and a line 150 feet west of the west line of South Ninth Avenue; 
4.  Longfellow School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of Tracy Avenue between a line 20 feet south of the south line of East Story Street to a line 320 feet north of the north line of East College Street; all that part of East Dickerson Street between the west line of South Tracy Avenue and a line 100 feet west of the west line of East Tracy Avenue; all that part of East Story Street 100 feet east of the east curbline of East Tracy Avenue; 
5.  Whittier School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of West Peach Street between a line 150 feet east of the east line of North Fifth Avenue and a line 150 feet west of the west line of North Sixth Avenue; all that part of Sixth Avenue between the north line of West Peach Street and a line 200 feet north of the north line of West Villard Street; all that part of North Fifth Avenue between a line 150 feet north of the north line of West Peach Street and a line 200 feet north of the north line of West Villard Street; all that part of West Short Street between a line 150 feet west of the west line of North Sixth Avenue and a line 150 feet east of the east line of North Fifth Avenue; all that part of the alley adjacent to and parallel to the south line of the Whittier School grounds in Block 4 of the Violett Addition; 
6.  Willson School/Bridger Alternative High School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of South Third Avenue between the south line of West Main Street and the north line of West Babcock Street; 
7.  Emily Dickinson School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of Annie Street between North 25th Avenue and a line 275 feet west of the east boundary of Brentwood Avenue; all that part of North 25th Avenue between Rogers Way and the north property line of the school; 
8.  Morning Star School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of Arnold Street between the west line of Westridge Drive to the west line of the school property; 
9.  Sacagawea Middle School speed zone. 
a.  Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of Cambridge Drive from the west line of South Third Avenue to the west line of the school property; 
b.  Speed limit is 25 miles per hour on all that part of South Third Avenue from 200 feet north of Cambridge Drive to 200 feet south of Dartmouth Drive during days and times of day so noted on the changeable speed limit signs installed on South Third Avenue; 
10.  Chief Joseph Middle School speed zone. Speed limit is 15 miles per hour on: All that part of Kimberwicke Street between the west line of Ferguson Avenue and a line 300 feet east of Arabian Avenue; and all that part of Ferguson Avenue between the south line of Kimberwicke Street and the north line of Cattail Street; 
11.  Hyalite School Speed Zone. Speed limit is 20 miles per hour on: All that part of West Babcock Street from 150 feet east of Sheridan Place to 150 feet west of Yellowstone Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 1758, § 5(10.24.030), 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 36.07.040. - Public park speed zones. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of section 36.07.020.A.8, or any applicable subsequent commission resolution, pursuant to section 36.07.010.A.3, it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour unless otherwise specifically designated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on the streets or parts of streets immediately adjacent to the applicable public parks, as specified in the following public parks speed zones: 
1.  Aasheim Fields Park speed zone. All that part of Fowler Avenue from the south line of West Babcock Street to the southern boundary of Aasheim Fields Park. 
2.  Beall Park speed zone. All that part of East Villard Street from the west line of North Black Avenue to the east line of North Bozeman Avenue; all that part of North Bozeman Avenue from the south line of East Villard Street to the north line of East Short Street; all that part of East Short Street from the east line of North Bozeman Avenue to the west line of North Black Avenue; all that part of North Black Avenue from the north line of East Short Street to the south line of East Villard Street. 
3.  Bogert Park speed zone. On South Church Avenue from the north line of Bogert Park to a point approximately 100 feet south of Bogert Place. 
4.  Centennial Park speed zone. All that part of North Tracy Avenue from Cottonwood Street to the north line of Centennial Park; all that part of Cottonwood Street from the east line of North Tracy Avenue to the west line of North Grand Avenue; all that part of North Grand Avenue from the south line of Cottonwood Street to the north line of Centennial Park. 
5.  Christie Fields Park speed zone. All that part of East Mason Street from the west line of South Black Avenue to the east line of South Rouse Avenue; all that part of South Rouse Avenue from the south line of East Mason Street to the north line of Christie Field Park; all that part of South Black Avenue from the south line of East Mason Street to the north line of Christie Field Park. 
6.  Cooper Park speed zone. All that part of South Eighth Avenue from a line 150 north of West Dickerson Street to the south line of West Koch Street. 
7.  Farmall Street Park speed zone. All that part of Farmall Street from the west line of Springbrook Avenue to the east line of Durham Avenue; all that part of Durham Avenue from the south line of Farmall Street to the north boundary of Farmall Street Park, which is approximately 500 feet north of the south line of Farmall Street; all that part of Springbrook Avenue from the south line of Farmall Street to the north line of Farmall Street Park; which is approximately 500 feet north of the south line of Farmall Street. 
8.  Kirk Park speed zone. All that part of West Beall Street from the east line of North 20th Avenue to the west line of Kirk Park; all that part of North 20th Avenue from a point approximately 300 feet north of the north line of West Main Street to the north line of West Beall Street. 
9.  Lindley Park speed zone. All that part of Buttonwood Avenue from the south line of East Main Street to the entrance to the Sunset Hills Cemetery; all that part of Cypress Avenue from the south line of East Main Street to the south line of East Curtiss Street. 
10.  Meyers Park speed zone. All that part of Hanley Avenue from the north line of West Babcock Street to the south line of Brenden Street; all that part of Clifden Drive from the north line of West Babcock Street to the south line of Brisbin Street; all that part of Cascade Street between the west line of Hanley Avenue to the east line of Clifden Drive. 
11.  Oak Springs Subdivision Park speed zone. All that part of Jardine Avenue from the north line of Annie Street to its intersection with Palm Street; all that section of Palm Street from its intersection with Jardine Avenue to the east line of Yellowstone Avenue; all that part of Yellowstone Avenue from the south line of Palm Street to the north line of Renova Lane; all that part of Renova Lane from the east line of Yellowstone Avenue to the west line of Oak Springs Subdivision Park. 
12.  Westlake BMX Park speed zone. All that part of North Fifth Avenue from a line 150 feet north of Peach Street to the south line of Tamarack Street. 
(Ord. No. 1758, § 7(10.24.040), 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 36.07.050. - Graduated speed zones designated. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of section 36.07.020.A.5, or any applicable subsequent commission resolution, it is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to drive at a speed greater than designated below upon the following streets: 
1.  West Babcock Street. The speed limit is 30 miles per hour on all that part of West Babcock Street from the west line of West Main Street to the east line of Cottonwood Road. 
2.  Baxter Lane. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of North Seventh Avenue to a point approximately 1,000 feet west of North Seventh Avenue. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from a point approximately 1,000 feet west of North Seventh Avenue to a point approximately 1,200 east of North Nineteenth Avenue. 
c.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from a point approximately 1,200 feet east of North Nineteenth Avenue to the east line of North Nineteenth Avenue. 
d.  The speed limit is 30 miles per hour from the western line of North Nineteenth Avenue to a point approximately 1,100 feet west of North Nineteenth Avenue. 
e.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from a point approximately 1,100 feet west of North Nineteenth Avenue to a point approximately 1175 feet east of Gallatin Green Boulevard. 
f.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from a point approximately 550 feet east of Flanders Mill Road west to the city limits. 
3.  Bozeman Trail Road. The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from the west line of Haggerty Lane to the north line of Kagy Boulevard. 
4.  Bridger Drive/Bridger Canyon Road. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the junction of Bridger Drive/Bridger Canyon Road with North Rouse Avenue to a point approximately 550 feet east of Story Mill Road. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from a point approximately 550 feet east of Story Mill Road to a point approximately 600 feet east of Creekwood Drive. 
c.  The speed limit is 60 miles per hour from a point approximately 600 feet east of Creekwood Drive east to the city limits. 
5.  West College Street. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of South Nineteen Avenue to the south line of West Main Street. 
6.  Cottonwood Road. 
a.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from Durston Road south to a point approximately 100 feet north of Fallon Street. 
b.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from a point approximately 100 feet north of Fallon Street to Huffine Lane. 
c.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from Huffine Lane south to the city limits. 
7.  Davis Lane. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of West Oak Street to the south line of East Valley Center Road. 
8.  Durston Road. 
a.  The speed limit is 30 miles per hour from the west line of North 7th Avenue to the east line of Ferguson Avenue. (As this is an Urban route, this speed limit will not be posted (signed) until the Montana Transportation Commission approves the change.) 
b.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of Ferguson Avenue west to the city limits. 
c.  The speed limit is 20 miles per hour during certain hours of school days as signed, from 1250 feet east of North 25th Avenue to 250 feet west of North 25th Avenue. 
9.  Ferguson Avenue. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of Huffine Lane to the south line of Durston Road. 
10.  Fowler Avenue. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the south line of Huffine Lane to the north line of Garfield Street. 
11.  East Frontage Road. 
a.  The speed limit is 60 miles per hour from the junction of East Frontage Road with North Seventh Avenue, northwest to the city limits. 
b.  The speed limit is 50 miles per hour from the junction of East Frontage Road with East Main Street, approximately 350 feet east of Haggerty Lane, to a point approximately 100 feet east of Hospitality Way. 
c.  The speed limit is 60 miles per hour from a point approximately 100 feet east of Hospitality Way east to the city limits. 
12.  Garfield Street. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of South Nineteenth Avenue to the south line of Fowler Avenue. 
13.  Griffin Drive. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the east line of North Seventh Avenue to the west line of North Rouse Avenue. 
14.  Haggerty Lane. 
a.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from the west line of Bozeman Trail Road to Ellis Street. 
b.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from Ellis Street northwesterly a distance of approximately 675 feet. 
15.  Highland Boulevard. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of New Hyalite View Subdivision to a point approximately 225 feet south of East Curtiss Street. 
16.  Huffine Lane. 
a.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from the junction of Huffine Lane with West Main Street to a point approximately 260 feet west of Ferguson Avenue. 
b.  The speed limit is 55 miles per hour from a point approximately 260 feet west of Ferguson Avenue to a point approximately 850 feet west of Cottonwood Road. 
c.  The speed limit is 65 miles per hour from a point approximately 1850 feet west of Cottonwood Road west to the city limits. 
17.  Kagy Boulevard. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the east line of South Nineteenth Avenue to a point approximately 875 feet east of Highland Boulevard. 
b.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from a point approximately 875 feet east of Highland Boulevard to Bozeman Trail Road. 
18.  East Main Street. The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from a point approximately 300 feet east of Cypress Avenue to the junction of East Main Street with East Frontage Road, approximately 350 feet east of Haggerty Lane. 
19.  West Main Street. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from a point approximately 320 feet east of North Fifteenth Avenue to the west line of South 23rd Avenue. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from the west line of South 23rd Avenue to the junction of West Main Street with Huffine Lane. 
20.  Manley Road. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of Griffin Drive north to the city limits. 
21.  McIllhattan Road. The speed limit is 30 miles per hour from the west line of Story Mill Road northwest to the city limits. 
22.  North Nineteenth Avenue. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the south line of Durston Road to approximately 500 feet north of Durston Road. 
b.  The speed limit is 40 miles per hour from a point approximately 500 feet north of the south line of Durston Road to Springhill Road. 
23.  South Nineteeth Avenue. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of West Main Street to the south line of West College Street. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from the south line of West College Street to the north line of Kagy Boulevard. 
c.  The speed limit for southbound traffic south of Kagy Boulevard is: 
(1)  45 miles per hour from Kagy Boulevard to a point approximately 330 feet south of Kagy Boulevard. 
(2)  60 miles per hour from a point approximately 330 feet south of Kagy Boulevard south to the city limits. 
d.  The speed limit for northbound traffic south of Kagy Boulevard is: 
(1)  45 miles per hour from Kagy Boulevard to a point approximately 875 feet south of Kagy Boulevard. 
(2)  60 miles per hour from a point approximately 1875 feet south of Kagy Boulevard south to the city limits. 
24.  Oak Street. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of North Rouse Avenue to the east line of North Eleventh Avenue. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from the east line of North Eleventh Avenue to the east line of North Nineteenth Avenue. 
c.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the west line of North Nineteenth Avenue to the west line of New Holland Drive. 
25.  North Rouse Avenue. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from a point approximately 430 feet north of East Oak Street to the junction of North Rouse Avenue with Bridger Drive. 
26.  North Seventh Avenue. 
a.  The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from a point approximately 380 feet north of Durston Road to a point approximately 610 feet north of West Oak Street. 
b.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from a point approximately 610 feet north of West Oak Street to a point approximately 1,720 feet north of Griffin Drive. 
c.  The speed limit is 60 miles per hour from a point approximately 1,720 feet north of Griffin Drive to the junction of North Seventh Avenue with East Frontage Road. 
27.  Simmental Way. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of Baxter Lane to the terminus of Simmental Way. 
28.  Springhill Road. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from East Frontage Road north to the city limits. 
29.  Story Mill Road. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the north line of Bridger Drive north to the city limits. 
30.  South Third Avenue. The speed limit is 35 miles per hour from the south line of Graf Street to the south side of Wagonwheel Road. 
31.  East Valley Center Road. 
a.  The speed limit is 45 miles per hour from North Nineteenth Avenue west a distance of approximately 2,830 feet. 
b.  The speed limit is 50 miles per hour from a point approximately 2,830 feet west of North Nineteenth Avenue to a point approximately 290 feet east of North 27th Avenue. 
c.  The speed limit is 60 miles per hour from a point approximately 290 feet east of North 27th Avenue west to the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1758, § 8(10.24.050), 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 36.07.060. - Enforcement; penalty for violation. 
A.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this article. 
B.  Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not less than $50.00 or more than $250.00, according to the following schedule: 
A speed of 0-10 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . $50.00 
A speed of 11-20 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $70.00 
A speed of 21-30 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $90.00 
A speed over 30 mph of the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . . .$100.00 
School Zones and Park Zones 
A speed of 0-10 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $75.00 
A speed of 11-20 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . .$95.00 
A speed over 20 mph of the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . . $125.00 
C.  For a second or subsequent violation of a speed regulation within a three year period, the fine shall be not less than $70.00 or more than $250.00, according to the following schedule: 
A speed of 0-10 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . $70.00 
A speed of 11-20 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $100.00 
A speed of 21-30 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $130.00 
A speed over 30 mph of the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . . .$160.00 
School Zones and Park Zones 
A speed of 0-10 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . $85.00 
A speed of 11-20 mph over the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . $115.00 
A speed over 20 mph of the posted speed limit. . . . . . . . . . . . $140.00 
(Ord. No. 1758, § 9(10.24.060), 4-20-2009)  
ARTICLE 8. - STOP INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 36.08.010. - Determination and designation. 
The director of public works is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists and to determine whether vehicles should stop at one or more entrances to any intersection. Should the director determine, upon the basis of traffic engineering principals and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this article a stop is necessary, then, the director has the authority to place stop signs at all intersections deemed necessary. In addition to the foregoing, the city commission may, by passing an ordinance or a resolution, require a stop at any intersection they deem necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 10.28.010; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 1-14-2002)  
Sec. 36.08.020. - Intersections with arterial and through streets. 
The director of public works is authorized to determine and designate what streets with appropriate signage within the corporate city limits of the city will be designated through or arterial streets. Whenever possible, such determination should be based upon traffic engineering principles and investigations. 
(Code 1982, § 10.28.030; Ord. No. 1553, § 2, 1-14-2002)  
ARTICLE 9. - TRUCK TRAFFIC 
 
Sec. 36.09.010. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Axle" means a transverse beam which is the common axis of rotation of one or more wheels and which, to receive credit for allowable total gross loading, must be capable of continuously transmitting a proportionate share of the total gross load to the roadway when the axle is in operation. 
2.  "Deviating truck" means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
3.  "Local delivery" means a delivery of goods or other property to a warehouse, carrier or other person in the ordinary course of business to a specific location upon a specific street within the city limits. 
4.  "Trailer" means every vehicle, with or without motor power, designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this article, the term includes only trailers with three or more axles and designed to carry property wholly on its own structure which must be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
5.  "Truck" means any vehicle designed, used, maintained or operated for the primarily for the transportation of personal property and, for the purposes of this article, has three or more axles. The term "truck" as used in this article will also include any vehicle pulling a trailer as defined herein. 
6.  "Through truck traffic" means any truck traffic which does not have a destination point on the street upon which it is traveling. 
7.  "Truck route" means a way over certain streets, as designated by ordinance, over and along which trucks coming into, going out of and traveling within the city must operate. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.010), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.020. - Application of article. 
This article will apply to all trucks as defined herein or any vehicle pulling trailers as defined. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.020), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.030. - Traffic within the city. 
A.  Through truck traffic is prohibited upon any street which is not a designated truck route except: 
1.  All trucks on a trip originating in the city will proceed on the shortest route possible to a street upon an established truck route. 
2.  All trucks entering the city will proceed over an established truck route and will deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck must travel to its next destination or the nearest truck route, whichever is closest, by the shortest route possible. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.030), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.040. - Exceptions. 
A.  This article does not prohibit the operation of: 
1.  Trucks where necessary to conduct business at a point of destination. 
2.  Emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
3.  Trucks upon any detour properly established by the city. 
4.  School buses being driven to either pick up or deliver students to the school or their homes. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.040), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.050. - Routes established. 
The commission will designated truck routes and alternate truck routes by separate resolution. Additionally, the commission, in its discretion, may prohibit truck traffic on specific streets. The director of public works will ensure the proper signing of all routes, including but not limited to any streets which are prohibited to truck traffic, for local delivery only and truck routes. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.050), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.060. - Maps indicating routes. 
The city clerk will keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted. All maps will be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.060), 1-14-2001)  
Sec. 36.09.070. - Enforcement. 
Violations of this article will be punishable as set forth in section 36.02.030. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 3(10.42.080), 1-14-2001)  
ARTICLE 10. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 36.10.010. - Regulations applicable; responsibility of parents and guardians. 
A.  It is a violation of this article for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
B.  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
C.  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.010)  
Sec. 36.10.020. - Traffic laws applicable. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles, or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter, and except as to those provisions of laws which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.090)  
Sec. 36.10.030. - Obedience to traffic control devices required. 
A.  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
B.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.100)  
Sec. 36.10.040. - Operation restrictions. 
A.  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
B.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.110)  
Sec. 36.10.050. - Riding on streets, roadways and bicycle paths; restrictions. 
A.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a street or roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
B.  Persons riding bicycles upon a street or roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
C.  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a street or roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the street or roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.120)  
Sec. 36.10.060. - Speed limits. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.130)  
Sec. 36.10.070. - Yield right-of-way upon crossing sidewalk or entering roadway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.140)  
Sec. 36.10.080. - Clinging to vehicles prohibited. 
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle upon a street or roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.150)  
Sec. 36.10.090. - Carrying articles; limitation. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.160)  
Sec. 36.10.100. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building, or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. No person shall park a bicycle against a glass window at any time. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.170)  
Sec. 36.10.110. - Riding on sidewalks; restrictions. 
A.  No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk within the main business district. 
B.  No person over the age of 15 years shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk within the city. 
C.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.180)  
Sec. 36.10.120. - Brakes and lights. 
A.  Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 200 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible form a distance of 300 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
B.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.190)  
Sec. 36.10.130. - Violation; penalty; violations by minors. 
Every person, firm or corporation convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300.00 or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except in the case of violation by minors under the age of 18 years. In case of violation by any minor, or by any other person, a police officer is given the authority and power to remove and detain the license plate of such person's bicycle for a period not exceeding 30 days, or to take possession of and impound such person's bicycle so operated by the violator at the time of such violation, for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by any combination thereof, or such minor may be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state governing juvenile delinquents. 
(Code 1982, § 10.48.200)  
ARTICLE 11. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 36.11.010. - Pedestrians subject to restrictions and traffic control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10.52.010)  
Sec. 36.11.020. - Crosswalks. 
A.  Pedestrian right-of-way. 
1.  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that is impossible for the driver to yield. 
2.  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
B.  Method of use. Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.52.020, 10.52.030)  
Sec. 36.11.030. - Crossing roadways. 
A.  Shortest route required. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
B.  Yielding right-of-way required when. 
1.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
2.  The rules in subsection B.1 of this section have no application under the conditions stated in subsection C of this section when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
C.  Locations where prohibited. 
1.  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
2.  No pedestrians shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in Parts I and II of the business district, or on any through or arterial street or avenue. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10.52.040—10.52.060)  
Sec. 36.11.040. - Walking along roadways; conditions; soliciting rides prohibited. 
A.  Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
B.  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
C.  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 10.52.070)  
Sec. 36.11.050. - Driver precautions for pedestrian safety. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1982, § 10.52.080)  
ARTICLE 12. - TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AND VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 36.12.010. - Report accidents immediately. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $100.00 or more, shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. 
(Code 1982, § 10.56.010)  
Sec. 36.12.020. - Duty to stop in event of accident; penalty for violation. 
A.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, and shall give such driver's name and address and registration number of such driver's vehicle to the person struck or to the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with, or other persons owning or in possession of other property damaged, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. 
B.  Every person convicted under this section upon a charge of failure to stop after an accident resulting in injury or death of any person shall be punished by imprisonment in the city jail for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days, or by a fine of not exceeding $300.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted under this section upon a charge of failure to stop after an accident resulting in damage to property shall be punished by imprisonment in the city jail for not less than five days and not more than 30 days, or by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1982, § 10.56.020)  
Sec. 36.12.030. - Traffic accident reports; duties of police department. 
A.  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic-accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. 
B.  The police department shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under any ordinance of the city, but all such accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the police department and no such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making such report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to prove a compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report. 
(Code 1982, § 10.56.030; Ord. No. 1537, § 21, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 5, 6-6-2005)  
Sec. 36.12.040. - Traffic violations; duties of police department. 
A.  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period, and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
B.  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public, showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(Code 1982, § 10.56.040; Ord. No. 1537, § 22, 5-29-2001; Ord. No. 1640, § 6, 6-6-2005)  
ARTICLE 13. - CRASH INVESTIGATORS 
 
Sec. 36.13.010. - Crash investigator appointment and duties. 
A.  Appointment. The chief of police may appoint crash investigators. A crash investigator is a public servant as defined pursuant to MCA 45-2-101 and 45-7-302. 
B.  Duties. A crash investigator's duties include investigating vehicle crashes, traffic violations, issuing citations supported by probable cause, assisting in the prosecution of vehicle crashes or traffic violations, and other related duties as required by the Bozeman Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1940 , § 2, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 36.13.020. - Temporary investigative authority. 
A.  A duly appointed crash investigator may direct or order that any person or property temporarily remain when the person or property is observed in circumstances that create a particularized suspicion that the person or property has been involved in a vehicle crash, or the person has committed a traffic violation related to a vehicle crash. 
B.  The purpose of ordering or directing that a person or property temporarily remain must be to obtain or verify an account of a vehicle crash, to determine whether a traffic violation has occurred, or to otherwise investigate either a vehicle crash or traffic violation. 
C.  The crash investigator shall as promptly as possible inform the person or possessor of property the reason for remaining unless emergency circumstances exist, or the crash investigator has reasonable cause to fear for the crash investigator's own safety or for the public's safety. 
D.  A crash investigator who has lawfully directed or ordered that a person temporarily remain may request the person's name, present address, an explanation of the person's actions, and, if the person is the driver of a vehicle, demand the person's driver's license, the vehicle's registration, and proof of insurance. 
E.  An order or direction to temporarily remain may not last longer than is necessary to effectuate the purpose of the order or direction. 
(Ord. No. 1940 , § 2, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 36.13.030. - Authority to issue citations. 
If a crash investigator determines probable cause exists that a person has committed a traffic violation, the crash investigator may issue the person a notice to appear and complaint or notice of municipal infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1940 , § 2, 4-18-2016)  
Chapter 38 - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1978 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 4, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 38 and enacted a new Ch. 38 as set out herein. The former Ch. 38 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation of the former Ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 38.100 - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38.100.010. - Citation. 
This chapter is known and may be cited as the Unified Development Code of the City of Bozeman, except when cited herein, where it is referred to as "this chapter."  
Sec. 38.100.020. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted by authority of MCA 76-2-301 et seq., MCA 76-3-101 et seq., and MCA 7-3-701 et seq. Additional city authority is granted by various other sections of state law and the authority granted by those sections is incorporated as if set forth herein.  
Sec. 38.100.030. - Jurisdictional area and application. 
These regulations govern the division, development and use of land within the city limits and lands proposed for annexation to the city. These regulations apply to all private and public lands, all uses thereon, and all structures and buildings over which the city has jurisdiction under the constitution and laws of the state or pursuant to the city's powers.  
Sec. 38.100.040. - Intent and purpose of chapter. 
A.  The intent of this unified development chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare; to recognize and balance the various rights and responsibilities relating to land ownership, use, and development identified in the United States and State of Montana constitutions, and statutory and common law; to implement the city's adopted growth policy; and to meet the requirements of state law. 
B.  It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: preventing the creation of private or public nuisances caused by noncompliance with the standards and procedures of this chapter; regulating the subdivision, development and use of land; preventing the overcrowding of land; lessening congestion in the streets and highways; being in accord with the growth policy; providing adequate light, air, water supply, sewage disposal, parks and recreation areas, ingress and egress, and other public improvements; requiring development in harmony with the natural environment; promoting preservation of open space; promoting development approaches that minimize costs to local citizens and that promote the effective and efficient provision of public services; securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; protecting the rights of property owners'; requiring uniform monumentation of land subdivisions and transferring interests in real property by reference to a plat or certificate of survey (MCA 76-3-102). 
It is further the purpose of these regulations to: consider the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, conserving the value of buildings, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the jurisdictional area (MCA 76-2-304). 
C.  Further, to support the purposes of MCA 76-2-304 and 76-3-102, these regulations are intended to promote and to provide for the: 
1.  Orderly development of the city; 
2.  Coordination of streets within subdivided land with other streets and roads, both existing and planned; 
3.  Dedication of land for streets and roadways and for public utility easements; 
4.  Improvement of streets; 
5.  Adequate open spaces for travel, light, air and recreation; 
6.  Adequate transportation, water, drainage and sanitary facilities; 
7.  Minimization of unnecessary congestion; 
8.  Avoidance of unnecessary environmental degradation; 
9.  Encouragement of subdivision development in harmony with the natural environment; 
10.  Avoidance of danger or injury to health, safety or general welfare by reason of natural hazard or the lack of water, sewer, drainage, access, transportation or other public services; 
11.  Avoidance of excessive expenditure of public funds for the provision of public services; 
12.  Manner and form of making and filing of plats for subdivided lands; 
13.  Administration of these regulations, by defining the powers and the duties of approving authorities, including procedures for the review and approval of all subdivision plats; 
14.  Division of the city into districts with uniformly applicable standards for development within each district; 
15.  Standards for the development and use of land; 
16.  Procedures for the review and approval for the development and use of land; and 
17.  Establishment of all other requirements necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter. 
D.  Pursuant to MCA 76-2-304, 76-1-605 and 76-1-606, these regulations are also intended to implement the goals and objectives of the city's adopted growth policy. This chapter has been evaluated for compliance with the growth policy as part of the process to adopt this chapter, and has been found to comply with the growth policy.  
Sec. 38.100.050. - Interpretation as minimum requirements. 
A.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the community. In some instances the public interest will be best served when such minimums are exceeded. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules or regulations, or wherever there is an internal conflict within this chapter, the most restrictive requirements, or those imposing the higher standards, will govern. 
B.  In the case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and the captions or headings for each section, the text controls. 
C.  When interpreting the meaning of this chapter, subsections of the chapter must be construed in a manner that will give effect to them all as the chapter derives its meaning from the entire body of text taken together. 
D.  These regulations apply uniformly within each zoning district to each class or kind of structure, land or development as set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Graphics are provided to enable understanding of the adopted text. In the event of a conflict between the text and graphic, the text must control.  
Sec. 38.100.060. - Donations or grants to public considered a grant to donee. 
Every donation or grant to the public or to any person, society or corporation marked or noted on a plat or plan is to be considered a grant to the donee.  
Sec. 38.100.070. - Conditions of approval. 
A.  Regulation of the subdivision and development of land, and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivided or developed, or a use undertaken, is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the city. Persons undertaking the subdivision, development or use of land have the duty of complying with reasonable conditions for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economic development of the city, and to the safety and general welfare of the future lot owners and of the community at large. Such conditions may require compliance with more than the minimum standards established by this chapter. 
B.  Conditions of approval may not be added after final action to grant preliminary approval to a proposed subdivision or other development unless: 
1.  The conditions are necessary to correct inaccurate or incomplete information provided with an application, which error is discovered after the original approval action; and 
2.  The project is not completed within the time period provided in the approval or by this chapter; or 
3.  The requirement is part of an improvements agreement and security for completion of required improvements prior to filing a final plat or other development. 
However, should the owner seek material modifications (e.g., changes to the intent, nature, or scope of a subdivision or development, or necessary improvements) to a previously approved subdivision, development or condition of approval, the entire application must be considered to be again opened for review and additional conditions may be applied. Modifications of conditions of approval must be reviewed through the same process as the original application. Final action includes the resolution of any appeals. The provisions of section 38.240.130.A.5.h may also apply to revisions of conditions for preliminary plats. 
C.  Mandatory compliance with the explicit terms of this chapter does not constitute conditions of approval and is not affected by the limitations of subsection B of this section.  
Sec. 38.100.080. - Compliance with regulations required. 
A.  No land may hereafter be subdivided, used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof may hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, and no development may commence unless it is in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
B.  To the extent reasonable, all city-owned land is subject to applicable regulations of the underlying zoning district.  
Sec. 38.100.090. - Development that lies within multiple jurisdictions. 
If a proposed development lies partly within the city and partly within unincorporated Gallatin County, the proposed development must be submitted to and approved by both the city and the county.  
Sec. 38.100.100. - Private restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to affect any existing private agreement or condition such as a deed restriction or covenant. If any provision of this chapter is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard than any such private restriction, the requirements of this chapter control. Where the provisions of any private restriction are more restrictive or impose higher standards than the provisions of this chapter, the city has no duty to enforce such private restrictions or advise of their existence. The city may enforce a private restriction if the city is a party to such covenant or restriction, if such restriction was required by the city, or if it was relied upon by the city during the land development process in order to meet the requirements of this chapter or another required standard. The city may prohibit private restrictions that violate applicable law. Covenants are subject to the requirements of section 38.220.320.  
Sec. 38.100.110. - Severability. 
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section or other part of these regulations is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction by express inclusion in the decision to be invalid, such judgment will affect only that part held invalid and such decision will not affect, impair or nullify this chapter as a whole or any other part thereof. Insofar as these regulations are more restrictive than any other applicable law, these regulations control, and if any other law is more restrictive, the more restrictive standard takes precedence over a standard set forth in these regulations.  
DIVISION 38.110. - ADOPTED PLANS, STANDARDS AND RESOLUTIONS 
 
Sec. 38.110.010. - Plans, standards and resolutions adopted by reference. 
The following plans and documents (as amended), are hereby adopted by reference as a part of or in support of this chapter: 
A.  Design manual. 
B.  Guidelines for historic preservation and neighborhood conservation overlay district. 
C.  Engineering design standards. 
D.  Water administrative manual. 
E.  Parks administrative manual. 
F.  Parks and recreation master plan. 
G.  Bozeman long range transportation plan. 
H.  MT public works standards. 
I.  Federal wetland delineation manual. 
J.  Application fee resolution. 
K.  Cash-in-lieu of water rights resolution. 
L.  Other similar plans, manuals, guidelines, and standards formally adopted by the city.  
Sec. 38.110.020. - Figures. 
The figures in this chapter are for illustrative purposes only and do not constitute regulatory standards. Figures may be revised, replaced, or added by administrative order issued by the director of community development.  
ARTICLE 2. - PERMITS, LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS AND PROCEDURES  
DIVISION 38.200. - JURISDICTION AND SCOPE OF AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 38.200.010. - Review authority. 
A.  The city commission has the right to review and require revisions to all development proposals subject to this chapter, and delegates that authority in certain circumstances as set forth below. The purpose of this review is to prevent demonstrable adverse impacts of the development upon public safety, health or general welfare, or to provide for its mitigation; to protect public investments in roads, drainage facilities, sewage facilities, water facilities, and other facilities; to conserve the value of adjoining buildings and/or property; to protect the character of the city; to protect the right of use of property; advance the purposes and standards of this chapter and the adopted growth policy; and to ensure that the applicable regulations of the city are upheld. 
1.  The city commission retains to itself under all circumstances the review of the following: 
a.  Subdivisions which do not qualify as a subdivision exemption per article 2 of this chapter; 
b.  Amendments to the text of this chapter or amendment to the zoning map; 
c.  Requests for cash-in-lieu of parkland dedications, except: 
(1)  In the B-3 zone district; or 
(2)  When by resolution the city commission delegates decisions on cash-in-lieu for development for which it would not otherwise be the review authority. 
d.  Extensions of subdivision preliminary plat approvals for periods greater than two years; 
e.  Planned unit development preliminary plans and major amendments to planned unit developments; 
f.  Appeals from administrative interpretations and final project review decisions; 
g.  Approval of park master plans; 
h.  Large scale retail per section 38.360.150; and 
i.  Exceptions to installation of bikeways and boulevard trails per section 38.400.110.E. 
j.  Conditional use permits when no board of adjustment is established; 
k.  More than two deviations or where deviation is for more than 20 percent of standard; 
l.  Amendments to text or zoning map per division 38.260. 
2.  The city commission conducts public hearing for applications under 76-2-402, MCA. 
B.  The community development director must, upon recommendation from the applicable advisory bodies approve, approve with conditions or deny all applications subject to this chapter except those listed below. Decisions of the community development director are subject to the appeal provisions of division 38.250 of this chapter. 
1.  Projects excluded from community development director review: 
a.  Those applications specifically reserved to another approval authority as stated in this section; 
b.  Development of city property which does not conform to all standards of this chapter; 
c.  Any application involving variances from this chapter; 
2.  Exception. The city commission may, by an affirmative, simple majority vote of its members at a regularly scheduled meeting reclaim to itself the final approval of a development application normally subject to the approval of the community development director. The vote must occur prior to the action of the community development director. 
C.  When a board of adjustment has been appointed per section 2.05.2800, the board of adjustment must, upon recommendation from the applicable advisory bodies approve, approve with conditions or deny those applications specifically delegated to it by the city commission. Decisions of the BOA are subject to the appeal provisions of division 38.250 of this chapter. 
1.  Exception. The city commission may, by an affirmative vote of three of its members at a regularly scheduled meeting reclaim to itself the final approval of a development normally subject to the approval of the board of adjustment. The vote must occur prior to the action of the board of adjustment. 
D.  The city engineer must review and upon recommendation from the applicable advisory bodies as needed approve, approve with conditions or deny the following site elements and processes: 
1.  Site access and storm water for reuse and further development per section 38.230.160.B; 
2.  Location of storm water facilities within neighborhood centers per section 38.410.020; 
3.  The placement of private utility easements within public rights-of-way owned or controlled by the city; 
4.  The maximum length of dead end water mains per section 38.410.070; 
5.  The maximum length of service lines per section 38.410.070; 
6.  Exceptions to storm water controls per section 38.410.080; 
7.  All modifications or proposed standards in section 38.400.010 except section 38.400.010.A.1; 
8.  Plans and specifications for public infrastructure and infrastructure to be granted to the public per sections 38.400.060.A and B.1—3; 
9.  Alternate curb return radii per section 38.400.090.C.3; 
10.  Locations and modifications to drive accesses to public streets per sections 38.400.090.G and H; 
11.  Street improvement standards per section 38.400.060; 
12.  Backing into alleys, parking stall aisle and driveway design for surfacing and curbing per section 38.540.020.D, F and J; 
13.  Protection of landscaped area per section 38.550.050.H; 
14.  All actions required of the flood plain administrator per article 6 of this chapter; 
15.  Modifications in required completion time for subdivision improvements per section 38.270.030.B.1; 
16.  The use of a financial guarantee for paving of streets per 38.270.060.B; 
17.  The waiver of required information per section 38.220.080.A.2.i(3); 
18.  Requirement for a traffic impact analysis and determination of its contents per section 38.220.120.A.2.c(5); 
19.  Specifications for paving of streets and parking areas; 
20.  Designation of street classifications for collectors and arterials not shown in the long range transportation plan; and 
21.  Alternate parking angles for surface and structured parking stall configurations listed in Table 38.540.020. All other numeric standards apply. 
E.  The director of public works must review and upon recommendation from the applicable advisory bodies as needed approve, approve with conditions or deny the following development elements and processes: 
1.  Waiver of the requirement to extend water, sewer, and streets to the perimeter of property being developed per section 38.410.070; 
2.  Provision of water rights as authorized in section 38.410.130; 
3.  Subject to section 38.400.060, exceptions to the level of service standards established in section 38.400.060.B.4; 
4.  Payment of cash in-lieu of capital facilities established in section 38.270.070.C; and 
5.  Acceptable alternative sidewalk design or materials per section 38.400.080. 
F.  The director of parks and recreation must determine the classification of trails per section 38.420.110.D. 
G.  As detailed in division 38.200 of this chapter, the city commission authorizes the applicable advisory bodies to review and to make recommendations to the review authority regarding development proposals. Under this section, when advisory boards review and make recommendations to the review authority they act in a quasi-judicial capacity. Recommendations do not constitute votes of approval or denial. 
H.  The city commission or its designated representatives may require the applicant to design the proposed development to reasonably minimize potentially significant adverse impacts identified through the review required by these regulations. The city commission or its designated representatives may not unreasonably restrict a landowner's ability to develop land, but it is recognized that in some instances the unmitigated impacts of a proposed development may be unacceptable and will preclude approval of the development as submitted. Recognizing that the standards of this chapter are minimum requirements and the public health, safety, and general welfare may be best served by exceeding those minimums, the city commission or community development director may require as a condition of approval mitigation exceeding the minimums of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.200.020. - Administration and enforcement; community development director authority. 
A.  The community development director must administer and enforce this chapter unless a specific standard is clearly assigned in section 38.200.010 to another authority. The community development director may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the community development director may supervise and those assistants will have the responsibilities as directed by the community development director. 
B.  The community development director may in the administration of this chapter consult with other persons having expertise in relevant subject areas as in the community development director's opinion is necessary for the review of the proposed development or administration of the chapter. When an authority other than the community development director is assigned responsibility for a particular standard that authority must coordinate with the community development director in administration of that standard. 
C.  If the community development director or other administrator of standards finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, they must notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such administrator may order discontinuance of illegal use of land, illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; may order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or may take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions.  
Sec. 38.200.030. - Enforcement; community development director. 
This chapter is enforced by the community development director and authorized representatives. No development approval, subdivision approval, building permit or business or occupational use license may be issued, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.200.040. - Stop-work order by community development director, building official, city engineer authority. 
Whenever any subdivision, development or building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the community development director will order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person must immediately stop such work until authorized by the community development director to proceed with the work. The building official or city engineer may also issue a stop-work order when building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.200.050. - Permission to enter. 
The city commission, or its designated agents, may conduct such investigations, examinations and site evaluations as they deem necessary to verify the information supplied. The submission of material or a plat for review constitutes a grant of permission to enter the subject property. The grant of permission must continue until all final actions required by the approval process have been completed.  
Sec. 38.200.060. - Inaccurate or incomplete information and waivers. 
A.  The city must review each submitted application for completeness and sufficiency as described in sections 38.240.130 and 38.230.070. 
B.  The final approval body may withdraw approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat or other development approval if they determine that information provided by the applicant, and upon which approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat or other development was based, is inaccurate or incomplete. 
1.  Within 30 calendar days following approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat or other development application, any person or agency that claims that information provided by the applicant is inaccurate or incomplete may submit the information and proof to the community development department. 
2.  The community development department must investigate the claim, the accompanying information and proof, and make a report to the final approval authority within 30 working days after receipt of the information. If the final approval authority is the city commission, the city commission must consider the information and proof, and must make a determination regarding the claim at a regular meeting. Notice of the meeting or presentation of the report must be given to the claimant and the applicant.  
Sec. 38.200.070. - Coordinated reviews. 
When a proposed subdivision, development or use is also proposed to be annexed to the city, the city must coordinate the development review and annexation procedures to minimize duplication of hearings, reports, and other requirements whenever possible. The city commission must also hold joint public hearings on the initial zoning and the annexation whenever possible. Based upon the circumstances of proposed development the city may require sequential review of applications.  
Sec. 38.200.080. - Date of submittal and associated review standards. 
A.  Subdivision. Review and approval or disapproval of a subdivision under these regulations may occur only under those regulations in effect at the time a subdivision application for approval of a preliminary plat is deemed adequate according to section 38.240.130 or for an extension under division 38.240 of this chapter is submitted to the city. 
B.  Nonsubdivision. Review of nonsubdivision applications will be under such regulations as are in effect at the time an application for approval of a preliminary site plan is deemed adequate according to section 38.230.090; except that an interim zoning ordinance adopted according to MCA 76-2-306 applies to a nonsubdivision application without limitation to the date of adequacy of the application until final action has been taken on the application. An applicant may waive, in writing, the shield from changing ordinances established by this section. In the event that such waiver is provided, the nonsubdivision application will be reviewed under the ordinances in effect on the date of the final action on the application.  
Sec. 38.200.090. - Community development director and building official; plan application checking; notice of noncompliance. 
A.  It is the intent of this chapter that the community development director and building official check all development plans and applications for permits for compliance with this chapter both before and during construction. 
B.  If, during this procedure, the community development director and/or the building official deems that the proposed plan or construction does not comply with this chapter, the community development director and/or building official must inform the applicant of the infraction and must stop all construction on the project until such time as the applicant, builder or principal revises such plan to conform to this chapter and/or fulfills the requirements of any mandated review procedure as set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 38.200.100. - Building permit requirements. 
A.  No building or other structure may be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and no land use may be changed without valid permits as prescribed in this division. 
1.  Only minor site surface preparation and normal maintenance is allowed prior to conditional approval by the appropriate review authority and the issuance of a building permit, provided such activity does not include excavation for foundations or the removal of mature, healthy vegetation. Minor site surface preparation means disturbing less than one-half acre, movement of 30 cubic yards or less of material, or a cut or fill of less than cumulative one foot whichever is less. Any excavation and site disturbance must be in conformance with an approved stormwater control plan. No excavation of foundations or setting of forms can commence until final site or sketch plan approval has been granted and until building permits have been issued. Proceeding prior to building permit issuance is at the hazard of the landowner. 
a.  Exception: When construction and funding of public streets are occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, Planned unit development (PUD), the issuance of building permits may be allowed prior to completion of infrastructure improvements, pursuant to the provisions established in division 38.270 of this chapter. 
2.  Building permit. Within the limits of the city, building permits must be obtained as provided by section 10.02.020. 
3.  Based upon an approved sketch, site plan, certificate of appropriateness, conditional use permit or planned unit development (hereinafter referred to as "plan"), and after any appeals have been resolved, a building permit for the site may be requested and may be granted, provided such building permit is granted within one year of plan approval. Prior to lapse of one year, the applicant may seek an extension as allowed in divisions 38.230 and 38.430.  
Sec. 38.200.110. - Permit issuance; conformity with regulations required. 
No permit or license of any type will be issued unless the plans and applications are in conformance with the regulations contained within this chapter. Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official and community development director authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized is a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in this division.  
Sec. 38.200.120. - Permits issued contrary to title deemed void. 
Any authorization, including without limitation subdivision approval, site plan approval or building permit, issued, granted or approved in violation of the provisions of this chapter is null and void and of no effect without the necessity of any proceedings or a revocation or nullification thereof, and any work undertaken or use established pursuant to any such building permit or other authorization is unlawful.  
Sec. 38.200.130. - Expiration of permits. 
Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this chapter will expire by limitation and become null and void in accordance with section 10.02.020.  
Sec. 38.200.140. - Fee schedule. 
A.  The city commission must establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for reviews, permits, appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees for the procedures listed below will be set from time to time by the city commission by resolution. The fees must be available in the office of the community development director and may be altered or amended only by the city commission. 
B.  No subdivision, permit, zone change, site plan, conditional use, special temporary use, planned unit development, deviation or variance may be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor may any action be taken on proceedings before the administrative design review staff, development review committee, the design review board, the zoning commission, the planning board or the city commission until fees have been paid in full.  
Sec. 38.200.150. - Complaints of alleged violations; filing and recording. 
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof must be filed with the community development director. The community development director must record properly such complaint and immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.  
Sec. 38.200.160. - Violation; penalty; assisting or abetting; additional remedies. 
The effective enforcement of adopted standards is necessary to accomplish their intended purpose. The city has a variety of options for the enforcement of this chapter. The community development director must select the option which in their opinion is most suitable to the circumstance and violation. More than one enforcement option may be used to attain compliance with the standards of this chapter when deemed appropriate. 
A.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with the grant of variances or conditional uses or any of the required conditions imposed by the review authority is a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements may upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned or both, either as set forth in state law regarding subdivision and zoning, or in accordance with section 1.01.210, and in addition must pay all costs and expenses involved in the case except as stated in subsection D of this section. 
1.  Each day such violation continues is a separate offense and punishable as such. 
2.  For violations relating to plats each sale, lease or transfer of each separate parcel of land in violation of any provision of these regulations or the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act is a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  The code compliance officer is authorized to issue a notice to appear under the provisions of MCA 46-6-310 to any violator of this chapter. 
C.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
D.  If transfers not in accordance with these regulations or the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act are made, the city attorney may commence an action to enjoin further sales or transfers and compel compliance with all provisions of these regulations. The cost of the action must be imposed against the party not prevailing. 
E.  When a violation has not been corrected by the property owner after written notice from the city, the enforcement officer or community development director may seek approval from the city commission for filing at the county clerk and recorder's office a notice of violation or noncompliance. Such notice serves to advise potential purchasers of existing violations of this chapter or of on-going enforcement actions regarding a property. Such notice will clearly state that the parcel or development on the parcel is in violation of this chapter and that correction of the violation must be made prior to the city approving additional development or redevelopment of the site. The notice must also describe the nature of the violation and applicable citations to the relevant sections of this chapter. 
1.  When such a notice is to be filed the enforcement officer may either: 
a.  Through the office of the city attorney bring an action for civil and/or injunctive relief that requests a court order to record a notice of violation or noncompliance; or 
b.  Schedule a public meeting to be held before the city commission requesting an order from the city commission finding the violation valid and in need of correction, and authorizing the recording of the notice of violation or noncompliance. Notice of such a hearing must be provided as required by division 38.220 of this chapter. 
2.  When a violation has been corrected for which a notice of violation or noncompliance was filed, the city must record a release of noncompliance indicating that the prior violation has been corrected. The property owner is responsible for notifying the community development department in writing of the correction of the violation or noncompliance. Upon receipt of such notification by the property owner, the enforcement officer may conduct an inspection to verify correction prior to the recording of the release. 
F.  The city may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
G.  Violation of this chapter is a municipal infraction and may be punishable by a civil penalty as provided in section 24.02.040, in addition to other remedies of this section except that the court may impose the following minimum civil penalties. 
1.  Each day such violation continues is considered a separate offense and punishable as such. The minimum civil penalty for violation of this chapter by the same person for the same violation within a 12-month period is: 
a.  First citation: $100.00. 
b.  Second citation: $150.00. 
c.  Third and subsequent citations: $200.00. 
d.  The determining factor with respect to the civil penalty is the receipt of service of the citation and not the judgment. 
H.  Nothing herein contained prevents the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
I.  Upon resolution of an identified instance of noncompliance with the standards of this chapter the city may record a document with the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder to give notice of the resolution of the noncompliance.  
DIVISION 38.210. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC), DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB), ADMINISTRATIVE DESIGN REVIEW STAFF (ADR), WETLANDS REVIEW BOARD (WRB), BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA) JURISDICTION AND SCOPE OF AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 38.210.010. - Purpose of DRC, DRB, ADR, WRB, and BOA. 
A.  Purpose. The development review committee (DRC), design review board (DRB), administrative design review staff (ADR) and, if established, wetlands review board (WRB), is to coordinate, expedite and ensure fair and equitable implementation of this chapter. The objective, to be implemented through their procedures and deliberations, is to encourage development quality that will enhance both the natural and built environments, with consideration to present and future property values, and to carry out the purposes of this chapter. All bodies authorized or referenced under this division 38.210 may call upon any city staff or other persons with technical expertise, and may testify before any board, commission or other body upon the subjects for which they have responsibility. 
1.  DRC. The DRC evaluates all proposals subject to the provisions of this chapter. The DRC is the body charged with reviewing items relating to public health and safety. The DRC acts as an advisory body to the review authority established by section 38.200.010 for site plans, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, divisions of land, zone map amendments, annexations and other actions as requested by review authority. 
2.  DRB. The DRB has the duties and responsibilities established by 2.05.3000. 
3.  ADR. The ADR may review development applications subject to design review for zoning amendments, or applications for moving, demolition or any other kind of permit. 
4.  WRB. The WRB, if established, has the duties and responsibilities established by section 2.05.2900. 
5.  BOA. The BOA, if established, has the duties and responsibilities established by section 2.05.2810. 
B.  Development review committee procedures established. To implement this purpose, certain procedures will be adopted to include, but not be limited to, a regularly scheduled weekly or biweekly meeting attended by representatives of each of the city departments charged with development review. Each department is authorized to require the DRC to recommend denial when in their view the project cannot meet the requirements and review criteria of this chapter and acceptable conditions do not exist to cure the identified failings of the project. Recommendations must be set forth in written staff reports or summary reviews prepared by the community development department 
1.  The DRC must at a minimum be composed of the following personnel: city engineer, fire marshal, the streets superintendent, the sanitation superintendent, the water/sewer superintendent, the community development director and the building official, and other such personnel as the community development director deems necessary. 
2.  When applicable, the DRC may solicit the input of non-city agencies and persons including, but not limited to, the county subdivision review officer, the county sanitarian, the county road superintendent, and state or federal agencies, with other individuals to be included as necessary. 
C.  Design review board procedures established. The DRB will be convened as necessary and must follow procedures as set forth in section 2.05.3020. 
D.  Waiver of design review. In the event that the DRB is unable to convene a quorum or does not have the necessary personnel to conduct the reviews required by this chapter, the requirement for review by DRB is waived. Nothing in this section constitutes a waiver of the required review criteria established in divisions 38.340, 38.430, and 38.600 of this chapter. 
E.  Wetlands review board procedures. The WRB will be convened as necessary and must follow procedures as set forth in section 2.05.2920 when a WRB has been established. 
F.  Board of adjustment procedures established. The BOA will be convened as necessary and must follow procedures as set forth in section 2.05.2830 when a BOA has been established.  
DIVISION 38.220. - APPLICATIONS AND NOTICING  
Part 1. - Submittal Materials and Requirements 
 
Sec. 38.220.010. - Submittal materials and requirements. 
All applications must be submitted on official forms prescribed by the community development department. The application must be accompanied by the appropriate fee and development plans showing sufficient information for the approval authority to determine whether the proposed development will meet the development requirements of the city. Supplemental material may be required, depending on the application type. The format, size, and number of submittal materials is established by the director of community development.  
Sec. 38.220.020. - Streambed, streambank and/or wetlands permits. 
A.  The developer must provide the community development department with a copy of all required streambed, streambank or wetlands permits, or written notification from the appropriate agency that a permit is not required, prior to the commencement of any work on the site and/or final plat approval, whichever is sooner. These permits include but are not limited to: 
1.  Montana Stream Protection Act (SPA 124 Permit). Administered by the Habitat Protection Bureau, Fisheries Division, Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks. 
2.  Stormwater discharge general permit. Administered by the water quality bureau, state department of environmental quality. 
3.  Montana Natural Streambed and Land Preservation Act (310 Permit). Administered by the board of supervisors, county conservation district. 
4.  Montana Floodplain and Floodway Management Act (Floodplain Development Permit). Administered by the city engineering department. 
5.  Federal Clean Water Act (404 Permit). Administered by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
6.  Federal Rivers and Harbors Act (Section 10 Permit). Administered by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
7.  Short-term Water Quality Standard for Turbidity (318 Authorization). Administered by state department of environmental quality. 
8.  Montana Land-Use License or Easement on Navigable Waters. Administered by the state department of natural resources and conservation. 
9.  Montana Water Use Act (Water Right Permit and Change Authorization). Administered by the water rights bureau, state department of natural resources and conservation.  
Sec. 38.220.030. - Subdivision pre-application plan. 
A.  The pre-application plan may be a freehand sketch, legibly drawn, showing approximate boundaries, dimensions, areas and distances. The plan may be drawn directly on a print of a topographic survey required for the preliminary plat and must include: 
1.  Sketch map. A sketch map showing: 
a.  The names of adjoining subdivisions and numbers of adjoining certificates of survey, along with adjacent lot and tract lines. 
b.  Location, name, width and owner of existing or proposed streets, roads and easements within the proposed subdivision; existing streets, roads and easements within adjacent subdivisions and tracts; and the name of street or road that provides access from the nearest public street or road to the proposed subdivision. 
c.  Location of all existing structures, including buildings, railroads, power lines towers, and improvements inside and within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision. 
d.  Zoning classification within the proposed subdivision and adjacent to it. The zoning proposed for the subdivision, if a change is contemplated. 
2.  Topographic features. Topographic features of the proposed subdivision and adjacent subdivisions and tracts, including: 
a.  A current U.S. Geological Survey topographic map at the largest scale available with the subdivision clearly outlined. 
b.  Embankments, watercourses, drainage channels, areas of seasonal water ponding, areas within the designated floodway, marsh areas, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, noxious weeds and areas of active faults. Include copies of any permits listed in section 38.220.020 that have been obtained for the project. 
3.  Utilities. The existing and proposed utilities located on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision including: 
a.  Location, size and depth of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains and gas lines. 
b.  Location of fire hydrants, electric lines, telephone lines, sewage and water treatment, and storage facilities. 
4.  Subdivision layout. The proposed layout of the subdivision showing the approximate: 
a.  Subdivision block, tract, and lot boundary lines, with numbers, dimensions, and areas for each block, tract and lot. 
b.  Street location, right-of-way width, and name. 
c.  Easement location, width and purpose. 
d.  Sites to be dedicated or reserved as park, common open space or other public areas, with boundaries, dimensions and areas. 
e.  Sites for commercial centers, churches, schools, industrial areas, multi-household units, manufactured housing community and uses other than single-household residences. 
5.  Development plan. An overall development plan indicating future development of the remainder of the tract, if the tract is to be developed in phases. 
6.  Name and location. A title block indicating the proposed name, quarter-section, section, township, range, principal meridian and county of subdivision. 
7.  Notations. Scale, north arrow, name and addresses of owners and developers, and date of preparation. 
8.  Variances. A list of variance requests which will be submitted with the application for preliminary plat application. 
9.  Waivers. A list of waivers requested from the requirements of section 38.220.060 must be submitted with the pre-application. The DRC is responsible for granting waivers, and the community development department staff must notify the developer in writing of any waivers granted from section 38.220.060 after the pre-application meeting or plan review. 
10.  Parks and recreation facilities. The following information must be provided for all land proposed to meet parkland dedication requirements: 
a.  Park concept plan, including: 
(1)  Site plan for the entire property; and 
(2)  The zoning and ownership for adjacent properties; and 
(3)  The location of any critical lands (wetlands, riparian areas, streams, etc.); and 
(4)  General description of land, including size, terrain, details of location and history, water features, and proposed activities; and 
(5)  Description of trails or other recreational features proposed to connect the proposed park area to other park or open space areas. 
b.  If the applicant intends to request approval of cash-in-lieu, a response to the cash-in-lieu review factors established by resolution of the city commission. 
12.  Affordable housing. Describe how the subdivision proposes to satisfy the requirements of division 38.380. 
13.  Wildlife. Describe key wildlife habitat issues that may be associated with proposed subdivision. Describe how the subdivision will consider fish and wildlife resources in the course of project design. Describe subdivision early planning suggestions from local FWP field biologists at FWP regional offices. This description should consider the following: 
a.  The species of fish and wildlife, including those designated as species of concern, that use all or part of the project planning area (proposed subdivision site plus a one-half-mile radius around it) on a year-round, seasonal, or periodic basis. 
b.  Existing vegetation, aquatic habitats, and wildlife habitats in the project planning area (e.g., water bodies and their associated riparian habitat, big game winter range, native grassland or shrub land habitats, areas used by black or grizzly bears). 
c.  The proposed subdivision's potential impacts on wildlife and wildlife habitat, both during construction and at full build-out, taking any applicable fish and wildlife habitat standards into account. 
14.  Waivers of right to protest. Include copies of or the recorded document numbers of all existing waivers of right to protest special improvement districts or maintenance districts which are applicable to the property proposed to be subdivided. 
15.  Water rights. Describe how the proposed subdivision intends to satisfy section 38.410.130. Provide documentation of all water rights appurtenant to the proposed subdivision; e.g. previous payment-in-lieu of water rights, groundwater certificates, statements of claim, provisional permits, decreed rights, canal or water users association shares etc.  
Sec. 38.220.040. - Subdivision preliminary plat. 
A.  The preliminary plat must be legibly drawn as specified in the application form provided by the community development department. Where accurate information is required, surveying and engineering data must be prepared under the supervision of a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed in the state, as their respective licensing laws allow. The plat submittal must include the following: 
1.  Pre-application information. All information required with the pre-application plan, as outlined in section 38.220.030. 
2.  Subdivision information. Name and location of the subdivision, scale, scale bar, north arrow, date of preparation, lots and blocks (designated by number), the dimensions and area of each lot, and the use of each lot, if other than for single-household. 
3.  Streets, roads and grades. All streets, roads, alleys, avenues, highways and easements; the width of the right-of-way, grades and curvature of each; existing and proposed road and street names; and proposed location of intersections for any subdivision requiring access to arterial or collector streets. 
4.  Adjoining subdivisions. The names of adjoining platted subdivisions and numbers of adjoining certificates of survey. 
5.  Adjoining owners. Names and addresses of record owners of lots and tracts immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision. 
6.  Perimeter survey. An approximate survey of the exterior boundaries of the platted tract with bearings, distances, and curve data indicated outside of the boundary lines. When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or a body of water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse must be given. 
7.  Section corner. The approximate location of all section corners or legal subdivision corners of sections pertinent to the subdivision boundary. 
8.  Phased improvements. If the required improvements are to be completed in phases after the final plat is filed, the approximate area of each phase must be shown on the plat. 
9.  Contours. Ground contours must be provided for the tract according to the following requirements: 
Table 38.220.040 
Where the average slope is: 	Contour intervals must be: 
Under 10 percent 	2 feet (if all lots are over one acre in size, five feet intervals may be used) 
Between 10 and 15 percent 	5 feet 
Greater than 15 percent 	10 feet 
 
10.  Waivers. List of waivers granted from the requirements of section 38.220.060 during the pre-application process must be submitted with the preliminary plat application. 
11.  Request for exemption from department of environmental quality review. If the developer is proposing to request an exemption from the department of environmental quality for infrastructure plan and specification review, the preliminary plat application must include a written request from the developer's professional engineer, licensed in the state, that indicates the intent to request the exemption, and details the extent of water, sewer and stormwater infrastructure that will be completed prior to final plat approval. A detailed preliminary stormwater drainage plan must also be submitted with the written request.  
Sec. 38.220.050. - Preliminary plat supplements required for all subdivisions. 
A.  The following supplemental information must be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
1.  Area map. A map showing all adjacent sections of land, subdivision, certificates of survey, streets and roads. 
2.  Subdivision map. Map of entire subdivision as specified on the application form provided by the community development department. 
3.  Variances. A written statement describing any requested subdivision variance and the facts of hardship upon which the request is based (refer to division 38.250 of this chapter). 
4.  Property owners'. A certified list of adjoining property owners', their mailing addresses and property description, including property owners' across public rights-of-way and/or easements. The names and addresses must also be provided on self-adhesive mailing labels, one set of labels for first minor subdivisions or subdivisions eligible for summary review, and three sets of labels for all other subdivisions. 
5.  Documents and certificates. Draft copy of the following documents, and certificates to be printed on or to accompany the preliminary plat: 
a.  Covenants, restrictions and articles of incorporation for the property owners' association. 
b.  Encroachment permits or a letter indicating intention to issue a permit where new streets, easements, rights-of-way or drive aisles intersect state, county or city highways, streets or roads. 
c.  A letter of approval or preliminary approval from the city where a zoning change is necessary. 
d.  A draft of such other appropriate certificates. 
e.  Provision for maintenance of all streets (including emergency access), parks, and other required improvements if not dedicated to the public, or if private. 
6.  Street profile sheets. Profile sheets for street grades greater than five percent. 
7.  Application and fee. Completed preliminary plat application form, with the original signatures of all owners of record or their authorized representatives, and the required review fee. If an authorized representative signs on behalf of an owner of record, a copy of the authorization must be provided. 
8.  Noxious weed management and revegetation plan. Noxious weeds must be controlled in all developments as directed by the county weed control district (district) in accordance with the Montana County Noxious Weed Control Act (MCA 7-22-21). The developer must have any noxious weeds identified and their location mapped by a person with experience in weed management and knowledgeable in weed identification. A noxious weed management and revegetation plan approved by the district for control of noxious weeds must be submitted with the preliminary plat application. This plan must ensure the control of noxious weeds upon preliminary plat approval and the revegetation of any land disturbed during the construction of subdivision improvements. 
9.  Sanitation information. When the subdivision does not qualify for the certification established in section 38.240.100 the subdivider must provide the information regarding sanitation set forth in MCA 76-3-622.  
Sec. 38.220.060. - Additional subdivision preliminary plat supplements. 
A.  The following list of preliminary plat application supplements must also be provided for all subdivisions unless waived by the development review committee during the pre-application process. The developer must include documentation of any waivers granted by the city after the pre-application meeting or plan review. Additional relevant and reasonable information may be required to adequately assess whether the proposed subdivision complies with this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act. The need for additional information is determined during the pre-application process. 
1.  Surface water. 
a.  Mapping. Locate on a plat overlay or sketch map all surface waters and the delineated floodplain which may affect or be affected by the proposed subdivision including: 
(1)  Natural water systems such as natural streams, creeks, stream/ditches, drainages, waterways, gullies, ravines or washes in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and has a definite channel, bed and banks. 
(2)  Artificial water systems such as canals, ditches, ditch/streams, aqueducts, reservoirs, irrigation or drainage systems. 
b.  Description. 
(1)  Describe all surface waters which may affect or be affected by the proposed subdivision including name, approximate size, present use and time of year when water is present. 
(2)  Describe proximity of proposed construction (such as buildings, sewer systems, streets) to surface waters. 
c.  Water body alteration. Describe any existing or proposed streambank or shoreline alterations or any proposed construction or modification of lake beds, watercourses or irrigation ditches. Provide information on location, extent, type and purpose of alteration. Provide a revised floodplain analysis report, in compliance with article 6 of this chapter, as appropriate. 
d.  Wetlands. If the subdivision contains wetlands, as defined in section 38.700.210 of this chapter, then a delineation of the wetland must be shown on the preliminary and final plats. 
e.  Permits. Include copies of any permits listed in section 38.41.020 that have been obtained for the project. 
2.  Floodplains. A floodplain analysis report must be submitted with the preliminary plat in compliance with article 6 of this chapter. 
3.  Groundwater. 
a.  Depth. Establish the seasonal minimum and maximum depth to the water table, dates on which these depths were determined, and the location and depth of all known aquifers which may be affected by the proposed subdivision. The high water table must be determined from tests taken during the period of major concern as specified in writing by the county environmental health department. Specific locations for test holes may also be determined by the county environmental health department. 
b.  Steps to avoid degradation. Describe any steps necessary to avoid the degradation of groundwater and groundwater recharge areas. 
4.  Geology; soils; slopes. 
a.  Geologic hazards. Identify geologic hazards affecting the proposed subdivision which could result in property damage or personal injury due to rock falls or slides; landslides, mud or snow; surface subsidence (i.e., settling or sinking); or seismic activity. 
b.  Protective measures. Explain what measures will be taken to prevent or materially lessen the danger of future property damage or injury due to any of the hazards referred to in subsection A.4.a of this section. 
c.  Unusual features. Provide a statement describing any unusual soil, topographic or geologic conditions on the property which limit the capability for building or excavation using ordinary and reasonable construction techniques. The statement should address conditions such as shallow bedrock, high water table, unstable or expansive soil conditions, and slope. On a map, identify any slopes in excess of 15 percent grade. 
d.  Soils map. The subdivision must be overlaid on the county soil survey maps obtained from the Natural Resource and Conservation Service (NRCS). The maps are 1:24,000 in scale. These maps may be copied without permission. However, enlargement of these maps could cause misunderstanding of the detail of mapping. Soils were mapped using a minimum delineation of five acres, and these soils reports were intended to alert developers to possible problems and the need for a more detailed on-site investigation. The developer must provide the following soil reports, which can be obtained from the NRCS: 
(1)  The physical properties and engineering indexes for each soil type; 
(2)  Soil limitations for building and site development, and water features for each soil type; 
(3)  Hydric soils report for each soil type. If hydric soils are present, the developer must provide a wetlands investigation by a certified consultant, using the current Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands; and 
(4)  The developer must provide any special design methods planned to overcome the above limitations. 
e.  Cuts and fills. Describe the location and amount of any cut or fill three or more feet in depth. These cuts and fills should be indicated on a plat overlay or sketch map. Where cuts or fills are necessary, describe any plans to prevent erosion and to promote revegetation such as replacement of topsoil and grading. 
5.  Vegetation. 
a.  Vegetation map. On a plat overlay or sketch map: 
(1)  Indicate the distribution of the major vegetation types such as marsh, grassland, shrub, coniferous forest, deciduous forest or mixed forest. 
(2)  Identify critical plant communities such as stream bank or shoreline vegetation; vegetation on steep, unstable slopes; and vegetation on soils highly susceptible to wind or water erosion. 
b.  Protective measures. Describe measures to preserve trees and critical plant communities (e.g., design and location of streets, lots and open spaces). 
6.  Wildlife. 
a.  Species. Describe species of fish and wildlife which use the area affected by the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Critical areas. Identify on a plat overlay or sketch map of the proposed subdivision any known critical, significant or "key" wildlife areas, such as big game winter range, waterfowl nesting areas, habitat for rare or endangered species or wetlands. 
c.  Pets/human activity. Describe the expected effects of pets and human activity on wildlife. 
d.  Public access. Describe the effects on public access to public lands, trails, hunting or fishing areas. 
e.  Protective measures. Describe any proposed measures to protect or enhance wildlife habitat or to minimize degradation (e.g., keeping building and streets back from shorelines, setting aside marshland as undeveloped open space). 
f.  Discussion of impact; documentation. The developer must discuss the impact of the proposed development on fish and wildlife with the state department of fish, wildlife and Parks (FWP). With the preliminary plat, the developer must provide written documentation from FWP that: 
(1)  Verifies that FWP has reviewed the proposed plat; 
(2)  Lists any FWP recommendations; and 
(3)  Outlines any mitigation planned to overcome any adverse impacts. 
7.  Historical features. 
a.  Affected areas. Describe and locate on a plat overlay or sketch map any known or possible historic, paleontological, archaeological, or cultural sites, structures, or objects which may be affected by the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Protective measures. Describe any plans to protect such sites or properties. 
c.  Procedures. Describe procedures to be followed if any historic, paleontological, archaeological, cultural sites, structures or object are found on site during site preparation and construction. 
d.  Discussion of impact; documentation. The developer must discuss the impact of the proposed development on any historic features, and the need for inventory, study and/or preservation with the state historic preservation office (SHPO). The developer must provide written documentation from SHPO that: 
(1)  Verifies that SHPO has reviewed the proposed plat; 
(2)  Lists any SHPO recommendations; 
(3)  Outlines any plans for inventory, study, and/or preservation; and 
(4)  Describes any mitigation planned to overcome any adverse impacts. 
e.  Preparation of information. Information on historical sites must be prepared by a qualified professional, including persons with a professional or educational background in history, architectural history, archaeology, art history, historic preservation, anthropology and cultural resource management. 
8.  Agriculture. 
a.  Number of acres in production and type of production. 
b.  Agricultural operations in the vicinity, and other uses of land in the general vicinity. 
c.  The productivity of the land. 
d.  Whether or not the property is part of a viable farm unit, and whether the property was under production during the last regular season. 
e.  What measures will be taken, if any, to control family pets. 
f.  Fencing of agricultural land. Describe any existing fence lines around the subdivision boundary which protect agricultural lands under an ownership other than of the developer, and describe any measure which will be taken to ensure that the owners of the subdivision will share with the owner of the agricultural lands in the continued maintenance of the fence. 
9.  Agricultural water user facilities. 
a.  Type, description, ownership and users of facilities. 
b.  Written documentation demonstrating active use of facilities, for example the delivery of non-potable water supplies for irrigation, conversion to stormwater facilities, or other use. If a facility is not being actively used, include a written plan for discontinuance including all documentation required pursuant to Montana Law. 
c.  Describe any proposed realignment. All realignments must comply with all relevant requirements of Montana law. 
d.  Information from the owner(s) of the facility concerning the proposed use or discontinuance of the facility. 
10.  Water and sewer. Provide an engineering design report and/or other documentation demonstrating that adequate water distribution systems and capacity, and sewage collection and disposal systems and capacity, exists or will be provided to serve the proposed subdivision. 
a.  Water rights. Describe how the proposed subdivision intends to satisfy section 38.410.130. Provide documentation of all water rights appurtenant to the proposed subdivision; e.g. previous estimates or actual payment-in-lieu of water rights, certified well logs, decrees or adjudications, etc. 
11.  Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan meeting the requirements of section 40.04.700 and the city's adopted stormwater master plan. 
12.  Streets, roads and alleys. 
a.  Description. Describe any proposed new public or private streets, roads or alley, or substantial improvements of existing public or private streets, roads or alleys. The developer must demonstrate that the land to be subdivided has access onto a legal street. 
b.  Access to arterial. Discuss whether any of the individual lots or tracts have access directly to arterial streets or roads, and if so, the reason access was not provided by means of a street within the subdivision and how the access complies with section 38.400.090. 
c.  Modification of existing streets, roads or alleys. Explain any proposed closure or modification of existing streets, roads or alleys. 
d.  Dust. Describe provisions considered for dust control on alleys. 
e.  Pollution and erosion. Explain how street, road and alley maintenance will be provided to meet the department of environmental quality guidelines for prevention of water pollution and erosion. 
f.  Traffic generation. Discuss how much daily traffic will be generated on existing local and neighborhood streets, roads and alleys, when the subdivision is fully developed, and provide the following information: 
(1)  The report format must be as follows: 
(a)  Trip generation, using the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual; 
(b)  Trip distribution; 
(c)  Traffic assignment; 
(d)  Capacity analysis; 
(e)  Evaluation; and 
(f)  Recommended access plan, including access points, modifications and any mitigation techniques. 
(2)  The report must include the following information: 
(a)  Land use and trip generation in the form of a table of each type of land use, the number of units or square footage, as appropriate, the trip rates used (daily and peak) and resulting trip generation. 
(b)  Traffic graphics, which show: 
(i)  A.M. peak hour site traffic; 
(ii)  P.M. peak hour site traffic; 
(iii)  A.M. peak hour total traffic; 
(iv)  P.M. peak hour total traffic; and 
(v)  Total daily traffic (with site-generated traffic shown separately). 
(c)  A.M. and P.M. capacity analysis with an A.M. and P.M. peak-hour capacity analysis provided for: 
(i)  All major drive accesses that intersect collector or arterial streets or roads; and 
(ii)  All arterial-arterial, collector-collector and arterial-collector intersections within one-half mile of the site, or as required by the city engineer during the pre-application review, concept plan review, or informal project review. 
(d)  For two-way stop controlled intersections, analysis of whether the intersection would satisfy signalization warrants if the two-way stop control was removed. 
g.  Capacity. Indicate the levels of service (before and after development) of existing and proposed streets and roads, including appropriate intersections, to safely handle any increased traffic. Describe any anticipated increased maintenance that will be necessary due to increased traffic and who will pay the cost of maintenance. 
h.  Bicycle and pedestrian pathways, lanes and routes. Describe bicycle and pedestrian pathways, lanes or routes to be developed with the development. 
i.  Traffic calming. Detailed drawings of any proposed traffic calming installations, including locations and turning radius templates. 
13.  Utilities. The developer must submit a copy of the subdivision plat to all relevant utility companies. With the preliminary plat, the developer must provide written documentation of the following: 
a.  Affected utilities. Indicate which affected utilities the subdivision plat has been submitted to for review, and include a copy of responses. 
b.  Include a description of: 
(1)  The method of furnishing electric, natural gas, cable TV, internet or telephone service, where provided. 
(2)  Estimated timing of each utility installation. 
(3)  The developer must provide a written statement from the utility companies that the proposed subdivision can be provided with service. 
14.  Educational facilities. With the preliminary plat, provide a written statement from the administrator of the appropriate school system indicating whether the increased enrollment can be accommodated by the present personnel and facilities and by the existing school bus system. 
15.  Land use. 
a.  Indicate the proposed use and number of lots or spaces in each: 
(1)  Residential area, single-household; 
(2)  Residential area, multiple-household. Types of multiple-household structures and numbers of each (e.g., two or four unit structures); 
(3)  Planned unit development (number of units); 
(4)  Condominium (number of units); 
(5)  Manufactured housing community (number of units); 
(6)  Recreational vehicle park; 
(7)  Commercial or industrial; and 
(8)  Other (please describe). 
16.  Parks and recreation facilities. The following information must be provided for all land used to meet parkland dedication requirements: 
a.  Park plan. A park plan, including: 
(1)  Site plan with one-foot contour topographic survey for the entire property; showing developer installed improvements on the initial park plan and proposed future improvements on the future park plan, and phasing proposed if any; 
(2)  Drainage areas; 
(3)  Utilities within, serving, and adjacent to the property; 
(4)  The zoning and ownership for adjacent properties; 
(5)  The location of any critical lands (wetlands, riparian areas, streams, etc.) and location of watercourse setbacks and any permits from non-city agencies required to execute the proposed plan; 
(6)  Park landscaping plan, prepared by a qualified landscape professional in accordance with section 38.220.100, showing the location and specific types and species of plants, shrubs, trees as well as grass seed mixes and the irrigation system including but not limited to identification of water source, points of connection, mains, laterals, valves, zones, and sprinkler heads; 
(7)  General description of land, including size, terrain, details of location and history, water features, and proposed activities; 
(8)  Trail design and construction showing compliance with adopted city standards and trail classifications; 
(9)  The requirement for approval of the final park plan by the review authority with a recommendation from the city recreation and parks advisory board prior to any site work; 
(10)  The requirement for a preconstruction meeting prior to any site work; 
(11)  Appropriate sections from the design guidelines for city parks; 
(12)  Cost estimate, installation phasing and responsibility, and maintenance plan tasks and responsibility for all improvements; 
(13)  If playground equipment will be provided, information including the manufacturer, installation data and specifications, installer, type of fall zone surfacing and age group intended for use; 
(14)  Soils information and analysis; 
(15)  A description of how the proposed park plan is consistent with the goals of the city's long range parks plan; 
(16)  A description of how the proposed park will meet the recreational needs of the residents of the development; 
(17)  The proposed manner of providing irrigation to the park including water source, amount of water expected to be consumed annually, and proposed manner of transfer of water facilities and rights to the city; and 
(18)  A phase I environmental assessment of the area proposed to be transferred to the city or property owner's association. 
b.  Park maintenance. 
(1)  Maintenance information, including levels of maintenance, a maintenance schedule, and responsible parties; 
(2)  Weed control plan, including responsible parties; and 
(3)  Plan for garbage collection, snow removal and leaf removal including responsible parties. 
c.  Irrigation information. 
(1)  An irrigation system map generally showing the locations and types of lines, including depth, water source, heads, electric valves, quick couplers, drains and control box; and 
(2)  If a well will be used for irrigation, a certified well log must be submitted showing depth of well, gpm, pump type and size, voltage, water rights, etc. 
d.  Phasing. If improvements will be phased, a phasing plan must be provided including proposed financing methods and responsibilities. 
e.  Cash-in-lieu. If the development includes a proposal for cash-in-lieu of park a specific justification responding to the cash-in-lieu review factors established by resolution of the city commission. If improvements-in-lieu are proposed specific costs of proposed improvements and costs to install must be provided. 
17.  Neighborhood center plan. A neighborhood center plan must be prepared and submitted for all subdivisions containing a neighborhood center. 
18.  Lighting plan. The following subdivision lighting information must be submitted for all new subdivisions: 
a.  For subdivision applications where lighting is required or proposed, lighting plans must be submitted to the city for review and approval, and must include: 
(1)  Isofootcandle plots for individual fixture installations, and ten-foot by ten-foot illuminance-grid plots for multifixture installations, which demonstrate compliance with the intensity and uniformity requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture manufacturer's cutsheets, photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/off control devices, mounting heights, pole foundation details and mounting methods. 
(3)  The lighting plan must be prepared, and certified for compliance with the city's design requirements and illumination standards, by a qualified lighting professional. Qualified lighting professionals include electrical engineers, architects, lighting designers and manufacturers representatives. 
(4)  Lighting calculations may include only the illuminated areas; areas occupied by buildings or other nonlighted areas must be excluded from calculations. 
b.  When requested by the city, the applicant must also submit a visual-impact plan that demonstrates appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate on-site and off-site glare and to retain the city's character. 
c.  Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions for approved lighting must only be made after city review and approval. 
19.  Miscellaneous. 
a.  Public lands. Describe how the subdivision will affect access to any public lands. Where public lands are adjacent to or within 200 feet of the proposed development, describe present and anticipated uses for those lands (e.g., open space, recreation, etc.), and how public access will be preserved/enhanced. 
b.  Hazards. Describe any health or safety hazards on or near the subdivision, such as mining activity or potential subsidence, high pressure gas lines, dilapidated structures or high voltage power lines. Any such conditions must be accurately described and their origin and location identified. List any provisions that will be made to mitigate these hazards. Also describe any on-site or off-site land uses creating a nuisance. 
c.  Wildlands-urban interface. Describe the subdivision's location within or proximity to the wildlands-urban interface (WUI) and ember zone designated by the most recent city-adopted hazard mitigation plan. Describe any hazard from the subdivision's proximity to the WUI. List any provisions that will be used to mitigate these hazards and reduce structure ignitability. 
20.  Affordable housing. Describe how the subdivision will satisfy the requirements of division 38.380. The description must be of adequate detail to clearly identify those lots designated as subject to division 38.380 compliance requirements and to make the obligations placed on the affected lots readily understandable. 
a.  On all lots intended to be used to satisfy the requirements of division 38.380, the allowable building envelope must be depicted.  
Sec. 38.220.070. - Final plat. 
A.  The following materials must be provided with each application for final plat approval. Materials must be provided in the number of copies and form established by the director of community development. 
1.  A letter from the city engineer certifying that the following documents have been received: 
a.  As-built drawings, i.e., copies of final plans, profiles, grades and specifications for public improvements, including a complete grading and drainage plan. 
b.  Copy of the state highway access or encroachment permit where a street created by the plat will intersect with a state highway. 
2.  Noxious weed MOU. Prior to final plat approval, a memorandum of understanding must be entered into by the weed control district and the developer. The memorandum of understanding must be signed by the district and the developer prior to final plat approval, and a copy of the signed document must be submitted to the community development department with the application for final plat approval. 
3.  Final park plan. For all land used to meet parkland dedication requirements, a final park plan must be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to final plat. The final park plan must include all of the information listed in section 38.220.060.A.16 and must include evidence of compliance with the installation requirements of division 38.270. 
4.  Irrigation system as-builts. The developer must provide irrigation system as-builts, for all irrigation installed in public rights-of-way and/or land used to meet parkland dedication requirements, once the irrigation system is installed. The as-builts must include the exact locations and type of lines, including accurate depth, water source, heads, electric valves, quick couplers, drains and control box. 
5.  Affordable housing. The developer must provide a description of how the subdivision has complied with division 38.380. The description must be of adequate detail to clearly identify those lots designated as subject to division 38.380 compliance requirements and to make the obligations placed on the affected lots readily understandable. 
6.  Conditions of approval. A sheet(s) of the plat depicting conformance with subdivision application approval must be submitted as set forth in 24.183.1107 ARM as may be amended and as required by the county clerk and recorder, and must: 
a.  Be entitled "Conditions of Approval of [insert name of subdivision]" with a title block including the quarter-section, section, township, range, principal meridian, county, and, if applicable, city or town in which the subdivision is located. 
b.  Contain any text and/or graphic representations of requirements by the governing body for final plat approval including, but not limited to, setbacks from streams or riparian areas, floodplain boundaries, no-build areas, building envelopes, or the use of particular parcels. 
c.  Include a certification statement by the landowner that the text and/or graphics shown on the conditions of approval sheet(s) represent(s) requirements by the governing body for final plat approval and that all conditions of subdivision application have been satisfied. 
d.  Include a notation stating that the information shown is current as of the date of the certification, and that changes to any land-use restrictions or encumbrances may be made by amendments to covenants, zoning regulations, easements, or other documents as allowed by law or by local regulations. 
e.  Include a notation stating that buyers of property should ensure that they have obtained and reviewed all sheets of the plat and all documents recorded and filed in conjunction with the plat, and that buyers of property are strongly encouraged to contact the local community development department and become informed of any limitations on the use of the property prior to closing. 
f.  List all associated recorded documents and recorded document numbers. 
g.  Include a tabulation of parkland credit for the entire subdivision and attributed to each lot. 
h.  Include a tabulation of open space. 
i.  List easements, including easements for agricultural water user facilities. 
7.  Documents. The following documents must accompany the final plat: 
a.  A title report or certificate of a title abstractor; 
b.  Any covenants or deed restrictions relating to the subdivision; 
c.  The security required pursuant to section 38.270.060, securing the future construction of any remaining private or public improvements to be installed; 
d.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, copies of final plans, profiles, grades, and specifications for improvements, including a complete grading and drainage plan, with the certification of a professional engineer that all required improvements which have been installed are in conformance with the attached plans. The subdivider must file copies of final plans, profiles, grades, and specifications for improvements, including a complete grading and drainage plan, with the certification of a professional engineer that all required improvements which have been installed are in conformance with the attached plans, with the city engineering division of the department of public works and the city parks department. A statement must be included on the conditions of approval sheet stating where the plans can be obtained; 
e.  If a street, alley, avenue, road, or highway created by the plat will intersect with a state or federal right-of-way, a copy of the access or encroachment permit; 
f.  A title report or certificate of a title abstractor for any off-site land intended to satisfy park dedication requirements; 
g.  Any deeds or documents for transfer of land and/or improvements to the city or the property owners' association or other entity; 
h.  Any deeds or documents for transfer of water rights; including but not limited to all required state department of natural resources and conservation documentation, e.g. ownership update form, permit, groundwater certificate and/or change authorization; and 
i.  Any other documents satisfying subdivision application approval required by the governing body to be filed or recorded. 
8.  The developer must submit with the application for final plat review and approval, a written narrative stating how each of the conditions of preliminary plat approval and noted code provisions have been satisfactorily addressed. This narrative must be in sufficient detail to direct the reviewer to the appropriate plat, plan, sheet, note, covenant, etc. in the submittal.  
Sec. 38.220.080. - Site plan submittal requirements. 
A.  Applications for all site plan approvals must be submitted to the community development department on forms provided by the community development director. 
1.  General information. 
a.  Complete, signed application including the following: 
(1)  Name of project/development; 
(2)  Location of project/development by street address and legal description; 
(3)  Name and mailing address of developer and owner; 
(4)  Name and mailing address of engineer/architect, landscape architect and/or planner; 
(5)  Listing of specific land uses being proposed; and 
(6)  A statement signed by the owner of the proposed development of their intent to comply with the requirements of this Code and any conditions considered necessary by the approval body; 
b.  Location map, including area within one-half mile of the site; 
c.  List of names and addresses of property owners' according to division 38.220 of this chapter; 
d.  For all developments, excluding sketch and reuse/further development, a construction route map must be provided showing how materials and heavy equipment will travel to and from the site. The route must avoid, where possible, local or minor collector streets or streets where construction traffic would disrupt neighborhood residential character or pose a threat to public health and safety. 
2.  Site plan information. The following information is required whenever the requested information pertains to zoning or other regulatory requirements of this chapter, existing conditions on-site or conditions on-site which would result from the proposed development: 
a.  Boundary line of property with dimensions; 
b.  Date of plan preparation and changes; 
c.  North point indicator; 
d.  Suggested scale of one inch to 20 feet, but not less than one inch to 100 feet; 
e.  Parcel and site coverage information: 
(1)  Parcel size in gross acres and square feet; 
(2)  Estimated total floor area and estimated ratio of floor area to lot size (floor area ratio, FAR), with a breakdown by land use; and 
(3)  Location, percentage of parcel and total site, and square footage for the following: 
(a)  Existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(b)  Driveway and parking; 
(c)  Open space and/or landscaped area, recreational use areas, public and semipublic land, parks, school sites, etc.; and 
(d)  Public street right-of-way; 
f.  Total number, type and density per type of dwelling units, and total net and gross residential density and density per residential parcel; 
g.  Location, identification and dimension of the following existing and proposed data, on-site and to a distance of 100 feet (200 feet for PUDs) outside site plan boundary, exclusive of public rights-of-way, unless otherwise stated: 
(1)  Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet, or as determined by the community development director; 
(2)  Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way to a distance of 150 feet, except for sites adjacent to major arterial streets where the distances must be 200 feet; 
(3)  On-site streets and rights-of-way; 
(4)  Ingress and egress points; 
(5)  Traffic flow on-site; 
(6)  Traffic flow off-site; 
(7)  Utilities and utility rights-of-way or easements: 
(a)  Electric; 
(b)  Natural gas; 
(c)  Telephone, cable TV, optic fiber, and similar utilities; 
(d)  Water; and 
(e)  Sewer (sanitary, treated effluent and storm); 
(8)  Surface water, including: 
(a)  Holding ponds, streams and irrigation ditches; 
(b)  Watercourses, water bodies and wetlands; 
(c)  Floodplains as designated on the federal insurance rate map or that may otherwise be identified as lying within a 100-year floodplain through additional floodplain delineation, engineering analysis, topographic survey or other objective and factual basis; and 
(d)  A floodplain analysis report in compliance with article 6 of this chapter if not previously provided with subdivision review; 
(9)  Grading and drainage plan, including provisions for on-site retention/detention and water quality improvement facilities as required by the engineering department, or in compliance with any adopted storm drainage ordinance or best management practices manual adopted by the city; 
(a)  All drainageways, streets, arroyos, dry gullies, diversion ditches, spillways, reservoirs, etc., which may be incorporated into the storm drainage system for the property must be designated: 
(i)  The name of the drainageway (where appropriate); 
(ii)  The downstream conditions (developed, available drainageways, etc.); and 
(iii)  Any downstream restrictions; 
(10)  Significant rock outcroppings, slopes of greater than 15 percent or other significant topographic features; 
(11)  Sidewalks, walkways, drive aisles, loading areas and docks, bikeways, including typical details and interrelationships with vehicular circulation system, indicating proposed treatment of points of conflict, a statement requiring lot accesses to be built to the standard contained in this section, the city design standards and specifications policy, and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications; 
(12)  Provision for handicapped accessibility, including, but not limited to, wheelchair ramps, parking spaces, handrails and curb cuts, including construction details and the applicant's certification of ADA compliance; 
(13)  Fences and walls, including typical details; 
(14)  Exterior signs; 
(15)  Exterior refuse collection areas, including typical details; 
(16)  A site plan, complete with all structures, parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation that might interfere with lighting, and adjacent uses, containing a layout of all proposed fixtures by location and type. The materials required in section 38.220.060.A.18, if not previously provided; 
(17)  Curb, asphalt section and drive approach construction details; 
(18)  Landscaping (detailed plan showing plantings, equipment, and other appropriate information as required in section 38.220.100); 
(19)  Unique natural features, significant wildlife areas and vegetative cover, including existing trees and shrubs having a diameter greater than two and one-half inches, by species; 
(20)  Snow storage areas; 
(21)  Location of city limit boundaries, and boundaries of Gallatin County's Bozeman Area Zoning Jurisdiction, within or near the development; 
(22)  Existing zoning within 200 feet of the site; 
(23)  Historic, cultural and archaeological resources, describe and map any designated historic structures or districts, and archaeological or cultural sites; and 
(24)  Major public facilities, including schools, parks, trails, etc.; 
h.  Detailed plan of all parking facilities, including circulation aisles, access drives, bicycle racks, compact spaces, handicapped spaces and motorcycle parking, on-street parking, number of employee and nonemployee parking spaces, existing and proposed, and total square footage of each; 
i.  The information required by section 38.220.060.A.12, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Such information was previously provided through a subdivision review process; or 
(2)  The provision of such information was waived in writing during subdivision review of the land to be developed; or 
(3)  The provision of such information is waived in writing by the city engineer prior to submittal of a preliminary site plan application; or 
(4)  The application for site plan approval involves the redevelopment of property located within the city's established neighborhood conservation overlay district. In such cases, the city may require the property owner to sign a waiver of right to protest creation of a special improvement district, or other form of agreement, assuring participation, on a fair share, pro-rata basis, in future improvements to intersections in the vicinity of the development proposal; or 
(5)  The application for site plan approval involves the adaptive reuse of an existing building, regardless of its location within the city, or the redevelopment of a property located within one of the city's urban renewal districts. In cases where an existing building or complex of buildings is to be torn down and replaced with a larger building or complex of buildings, the city engineer may require the information described in section 38.220.060.A.12 to evaluate the additional traffic impacts resulting from development of the larger building or complex of buildings; 
j.  Building design information (on-site): 
(1)  Building heights and elevations of all exterior walls of the building or structure; 
(2)  Height above mean sea level of the elevation of the lowest floor and location of lot outfall when the structure is proposed to be located in a floodway or floodplain area; 
(3)  Floor plans depicting location and dimensions of all proposed uses and activities; and 
(4)  All on-site utilities and mechanical equipment; 
k.  Description and mapping of soils existing on the site, accompanied by analysis as to the suitability of such soils for the intended construction and proposed landscaping; 
l.  Temporary facilities plan showing the location of all temporary model homes, sales offices and/or construction facilities, including temporary signs and parking facilities; 
m.  Unless already provided through a previous subdivision review, a noxious weed control plan complying with section 38.220.050; and 
n.  Drafts of applicable supplementary documents as set forth in division 38.220 of this chapter; 
o.  The information necessary to complete the determination of density change and parkland provision required by section 38.420.020.B, unless such information was previously determined by the city to be inapplicable and written confirmation is provided to the applicant prior to submittal of a preliminary site plan application. If a new park will be created by the development the park plan materials of section 38.220.060.A.16, must be provided; 
p.  Affordable housing. Describe how the site plan will satisfy any requirements of division 38.380 which have either been established for that lot through the subdivision process or if no subdivision has previously occurred are applicable to a site plan. The description must be of adequate detail to clearly identify those lots and dwellings designated as subject to division 38.380 compliance requirements and to make the obligations placed on the affected lots and dwellings readily understandable; 
q.  Phased site plans: 
(1)  A phasing plan showing the location of phase boundaries and that each phase will be fully functional if subsequent phases are not completed; 
(2)  A utilities plan showing that each phase will be able to be fully functional if subsequent phases are not completed; 
(3)  A revegetation and grading plan showing how disturbed areas will be revegetated to control weeds and site grading and drainage control will be maintained as phased construction proceeds; 
(4)  If the applicant intends for multiple phases to be under construction simultaneously, evidence of financial commitment from the project lender for the completion of all phases to be undertaken at once. Evidence of financial commitment may be provided at the time the building permits for the multiple phases are sought. 
r.  When section 38.420.020 requires parkland dedication in association with a site plan, and cash-in-lieu of parkland will not be provided, the materials required by section 38.220.060.A.16.  
Sec. 38.220.090. - Certificates of appropriateness; additional application requirements, review procedures and review criteria. 
A.  Submittal requirements for certificates of appropriateness. All development proposals requiring certificates of appropriateness (e.g., located in a neighborhood conservation district or historic property/structure) must submit the following information in addition to any sketch plan, site plan or special development submittal requirements for the proposal: 
1.  Neighborhood conservation overlay district and historic property/structures. Certain information must be provided to the appropriate review authority to review prior to granting or denying a certificate of appropriateness. The extent of documentation to be submitted on any project is dictated by the scope of the planned alteration and the information reasonably necessary for the appropriate review authority to make its determination. At a minimum, the following items must be included in the submission: 
a.  Completed application on form provided by the community development department; 
b.  One current picture of each elevation of each structure planned to be altered and such additional pictures of the specific elements of the structure or property to be altered that will clearly express the nature and extent of change planned. Except when otherwise recommended, no more than eight pictures may be submitted and all pictures must be mounted on letter-size sheets and clearly annotated with the property address, elevation direction (N, S, E, W) and relevant information; 
c.  Sketch plan or site plan information, as per section 38.230.070 or 38.230.080; 
d.  Historical information, including available data such as pictures, plans, authenticated verbal records and similar research documentation that may be relevant to the planned alteration; 
e.  Materials and color schemes to be used; 
f.  Plans, sketches, pictures, specifications and other data that will clearly express the applicant's proposed alterations; 
g.  A schedule of planned actions that will lead to the completed alterations; 
h.  Description of any applicant-requested deviation and a narrative explanation as to how the requested deviation will encourage restoration and rehabilitation activity that will contribute to the overall historic character of the community; 
i.  An illustration showing all internal and external elements of a structure to be removed or altered by a project. All elements to be removed or altered, and to what extent, must be clearly identified and must include those elements to be removed and reinstalled; 
j.  If demolition of a historic structure, as defined in article 7 of this chapter, is proposed a structural analysis and cost estimates indicating the costs of repair and/or rehabilitation to bring the structure to a habitable condition as established by the applicable technical codes in Article 10.02, versus the costs of demolition and redevelopment. Analysis must include cost estimates from more than one general contractor for the work. The cost comparison is between the cost to rehabilitate the structure to a condition which meets the building code standard for occupancy and demolition and construction of a new structure of the same type and scale to building code standards. 
k.  If a building is claimed to be unsafe evidence to support that claim; 
l.  For any nonconforming structure, an analysis of demolition to determine whether the threshold for loss of protected nonconforming status per section 38.280.040.B has been met or surpassed; and 
m.  Such other information as may be required by the community development department. 
2.  It is further suggested that the applicant seek comments from the neighborhood or area.  
Sec. 38.220.100. - Submittal requirements for landscape plans. 
A.  These landscape regulations apply to a lot or site subject to plan review and approval outlined in division 38.230 of this chapter. A separate landscape plan must be submitted as part of the site plan application unless the required landscape information can be included in a site plan that meets formatting requirements as determined by the city and the standards listed below. 
B.  Preparation of landscape plan. Landscape plans must be prepared and certified by: 
1.  A state-registered landscape architect; 
2.  An individual with a degree in landscape design and two years of professional design experience in the state; or 
3.  An individual with a degree in a related field (such as horticulture, botany, plant science, etc.) and at least five years of professional landscape design experience, of which two years have been in the state. 
C.  Contents of landscape plan. A landscape plan required pursuant to this chapter must contain the following information: 
1.  Date, scale, north arrow, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the property owner and the person preparing the plan; 
2.  Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the lot; 
3.  Approximate centerlines of existing watercourses, required watercourse setbacks, and the location of any 100-year floodplain; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, utility easements, utility lines, drive aisles and sidewalks on the lot and/or adjacent to the lot; 
4.  Project name, street address, and lot and block description; 
5.  Location, height and material of proposed screening and fencing (with berms to be delineated by one foot contours); 
6.  Locations and dimensions of proposed landscape buffer strips, including watercourse buffer strips; 
7.  Complete landscape legend providing a description of plant materials shown on the plan, including typical symbols, names (common and botanical name), locations, quantities, container or caliper sizes at installation, heights, spread and spacing. The location and type of all existing trees on the lot over six inches in caliper must be specifically indicated; 
8.  Complete illustration of landscaping and screening to be provided in or near off-street parking and loading areas, including information as to the amount (in square feet) of landscape area to be provided internal to parking areas and the number and location of required off-street parking and loading spaces; 
9.  An indication of how existing healthy trees (if any) are to be retained and protected from damage during construction; 
10.  Size, height, location and material of proposed seating, lighting, planters, sculptures, and water features; 
11.  A description of proposed watering methods; 
12.  Location of street vision triangles on the lot (if applicable); 
13.  Designated snow removal storage areas; 
14.  Location of pavement, curbs, sidewalks and gutters; 
15.  Show location of existing and/or proposed drainage facilities which are to be used for drainage control; 
16.  Existing and proposed grade; 
17.  Size of plantings at the time of installation and at maturity; 
18.  Areas to be irrigated; 
19.  Planting plan for watercourse buffers, per section 38.410.100, if not previously provided through subdivision review; and 
20.  Front and side elevations of buildings, fences and walls with height dimensions if not otherwise provided by the application. Show open stairways and other projections from exterior building walls. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 1, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.220.110. - Sketch plan submittal requirements. 
A sketch plan must be drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Sketch plans must be oriented with north at the top of the page and must also show site boundaries, street and alley frontages with names, street trees, water and sewer service locations, sidewalks, parking location and size, and location of all structures with distances to the nearest inch or nearest tenth of foot between buildings and from buildings to property lines.  
Sec. 38.220.120. - Planned unit development submittal requirements. 
A.  The following material must be submitted for review with each planned unit development. 
1.  Submittal requirements for pre-applications. The following information and data must be submitted for pre-application review. The number of copies required is determined by the community development department: 
a.  Data regarding site conditions, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities and other related general information about adjacent land uses and the uses of land within one-half mile of the subject parcel of land; 
b.  Conceptual (sketch) drawing showing the proposed location of the uses of land, major streets and other significant features on the site and within one-half mile of the site; and 
c.  A computation table showing the site's proposed land use allocations by location and as a percent of total site area. 
2.  Submittal requirements for preliminary plans. The following information and data must be submitted for preliminary plan review. The number of copies required is determined by the community development department: 
a.  Document requirements. The following information must be included in the submittal: 
(1)  Application forms; 
(2)  A list of names of all general and limited partners and/or officers and directors of the corporation involved as either applicants or owners of the planned unit development; 
(3)  A statement of planning objectives, including: 
(a)  Statement of applicable city land use policies and objectives achieved by the proposed plan and how it furthers the implementation of the city growth policy; 
(b)  Statement of: 
(i)  Proposed ownership of open space areas; and 
(ii)  Applicant's intentions with regard to future ownership of all or portions of the planned unit development; 
(c)  Estimate of number of employees for business, commercial and industrial uses; 
(d)  Description of rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant; 
(e)  Where deviations from the requirements of this chapter are proposed, the applicant must submit evidence of successful completion of the applicable community design objectives and criteria of section 38.430.090. The applicant must submit written explanation for each of the applicable objectives or criteria as to how the plan does or does not address the objective or criterion. The community development director may require, or the applicant may choose to submit, evidence that is beyond what is required in that section. Any element of the proposal that varies from the criterion must be described; 
(f)  Detailed description of how conflicts between land uses of different character are being avoided or mitigated; and 
(g)  Statement of design methods to reduce energy consumption, (e.g., home/business utilities, transportation fuel, waste recycling); 
(4)  A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the planned unit development, or stages of the same, is expected to begin and be completed, including the proposed phasing of construction of public improvements and recreational and common space areas; 
(5)  One reduced version of all preliminary plan and supplemental plan maps and graphic illustrations. 
b.  Site plan requirements. A site plan of the proposed development showing the information required for site plans in section 38.220.080 plus the following additional information: 
(1)  Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, must be included where appropriate; 
(2)  The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the planned unit development, including materials and techniques used, such as screening, fences, walls and other landscaping; and 
(3)  Attorney's or owner's certification of ownership. 
c.  Supplemental plan requirements. 
(1)  Viewsheds. 
(a)  Looking onto and across the site from areas around the site, describe and map the views and vistas from adjacent properties that may be blocked or impaired by development of the site; 
(b)  Describe and map areas of high visibility on the site as seen from adjacent off-site locations; 
(2)  Street cross sections if different from city standards. Street cross section schematics must be submitted for each general category of street, including: 
(a)  The proposed width; 
(b)  Treatment of curbs and gutters, or other stormwater control system if other than curb and gutter is proposed; 
(c)  Sidewalk systems; and 
(d)  Bikeway systems, where alternatives to the design criteria and standards of the city are proposed; 
(3)  Physiographic data, including the following: 
(a)  A description of the hydrologic conditions of the site with analysis of water table fluctuation and a statement of site suitability for intended construction and proposed landscaping. The description of the hydrologic conditions must include depth to groundwater measurements taken May 15 through September 15; 
(i)  An alternative to the actual measurement of water table depth may be offered provided that such alternative includes a detailed soil profile, including a detailed description of the soil which follows The National Cooperative Soil Survey Field Book for describing soils and which provides good and sufficient evidence to establish the presence and depth of a seasonal water table, a land form position or location, or other physiographic data which are sufficient to establish the minimum depth to groundwater. Some soils are not easily profiled to establish an off-season high water table, such as those underlain by sand or gravel, those high in organic matter and those with a high lime content. Physical monitoring of these types of soils may be necessary; 
(b)  Locate and identify the ownership of existing wells or well sites within 400 feet of the site; 
(4)  Preliminary subdivision plat. If the project involves or requires platting, a preliminary subdivision plat, subject to the requirements of this chapter relative to subdivisions, must be submitted; 
(5)  Traffic impact analysis. Notwithstanding the waiver provisions of section 38.220.080.A.2.i, the city may require that a traffic impact analysis be prepared based upon the proposed development. The analysis must include provisions of the approved development guidelines, and must address impacts upon surrounding land uses. The city may require the traffic impact analysis to include the information in section 38.220.060.A.12. If a traffic impact analysis has been submitted as part of a concurrent subdivision review, that analysis must meet this requirement; 
(6)  Additional studies and plans. If the development's compliance with the community design objectives and criteria is under question, the review authority may require additional impact studies or other plans as deemed necessary for providing thorough consideration of the proposed planned unit development; 
(7)  A proposed draft of a legal instrument containing the creation of a property owner's association sufficient to meet the requirements of section 38.220.310 must be submitted with the preliminary plan application. 
3.  Submittal requirements for final plans. 
a.  A completed and signed application form; 
b.  A list of names of all general and limited partners and/or officers and directors of the corporation involved as either applicants or owners of the planned unit development; and 
c.  Site plan submittal requirements. 
(1)  A final plan site plan including the following information must be submitted: 
(a)  Land use data (same information as required on the preliminary site plan); 
(b)  Lot lines, easements, public rights-of-way as per subdivision plat; 
(c)  Attorney's or owner's certification of ownership; 
(d)  Community development director certification of approval of the site plan and its conformance with the preliminary plan; and 
(e)  Owner's certification of acceptance of conditions and restrictions as set forth on the site plan. 
d.  Supplemental plans. 
(1)  Final landscape plan. A final landscape plan consistent with the conditions and restrictions of the approved preliminary plan must be submitted. It must also be consistent with the division 38.550 of this chapter, except that any stated conditions and restrictions of the preliminary plan approval supersede the provisions of division 38.550 of this chapter; 
(2)  Final subdivision plat. An official final subdivision plat of the site must accompany the final planned unit development plan when applicable. City approval of the final subdivision plat is required before issuance of building permits; 
(3)  Final utility plans. Prior to submission of the final plan to the DRC and ADR staff, engineering plans and specifications for sewer, water, street improvements and other public improvements, and an executed improvements agreement in proper form providing for the installation of such improvements, must be submitted to and approved by the city; and 
(4)  Open space maintenance plan. A plan for the maintenance of open space, meeting the requirements of section 38.220.320, must be submitted with an application for final plan approval. Open space shown on the approved final plan must not be used for the construction of any structures not shown on the final plan.  
Sec. 38.220.130. - Submittal materials for regulated activities in wetlands. 
A.  All parties applying for activity permits proposing action affecting federal, state or city regulated wetlands, watercourses and/or buffers within the city limits must submit the following information: 
1.  A wetland and watercourse delineation report must be submitted to the city for all projects, if aquatic resources are present. When required to determine applicability and scope of wetland location and function the delineation shall go beyond the boundary of the property. If no aquatic resources are present, a letter must be submitted to the city stating that there are no water resources within the subject property. 
a.  This wetland and watercourse delineation report must include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Wetland and watercourse descriptions; 
(2)  Functional assessment, as determined by a state-accepted functional assessment method, i.e., Montana Department of Transportation (Berglund and McEldowney 2008 as amended) or Montana Department of Environmental Quality (Apfelbeck and Farris 2005 as amended); 
(3)  Wetland types, as determined by a state-accepted functional assessment method (i.e., Cowardin et al 1979 as amended); 
(4)  Wetland acreages (by a licensed surveyor); 
(5)  Maps with property boundaries, wetland and watercourse boundaries and acreages; and 
(6)  Wetland data forms (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers data forms). 
2.  If activities are planned in and/or adjacent to aquatic resources the following information is required: 
a.  A site plan which shows the property boundary; delineated wetland and watercourse boundaries; buffer boundaries; and all existing and proposed structures, roads, trails, and easements. The site plan will include a table of existing wetland functional ratings and acreage, required buffers and acreage, and linear feet of all watercourses and ditches. 
(1)  All direct impacts to wetlands, watercourses, and buffers must be highlighted and summarized in a table on the site plan. The water resource and buffer summary table must include wetland/watercourse identification number; corresponding buffer width and acreage; total site, wetland, watercourse, ditch, and buffer acreages; jurisdictional status; impacts to all water resources and buffers; and, mitigation types and acreages. 
(2)  All indirect impacts (e.g., shading from boardwalks or public utility well drawdown) must be summarized in the document. 
b.  A map with all proposed mitigation areas and their required buffers. The map must include a table of mitigation wetland type and acreage and required buffers and acreage and a description of the functional unit gain of the wetland mitigation (as determined by a state-accepted functional assessment method). 
c.  The source, type and method of transport and disposal of any fill material to be used, and certification that the placement of fill material will not violate any applicable state or federal statutes and regulations as listed in section 38.220.020. 
d.  Copies of the following: 
(1)  Any Clean Water Act (CWA) section 404 and 401 permits; 
(2)  Any MT 301 permits; 
(3)  Any floodplain determinations for the proposed site known to the applicant; 
(4)  Any other applications, state or federal, for wetlands permits regarding the proposed site; 
(5)  Any U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional determinations regarding wetlands on the proposed and adjacent site; and 
(6)  If relevant, any Montana state joint applications for the proposed project site. 
e.  A completed wetland review checklist. 
3.  If in the preparation or review of the required submittal materials it is determined that there are unavoidable impacts to wetlands and/or watercourses that will require a Federal Clean Water Act permit, then the following information must be submitted to the city for all federal jurisdictional and city-regulated wetlands (see section 38.700.210 for definition) in a compensatory mitigation report: 
a.  The descriptive narrative must include, at a minimum: 
(1)  The name and contact information of the applicant; the name, qualifications, and contact information for the primary author of the compensatory mitigation report; a description of the proposal; summary of the direct and indirect impacts and proposed mitigation concept; identification of all the local, state, and federal wetland/stream-related permit required for the project; and, a vicinity map for the project. 
(2)  A description of the existing wetland, watercourse and buffer areas that will be impacted including area based on professional surveys; dominant vegetation; and functional assessments and wetland ratings for the entire wetland and the portions proposed to be impacted. 
(3)  An assessment of the potential changes in wetland hydroperiod for the proposed project and how the design has been modified to avoid, minimize or reduce impacts to the wetland hydroperiod. 
(4)  A description of the proposed conceptual mitigation actions for wetland, watercourse and buffer areas. Provide specifications (including buffers) for all proposed mitigation for wetland/watercourse/buffer impacts. Include a map with all proposed mitigation areas and their required buffers. 
(5)  An assessment of existing conditions in the zone of the proposed mitigation including vegetation community structure and composition, existing hydroperiod, existing soil conditions, and existing wetland functions. 
(6)  Field data that was collected to document the existing conditions of the proposed mitigation sites and on which the future hydrologic and soil conditions of the mitigation wetlands are based (e.g., hydrologic conditions: piezometer data, staff/crest gage data, hydrologic modeling, visual observations; soil conditions: data from hand-dug or mechanical soil pits or boring results). The applicant may not rely on soil survey data for establishing existing conditions. 
(7)  A planting schedule by proposed community type and hydrologic regime, size and type of plant material to be installed, spacing of plants, "typical" clustering patterns, total number of each species by community type, timing of installation, nutrient requirements, watering schedule, weed control, and where appropriate measures to protect plants from destruction. Native species must comprise 80 percent of the plants installed or seeded within the mitigation site. 
(8)  The mitigation monitoring plan must include a period of not less than three years, and establish the responsibility for long-term removal of invasive vegetation. 
(9)  Wetland mitigation performance criteria (measurable standards reflective of expected development goals established for each year after the mitigation site is established, i.e., "At the end of three years there will be an 80 percent survival of the planted shrubs and trees.") for mitigation wetlands and buffers, a monitoring schedule, reporting requirements to the city, and maintenance schedule and actions for each year of monitoring. 
(10)  Contingency plans which clearly define course of action or corrective measures needed if performance criteria are not met. 
b.  The scaled plan sheets for the compensatory mitigation must contain, at a minimum: 
(1)  Existing wetland and buffer surveyed edges; proposed areas of wetland and buffer impacts; and, location of proposed wetland and buffer compensation action. 
(2)  Surveyed topography at one- to two-foot contour intervals in the zone of the proposed compensation actions if any grading activity is proposed in the compensation area. Provide existing and proposed mitigation design cross section for the wetland and/or buffer compensation areas. 
(3)  Required wetland buffers for existing wetlands and proposed mitigation areas; 
c.  A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect and maintain the nonimpacted and mitigation wetland, watercourse and buffer areas in perpetuity.  
Sec. 38.220.140. - Submittal materials for appeals of administrative project decisions. 
A.  All appeals of administrative project decisions must include: 
1.  Name and address of the appellant; 
2.  The legal description, street address, and project number of the property involved in the appeal; 
3.  A description of the project that is the subject of the appeal; 
4.  Evidence that the appellant is an aggrieved person as defined in section 38.700.020; 
5.  Names and addresses of property owners and envelopes as required by section 38.220.420 .D; 
6.  Required appeal filing fee; and 
7.  The specific grounds and allegations for the appeal, and evidence necessary to support and justify a decision other than as determined by the administrative review authority.  
Sec. 38.220.150. - Administrative interpretation appeals. 
A.  All appeals of administrative interpretations must include: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The legal description and street address, and project number of the property, if any, involved in the appeal; 
3.  A description of the property, if any, that is the subject of the interpretation appeal including: 
a.  A site plan drawn to scale showing the property dimensions, grading, landscaping and location of utilities, as applicable; 
b.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings; and 
c.  Drive accesses, drive aisles, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas and sidewalks as applicable; 
4.  The names and addresses of the owners of the property and any other persons having a legal interest therein; 
5.  Names and addresses of property owners and envelopes as required by section 38.220.420.D. 
6.  Required filing fee; and 
7.  Evidence to prove that the decision or action of the official for which an appeal is made was incorrect or in violation of the terms of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.220.160. - Submittal materials for variances. 
A.  An application for a variance must be accompanied by a development plan showing such information as the community development director may reasonably require for purposes of this chapter. The plans must contain sufficient information for the commission to make a proper decision on the matter. The request must state the exceptional physical conditions and the peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for a variance. In all cases, the application must include, and will not be deemed filed until all of the following is submitted: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The legal description of the property involved in the request for variance, including the street address, if any, of the property; 
3.  The names and addresses of the owners of the property and any other persons having a legal interest therein; 
4.  Names and addresses of property owners and envelopes as required by section 38.220.420.D; 
5.  A site plan drawn to scale showing the property dimensions, grading, landscaping and location of utilities, as applicable; 
6.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings; 
7.  Drive accesses, drive aisles, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas and sidewalks as applicable; 
8.  A clear description of the variance requested and the reasons for the request; 
9.  Written justification supporting the criteria of section 38.250.070.C.1, 2, 3 and, when applicable, 4; 
10.  Evidence satisfactory to the review authority of the ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with actual construction work in accordance with said plans within six months after issuance of permit; and 
11.  Required filing fee.  
Sec. 38.220.170. - Submittal materials for telecommunications. 
A.  The following information must be submitted for review of wireless facilities as applicable. Failure to provide required materials will result in a determination that the application is incomplete and the application will not be processed. 
1.  Submittal materials. 
Table 38.220.170 
Telecommunication Submittal Materials 	Micro-scale 	Small-scale 	Large-scale 
A detailed written description of how the applicant has complied with, or will comply with, the applicable standards of this chapter. 	X 	X 	X 
An accurate photo simulation of the site with the proposed facility in place. The simulation must be to scale, and depict all planned and expected antennae, including collocation of other carriers, on the facility. Landscaping which is not existing or proposed on the accompanying site plan may not be included in the simulation unless it exists on adjoining properties; 	X 	X 	X 
A statement of whether the proposed facility is exempt or nonexempt from environmental review under the Rules of the FCC; 	X 	X 	X 
If the facility is claimed to be exempt, a detailed and specific citation to the Rules of the FCC indicating the section which details the relevant exemption provisions must be included. If the facility is not exempt from environmental review, a copy of the environmental review must be provided with the application, and the approval from the FCC for the site must be provided to the city prior to the final site plan approval; 			
and 			
If the facility is claimed to be exempt from environmental review, a statement must be provided, under oath and notarized, that the proposed or existing facility does or will comply with FCC radio frequency emission guidelines for both general population/ uncontrolled exposures and occupational/controlled exposures as defined in the FCC rules. The provision of false information will result in the immediate revocation of permits or approvals granted upon the basis of the false information and the cessation of operation of the offending facilities; 			
When the applicant is a wireless service provider, proof that the applicant is licensed by the FCC to provide the wireless communication services that the proposed facility is designed to support, or that licensing by the FCC is not required; 	X 	X 	X 
A report providing a description of the large scale wireless facility with technical reasons and justification for its design and placement; 			X 
A description of the maximum capacity of the large scale wireless facility as proposed and how the facility can be retrofitted or modified to accommodate changing user needs; 			X 
Documentation establishing the structural integrity for the large scale wireless facility's proposed use including documented loading calculations for wind, snow and seismic forces under circumstances of maximum capacity loading prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in the state. Loading criteria will be those set forth in the edition of the International Building Code most recently adopted by the city; and 			X 
A statement of how the collocation requirements of section 38.370.040.B are met. 			X 
 
2.  In addition to the materials required above, for all large scale wireless facilities 50 feet or greater in height, the applicant must submit: 
a.  Propagation studies for the users of the proposed facility, including existing service coverage maps and whether the placement of the new site will require relocations of existing facilities, or a description of how and why the proposed site and facility size is required to provide service that is otherwise unavailable or substantially inadequate or is required for the introduction of a new service; 
b.  A statement of intent of how collocation on the facility will be addressed; 
c.  A statement of willingness to allow collocation at reasonable and customary rates by all technically feasible providers up to the structural capacity of the tower; 
d.  An inventory of all surrounding buildings or other structures greater than 50 feet in height within a radius of one mile of the proposed location with a listing of height and suitability for hosting the proposed users of the large scale wireless facility; 
e.  An applicant must demonstrate in writing that there are no available openings on existing facilities which are feasible and that a new structure is necessary. Such demonstration must address the criteria in section 38.370.040.B; 
f.  A detailed explanation of how the large scale wireless facility will be maintained and how the maintenance and operations of the large scale wireless facility will be transferred to a third party should the applicant no longer retain ownership. Unless otherwise approved by the city, the responsibility of maintenance and operations must transfer to the owner of the underlying property; 
g.  An explanation of how the applicant will provide a financial security for the removal of the large scale wireless facility in the event that it no longer serves telecommunications carriers. The financial guarantee must be 150 percent of the estimated cost of facility removal and must be acceptable to the city; and 
h.  A large scale wireless facility may be reviewed as a multiple phase project and be constructed over time as provided for in section 38.370.040. An applicant intending to construct a new large scale wireless facility must provide letters of intent adequate to meet the requirements for leases set forth in section 38.370.040.B.  
Part 2. - Supplementary Documents 
 
Sec. 38.220.300. - General. 
When required, the supplementary documents described in this division, must be submitted in draft form with the preliminary plat or plan, and signed and notarized with the final plat or plan. The proper notary block must be used.  
Sec. 38.220.310. - Property owners' association. 
A.  General. If the review authority determines a common area, facility, or any other infrastructure is to be created or constructed as part of the development and such common area, facility, or infrastructure is required to be either owned by or maintained by the property owners' association the developer must provide supplemental documents, as applicable, that (i) transfer ownership of common area, facility, or infrastructure to the property owners' association; (ii) provide for the perpetual maintenance of common area, facility, or infrastructure by the property owners' association; and (iii) identify if access to the common area or facility is available to the public or is restricted to the members of the property owners' association. Property owners' association bylaws or the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions must be prepared and recorded with the final plat or plan. 
B.  Bylaws or covenants, conditions and restrictions contents. The items listed below are required to be included in the property owners' association bylaws or declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions and must be clearly identified within the documents. The covenants must at a minimum, provide: 
1.  The property owners' association will be formed before any properties are sold. 
2.  Membership is automatic and mandatory for each property or unit buyer and any subsequent buyer. 
3.  Means of enforcing the covenants, and of receiving and processing complaints. 
4.  Common area and facilities must be perpetually reserved. 
5.  The association is responsible for liability insurance, any applicable tax assessments and the maintenance of any common area or facilities. 
6.  Property or unit owners must pay a pro rata share of the cost of any common expenses, with any assessment charged by the association becoming a lien where necessary on individual parcels. 
7.  The association may adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. 
8.  The conditions and timing of the transfer of ownership and control of common areas and facilities from the declarant to the association. 
9.  The permission of the city commission is required before the association can be dissolved or the boundaries altered. 
10.  Regular maintenance program for items included in section 38.270.090.A and any other common area and facilities and that the association is responsible for the maintenance program. 
C.  If the property owners' association fails to install or maintain improvements according to approved plans, the city may, at its option, complete construction of improvements and/or maintain improvements in compliance with section 38.220.200 and division 38.270 of this chapter. The city's representative, contractors and engineers must have the right to enter upon the property and perform such work, and the property owners' association must permit and secure any additional permission required to enable them to do so. The city will bill the property owners' association for any costs associated with the installation or maintenance of improvements. 
D.  For a multiphase project, the property owners' association must be created for the entire project with the first phase. 
E.  To ensure continued maintenance of common areas and facilities, and on-going fulfillment of all obligations no property may be removed from the property owners' association without prior approval by the city commission.  
Sec. 38.220.320. - Covenants. 
A.  The city may require covenants to be recorded with the final plat when it is determined they are necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. Review of covenants must comply with section 38.240.150.A.3. All covenants must be considered to run with the land. If the covenants are not marked or noted on the final subdivision plat or other final approval document, they must be contained in a separate instrument which must be recorded with the final plat or prior to final approval of other applications. The covenants may be required to include, but are not limited to, the following provisions: 
1.  That all county declared noxious weeds will be controlled. 
2.  A section addressing agricultural uses of neighboring properties in the following form: 
"Lot owners and residents of the subdivision are informed that adjacent uses may be agricultural. Lot owners accept and are aware that standard agricultural and farming practices can result in dust, animal odors and noise, smoke, flies, and machinery noise. Standard agricultural practices feature the use of heavy equipment, chemical sprays and the use of machinery early in the morning and sometimes late into the evening." 
3.  That all fences bordering agricultural lands must be maintained by the landowners in accordance with state law. 
4.  That any covenant which is required as a condition of the preliminary plat approval and required by the city commission may not be amended or revoked without the mutual consent of the owners in accordance with the amendment procedures in the covenants, and the city commission. 
5.  Common area and facility maintenance plan. The developer must submit a legal instrument setting forth a plan providing for the permanent care and maintenance of common areas and facilities. The same must be submitted to the city attorney and must not be accepted by the city until approved as to legal form and effect. Common areas and facilities must be deeded to a property owners' association and, the applicant must record the proposed documents governing the association at the time of final plat filing. 
6.  Common area and facility maintenance guarantee. In the event the organization or any successor organization established to own and maintain common areas and facilities, must at any time fail to maintain the common areas or facilities in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved plan, the city may cause written notice to be served upon such organization or upon the owners of property in the development. The written notice must set forth the manner in which the common areas or facilities have failed to be maintained in reasonable condition. In addition, the notice must include the demand that the deficiencies noted be cured within 30 days thereafter and must state the date and place of a public meeting to be held within 14 days of the notice. At the time of public meeting, the city commission may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may extend the time within which the same may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or modifications are not cured within the time set, the city may enter upon such common facilities and maintain the same for a period of one year, in order to preserve the taxable values of properties within the development and to prevent the common facilities from becoming a public nuisance. Such entry and maintenance must not vest in the public any right to use the common facilities not dedicated to public use. Before the one year period expires, the commission must, upon its own initiative or upon written request of the organization theretofore responsible for maintenance, call a public meeting and give notice of such meeting to the organization responsible for maintenance or the property owners' of the development. At the meeting, the organization responsible for maintenance and/or the residents of the development may show cause why maintenance by the city should not be continued for a succeeding year. If the city commission determines that it is not necessary for the city to continue such maintenance, the city must cease such maintenance at the time established by the city commission. Otherwise the city must continue maintenance for the next succeeding year subject to a similar meeting and determination at the end of each year thereafter. 
a.  The cost of maintenance by the city must be a lien against the common facilities of the development and the private properties within the development. The city commission must have the right to make assessments against properties in the development on the same basis that the organization responsible for maintenance of the facilities could make such assessments. Any unpaid assessment must be a lien against the property responsible for the same, enforceable the same as a mortgage against such property. The city may further foreclose its lien on the common facility by certifying the same to the county treasurer for collection as in the case of collection of general property taxes. 
b.  Should the property owners' association request that the city assume permanent responsibility for maintenance of facilities, all facilities must be brought to city standards prior to the city assuming responsibility. The assumption of responsibility must be by action of the city commission and all costs to bring facilities to city standards must be the responsibility of the property owners' association. The city may create special financing mechanisms so that those properties within the area affected by the property owners' association continue to bear the costs of maintenance. 
c.  The city must assume permanent responsibility for maintenance of public areas and facilities when a dedicated funding mechanism is adopted. 
7.  Guarantee for open space preservation. Open space shown on the approved final plan or plat must not be used for the construction of any structures not shown on the final plan. 
8.  Covenants may not contain provisions which inhibit compliance with the requirements of division 38.380, for those developments subject to division 38.380. Some examples are: privately required minimum home or lot sizes which cannot be met. 
9.  Covenants and condominium declaration documents must require condominiums to be assigned street addresses in compliance with chapter 10, article 7 BMC. Addressing must not use X or other generic statements. Draft documents submitted for review prior to final approval must include correct addresses. 
10.  Stormwater facilities maintenance as required by chapter 40 article 4 BMC.  
Part 3. - Noticing 
 
Sec. 38.220.400. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of sections 38.220.400 through 38.220.430 to provide for adequate notice of governmental actions to those affected by such actions. Notice is required in order for citizens to participate in decision making which affects their interests and provides opportunity to receive information pertinent to an application that would not otherwise be available to the decision maker. In establishing standards for providing such notice, the need for expeditious processing of applications is also recognized.  
Sec. 38.220.410. - Contents of notice. 
A.  The following elements must be included in notices issued pursuant to this chapter: 
1.  Address of the property, or its location by approximate distances from the nearest major street intersections, or other description to identify the affected property; 
2.  Legal description of the property; 
3.  The number, date, time and place of scheduled public hearings or the date of any final public comment deadline; 
4.  A description of how and where additional information regarding the action may be obtained including the address and phone number of the city; and 
5.  A brief description of the subject of the notice. 
B.  Mailed and posted notices required for site plans, master site plans, certificates of appropriateness, special use permits, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, deviations, variances and subdivisions must also include a map of the area of the development so as to indicate its general location and proximity to surrounding properties. 
C.  The following additional elements must be included in all notices required for text amendments to this chapter: 
1.  A summary explanation of the intent of the change, with reference to the exact text being available for public review.  
Sec. 38.220.420. - Notice requirements for application processing. 
A.  The following minimum standards for timing, location of noticing area and type of notice must be provided. Noticing provisions are cumulative with the maximum combination of noticing requirements being provided. When more than one newspaper notice is required, only one of the required publication dates must fall within the minimum and maximum days required. 
B.  If for some reason a required property owner fails to receive mail notification of a scheduled public hearing, or if one or more of the required posted signs in the area or on the site for which the public hearing is being held is inadvertently moved through no fault of the city, this in no way invalidates the legal notice requirements of the scheduled public hearing. 
C.  Notice may also be provided to property owners' in any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed change or use as determined by the community development director. The community development director may use other means in addition to posting, mailing, or publication to provide notice. 
D.  For site and subdivision developments, the applicant must provide for the purposes of noticing a list of names and addresses of property owners' within 200 feet of the site, using the most current known property owners' of record as shown in the records of the county clerk and recorder's office and stamped, unsealed envelopes (with no return address) addressed with names of above property owners', and/or labels with the names of the above property owners', as specified on the appropriate application. 
Table 38.220.420 
Minimum standards for timing, location of noticing area and type of notice. 
Application 	Minimum Days 12 	Maximum Days 12 	Distance 1 	Notice Type 
Text amendment 	15 	45 	NA 	Newspaper once 
ZMA 2 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper once, post on-site, mail 1st class 
ZMA 2 - Resulting from ordinance changes 	15 	45 	None 	Newspaper once 
ZMA 2 - Annexation w/ initial zoning 	15 	45 	None 	Newspaper once, post on-site, mail 1st class 
Variance - Floodplain, zoning, and subdivision 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper once (zoning 2 times), post on-site, mail 1st class 
Noticing for 76-2-402, MCA claims 	15 	45 	None 	Newspaper 2 times, post on-site 
Deviation 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper 2 times, post on-site, mail 1st class 
Appeals 3 	15 	45 	200 3 	Newspaper 2 times, post on-site, mail 1st class 
Sketch plan/reuse/change in use/further development 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Sketch plan 4 	15 	45 	None 	Post on-site 
Informal/concept plan 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Preliminary site plan and master site plan 	15 	45 	200 	Post on-site, mail 1st class 
Preliminary PUD 5 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper 2 times, post on-site, mail 1st class 
Preliminary CUP 6 /SUP 13 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper 2 times, post on-site, mail 1st class 
Floodplain permit 	15 	45 	200 	Newspaper, mail 1st class 
COA 7 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Final site plan 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Final PUD plan 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Final CUP plan 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Subdivision exemption 	None 	None 	None 	None 
1st minor subdivision without variance - preliminary plat/ Extensions of subdivision approvals beyond two years 	15 	45 	200 	Mail 1st class 
1st minor subdivision with variance/2nd minor/major subdivision - Preliminary plat 	15 (Planning Board) 	45(Commission) 	200 	Newspaper 8 , post on-site, mail 1st class 9 , certified mail 10 
Final plat 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Notice of violation 11 	15 	45 	None 	Post on-site, certified mail to landowner 
 
Notes: 
1.  The distance from the exterior property boundary of the site to all or part of another parcel of land whose owners must be notified of a governmental action. This distance includes the width of a right-of-way or other public ownership. 
2.  Zone map amendment, division 38.260 of this chapter. 
3.  Posting and mailing only applies to appeals taken from actions to approve, approve with conditions or deny a development proposal and not to appeals of administrative interpretations. 
4.  Sketch plans for adding dwellings in the neighborhood conservation overlay district, demolition of historic structures as defined in article 7 of this chapter, or modification of wetlands. 
5.  Planned unit development, division 38.430 of this chapter. 
6.  Conditional use permit, division 38.230 of this chapter. 
7.  Certificate of appropriateness, division 38.340 of this chapter. 
8.  When newspaper notice is required the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
9.  Mail by first class to all landowners within 200 feet except those subject to certified mail. 
10.  Certified mail must be sent to recorded purchasers under contract for deed in addition to owners of physically contiguous property and the subdivider. 
11.  Notices of violation subject to section 38.200.160. 
12.  Days prior to the close of the public comment period or public hearing unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
13.  Special use permit, section 38.230.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.220.430. - Notice of city approval within neighborhood conservation. 
In order to inform adjacent property owners' and residents that an application within an overlay district has been approved by the city, any site approved for construction or alterations within an overlay district must be posted with a notice supplied by the community development department. The notice must be posted in a conspicuous place on the site before any construction begins and may be removed when the project is substantially complete. The notice must specify the name of the owner of record, the address of the property, a description of the scope of work approved and the date of city approval.  
DIVISION 38.230. - PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 38.230.010. - Introduction. 
A.  All non-subdivision development proposals within the city will be subject to plan review and approval except repair, maintenance, grading below the minimum defined limits of this chapter, and interior remodeling, or other items specifically exempted in this chapter. Depending on the complexity of development and status of proposed use in the applicable zoning district, either sketch plans, site plans, master site plans, special use permits, or conditional use permits (referred to herein as a "plan") will be required as specified in this division 38.230. Although work may be exempt from zoning review it may require review for other permits before construction may begin. 
B.  Special development proposals (e.g., PUDs, CUPs, variances, etc.) require other information to be submitted in conjunction with plans and are subject to requirements specific to the type of proposal. These additional submittal requirements and review procedures are outlined in section 38.230.030. 
C.  When a development is proposed within a neighborhood conservation overlay district or historic district, or proposes signs which do not specifically conform to the requirements of this chapter, design review is required in conjunction with plan review per the authority in section 38.210.010. In such cases, additional submittal requirements and review procedures apply as outlined in section 38.220.090. 
D.  Conditional uses. Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a particular zoning district, may, under certain circumstances, be acceptable. When such circumstances can be demonstrated by the applicant to exist, a conditional use permit may be granted by the review authority. Conditions may be applied to the issuance of the permit and periodic review may be required. No conditional use permit must be granted for a use which is not specifically designated as a conditional use in this chapter. 
E.  Approval will be granted for a particular use and not for a particular person or firm. 
F.  This division 38.230 is provided to meet the purposes of section 38.100.040 and all other relevant portions of this chapter. 
G.  Applications subject to this division 38.230 are reviewed under the authority established by division 38.200 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.230.020. - Classification of plans. 
A.  All developments, as defined in section 38.700.050 of this chapter, within the city are subject to the plan review procedures and criteria of this chapter and the applicable submittal requirements of division 38.220 of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, plans will be classified as either a site plan or a master site plan. 
1.  Exception. Those developments specified in section 38.230.070 and other development proposals when so specifically identified by the director of community development require only sketch plan review. 
B.  A master site plan is a generalized development plan that establishes building envelopes and overall entitlements for complex, large-scale projects that will require multiple years to reach completion. Use of a master site plan is not required unless necessary to address phasing of a proposed development (see section 38.230.090.B.3) or if required as part of the residential emphasis mixed-use district. A master site plan involves one or more of the following: 
1.  One hundred or more dwelling units in a multiple household structure or structures; 
2.  Fifty thousand or more square feet of office space, retail commercial space, service commercial space or industrial space; 
3.  Multiple buildings located on multiple contiguous lots and/or contiguous city blocks; 
4.  Multiple owners; 
5.  Development phasing projected to extend beyond two years; or 
6.  Parking for more than 200 vehicles. 
C.  Any planned unit development must be reviewed according to the regulations in division 38.430, in addition to this division 38.230. 
D.  Telecommunication facilities must be reviewed according to the regulations in division 38.370, in addition to this division 38.230. 
E.  Uses identified in division 38.360 of this chapter must be reviewed according to the standards and regulations contained in division 38.360 of this chapter, in addition to this division 38.230.  
Sec. 38.230.030. - Special development proposals—Additional application requirements, review procedures and review criteria. 
A.  Application requirements. Applications for special development proposals (e.g. PUD, CUP, flood plain development permits, variances, etc.) must include: 
1.  The required information for plans described in section 38.220.080; 
2.  Any additional application information required for specific reviews as listed in the following divisions of this chapter: 
a.  Division 38.430, Planned Unit Development; 
b.  Division 38.360, Standards for Specific Uses; 
c.  Division 38.370, Telecommunications; 
d.  Division 38.620, Bozeman Floodplain Regulations; and 
e.  Division 38.250, Appeals, Deviations and Variance Procedures. 
B.  Review procedures and review criteria. Additional review procedures and review criteria for specific development proposals are defined in the following sections and divisions of this chapter: 
1.  Section 38.230.080, Certificate of appropriateness; 
2.  Section 38.230.110, Conditional use; 
3.  Section 38.230.120, Special use permit; 
4.  Division 38.430, Planned Unit Development; 
5.  Division 38.360, Standards for Specific Uses; 
6.  Division 38.370, Telecommunications; 
7.  Division 38.610, Floodplain Regulations; and 
8.  Division 38.250, Appeals, Deviations and Variance Procedures.  
Sec. 38.230.040. - DRB review thresholds. 
A.  The review authorities are established in section 38.200.010 and as may be specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
B.  The development review committee, design review board, and wetlands review board have the advisory authority established in division 38.200 of this chapter. 
C.  DRB review thresholds. When a development is subject to design review and meets one or more of the following thresholds the design review board must conduct the design review: 
1.  Forty-five or more dwelling units; 
2.  Thirty thousand or more square feet of office space, retail commercial space, service commercial space or industrial space; 
3.  Four stories or more; 
4.  Twenty thousand or more square feet of exterior storage of materials or goods; 
5.  Parking for more than 90 vehicles. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 1, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.230.050. - Application of plan review procedures. 
A.  These procedures apply to all developments within the city unless explicitly exempted in this chapter. 
B.  A plan may be approved by the review authority prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
C.  No occupancy permits must be issued for any development for which plan review is required until certification has been provided under section 38.270.030 demonstrating that all terms and conditions of plan approval have been complied with. 
D.  Unless a deviation or variance is explicitly sought and granted in association with a plan, all standards of this chapter apply whether explicitly mentioned in the record of the review or not. An omission or oversight of a nonconformity with the standards of this chapter in the site plan does not constitute approval of such nonconformance. Any nonconformance which was not the subject of an explicitly approved deviation or variance may be required to be cured at such time the city becomes aware of the nonconforming condition's existence. 
E.  In the event that the volume of site development applications submitted for review exceeds the ability of the city to process them simultaneously, preference in order of scheduling will be given to those projects which provide the most affordable housing in excess of minimum requirements, as measured by the total number of affordable units. 
F.  When a development subject to this article is located within an overlay district established by division 38.340 of this chapter a certificate of appropriateness is required in addition to other required review procedures. 
G.  Public notice of development proposals and approvals subject to this article must be provided as required by division 38.220.400—38.220.430 of this chapter. 
H.  Improvements depicted on an approved plan must be installed subject to the requirements of division 38.270 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.230.060. - Special temporary use permit. 
A.  Generally. Uses permitted subject to a special temporary use permit are those temporary uses which are required for the proper function of the community or are temporarily required in the process of establishing a permitted use, constructing a public facility or providing for response to an emergency. Such uses must be so conducted that they will not be detrimental in any way to the surrounding properties or to the community. Uses permitted subject to a special temporary use permit may include: 
1.  Carnivals, circuses, special events of not over 72 consecutive hours; 
2.  Tent revival meetings; 
3.  Swap meets; or 
4.  Such other uses as may be deemed to be within the intent and purpose of this section. 
B.  Exception: Functions held within a park and which are subject to a park user agreement are not required to obtain a special temporary use permit. 
C.  Application and filing fee. Application for a special temporary use permit may be made by a property owner or his authorized agent. A copy of the fees are available at the community development department. Such application must be filed with the community development director who will charge and collect a filing fee for each such application, as provided in division 38.200 of this chapter. The community development director may also require any information deemed necessary to support the approval of a special temporary use permit, including site plans per this division 38.230. 
D.  Decision. Approval or conditional approval will be given only when in the judgment of the review authority such approval is within the intent and purposes of this division 38.230. 
E.  Conditions. In approving such a permit, the approval must be made subject to a time limit, not to exceed one year per approval, and other conditions deemed necessary to assure that there will be no adverse effect upon adjacent properties. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Regulation of parking; 
2.  Regulation of hours; 
3.  Regulation of noise; 
4.  Regulation of lights; 
5.  Requirement of financial security or other guarantees for cleanup or removal of structure or equipment; and/or 
6.  Such other conditions deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section.  
Sec. 38.230.070. - Sketch plan review. 
A.  Sketch plan submittal requirements. 
1.  Certain development applications (i.e., not in conjunction with other development) are required to submit only sketch plans which include the information specified in section 38.220.110. 
2.  Separate construction plans are necessary for building permits when the proposal requires such permits. Additional information is also necessary when the proposal requires the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness (see sections 38.230.080 and 38.220.090). 
3.  Examples of projects which qualify for sketch plan review are: 
a.  Individual single-household including manufactured homes on individual lots. 
b.  Adding one dwelling on an infill site. 
c.  Two-household, three-household, and four-household residential units, each on individual lots and independent of other site development. 
d.  Accessory dwelling units in the RS, R-1, R-2, R-3 R-4, R-O, and R-5 districts when a permitted use in Table 38.360.040. 
e.  Group living for eight or fewer persons on a single lot. 
f.  Fences; signs in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
g.  Regulated activities in areas with regulated wetlands not in conjunction with a land development proposal. 
h.  Grading of sites disturbing more than one-eighth but less than one-half acre, or movement of more than 30 but less than 100 cubic yards of material, or cut or fill of less than one cumulative foot, whichever is less; special temporary uses. 
i.  Reuse, change in use, or further development of sites per section 38.230.150, essential services Type II primarily underground with no above ground structures larger than 125 square feet; and accessory structures associated with these uses. 
Other similar projects may be determined by the community development director to require only sketch plan review. The community development director may determine submittal requirements in addition to those in section 38.220.110. Projects which do not require sketch plan review may still require review and permitting for non-zoning issues. 
B.  Sketch plan review procedures. 
1.  No certificate of appropriateness required. Sketch plans for projects which do not require a certificate of appropriateness must be submitted to the community development department for a determination of compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Once compliance is achieved, the application will be approved for construction or referred to the appropriate permitting authorities. In determining whether compliance is achieved the community development department must consider the individual circumstances of the site when the development is subject to section 38.230.150. 
2.  Certificate of appropriateness required. Sketch plans, including the material required by section 38.220.090, and such additional information as may be required for projects which require a certificate of appropriateness as per section 38.230.080 must be submitted to the community development department, who must review the proposal for compliance with this chapter, including compliance with the applicable overlay district requirements. Once compliance is achieved, the application will be approved for construction or referred to the appropriate permitting authorities. 
C.  Sketch plan review criteria. Sketch plans must be reviewed for compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter including overlay district requirements and the cessation of any current violations of this chapter, exclusive of any legal nonconforming conditions. Plan changes may be required. Where appropriate, the city may approve a sketch plan with restrictions which limit the duration of the use. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 7, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.230.080. - Certificates of appropriateness—Additional review procedures and review criteria. 
A.  Sign proposals which do not specifically conform to the requirements of this chapter. Independent sign proposals (i.e., not in conjunction with other development) which do not specifically conform to the requirements of this chapter, are required to submit full site plans. Additional site design information, in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the design objective plan, encompassing the property's location must be provided. 
B.  Review procedures and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
1.  Certificates of appropriateness must be issued according to procedures and criteria specified in divisions 38.210, 38.340 and 38.430, in addition to this chapter. 
2.  Sign proposals which specifically conform to the requirements of this chapter must be reviewed according to procedures and criteria outlined in division 38.560 of this chapter. 
C.  Demolition or movement of historic structures or sites located outside of the neighborhood conservation overlay district. 
1.  Demolition or movement of historic structures or sites located outside of the neighborhood conservation overlay district must be reviewed according to procedures and criteria outlined in section 38.340.080. 
2.  Certificates of appropriateness must be issued according to procedures and criteria specified in divisions 38.200, 38.340, and 38.430 as applicable, in addition to this article.  
Sec. 38.230.090. - Plan review procedures. 
A.  Step 1: Conceptual review. 
1.  Conceptual review (Required): 
a.  Purpose. Conceptual review is an opportunity for an applicant to discuss requirements, standards and procedures that apply to his or her development proposal. Major problems can be identified and solved during conceptual review before a formal application is made. Conceptual review applications are reviewed by the development review committee and comments are provided in writing to the applicant following the review. The primary focus of conceptual review is to identify site specific challenges and/or constraints critical path elements which will affect review process or submittal requirements. 
b.  Applicability. Conceptual review is required for development subject to section 38.230.050 and not subject to section 38.210.070. Conceptual review may be waived by the director of community development for development proposals that would not derive substantial benefit from such review. 
c.  Concept plan submittal. An applicant must submit the application materials required by the director of community development as provided in the conceptual review checklist. 
d.  Staff review and recommendation. Upon receipt of a concept plan, and after review of such plan by the DRC and a subsequent meeting with the applicant, the director of community development must furnish the applicant with written comments regarding such plan, including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the components of the formal development application. 
e.  Formal application must address the comments provided with the conceptual review. 
B.  Informal review (Optional): 
1.  Purpose. Informal review is an opportunity for an applicant to discuss the requirements, standards, procedures, and potential modifications of standards or variances that may be necessary for a development project. While the conceptual review process is a general consideration of the development proposal, informal review provides an opportunity for the applicant to have the city consider the development proposal in greater detail prior to formal submittal of an application. Problems of both a major and minor nature can be identified during the informal review before a formal application is made. 
Informal review applications are reviewed by the DRC and may be reviewed by the DRB, recreation and parks advisory board, or other applicable advisory boards. The city may invite other public or quasi-public agencies which may be impacted by the development to comment and/or attend the informal review meeting. These agencies may include the gas and electric utilities, state agencies, ditch companies, railroads, cable television service providers and other similar agencies. 
2.  Applicability. Although an informal review is not required, an applicant may request informal review for any development proposal. A request for informal review is made by filing an application with accompanying fee. 
3.  Informal review submittal. In conjunction with an informal review, the applicant must submit all documents required in the informal review checklist. 
4.  Staff review and recommendation. Upon receipt of a complete informal review proposal, and after review of such proposal by the DRC or other applicable advisory board, the director of community development must furnish the applicant with written comments and recommendations regarding such proposal. In conjunction with the foregoing, the director of community development will provide the applicant with a list of critical issues, if any, which have been identified in the informal review and which must be resolved prior to or during the review process of the formal development application. The list of critical issues will provide applicants the opinion of the director of community development regarding the development proposal, as that opinion is established based upon the facts presented during informal review. Formal application must address the comments provided with the informal review. 
C.  Step 2: Development application submittal. 
1.  Development application forms. All development applications must be in a form established by the director of community development. 
2.  Fees. All fees established in the adopted fee schedule must be paid prior to the review authority commencing review of the application. 
D.  Step 3: Review of applications. Acceptability and adequacy of application. 
1.  The community development department must review the application for acceptability within five working days to determine if the application omits any of the submittal elements required by this chapter. If the application does not contain all of the required elements, the application, and a written explanation of what the application is missing must be returned to the property owner or their representative. The five working day review period will be considered met if written explanation is provided as a signed and dated letter placed in the outgoing mail or as electronic communication (such as an email) within the five-day review period. 
2.  After the application is deemed to contain the required elements and to be acceptable, it must be reviewed for adequacy. A determination of adequacy means the application contains all of the required elements in sufficient detail and accuracy to enable the review authority to make a determination that the application either does or does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable regulations under the jurisdiction of the city. The adequacy review period begins on the next working day after the date that the community development department determines the application to contain all the required elements and must be completed within not more than 15 working days. The 15 working day review period will be considered met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the 15 working day review period. If the application is inadequate, a written explanation of why the application is inadequate will be provided to the property owner. 
a.  In the event the missing information is not received by the city within 15 working days of notification to the property owner and applicant of inadequacy, application materials except file records will be returned to the property owner or their representative, unless a longer period is agreed between city and applicant. Subsequent resubmittal requires payment of a review fee as if it were a new application. 
b.  A determination that an application is adequate does not restrict the city from requesting additional information during the site plan review process. 
3.  Should the property owner choose not to provide the required information after an application has been found unacceptable, nor to accept return of the application, the application may be processed by the city with the recognition by the property owner that unacceptability is an adequate basis for denial of the application regardless of other merit of the application. 
4.  The DRC may grant reasonable waivers from submittal of application materials required by these regulations where it is found that these regulations allow a waiver to be requested and granted. In order to be granted a waiver the applicant must include with the submission of the preliminary plan a written statement describing the requested waiver and the reasons upon which the request is based. The final approval body must then consider each waiver at the time the preliminary site plan is reviewed. All waivers must be identified not later than initial submittal of the preliminary site plan stage of review. 
If in the opinion of the review authority the waived materials are necessary for proper review of the development, the materials must be provided before review is completed. 
E.  Plans must be reviewed by the review bodies established by division 38.210 of this chapter and according to the procedures established by this chapter. After review of the applicable submittal materials required by division 38.220 of this chapter, and upon recommendation by the appropriate advisory bodies, the review authority must act to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application, subject to the appeal provisions of division 38.250 of this chapter. The basis for the review authority's action must be whether the application, including any required conditions, complies with all the applicable standards and requirements of this chapter, including section 38.100.050. 
1.  Plan. The review authority must provide an opportunity for the public to comment upon development proposals. The duration of the initial comment period must be as required by division 38.220 of this chapter and included in any notice required by division 38.270 of this chapter. 
a.  The review authority after receiving the recommendations of the advisory bodies and considering any public comment must act to approve, approve with conditions or deny an application within ten working days of the close of the public comment period. The decision must be in writing and must include any special conditions which are to be applied to the development. 
(1)  After formal notice of a project review has been given, interested parties may request in writing to receive a copy of the decision regarding an application. Persons making such a request must provide an addressed envelope. 
2.  Plan with deviations or variances or conditional use permits. The review authority must provide an opportunity for the public to comment upon a proposed plan. The notice must comply with the requirements of division 38.220 of this chapter. 
a.  The review authority, after receiving the recommendations of the advisory bodies and considering any public comment must act to approve, approve with conditions or deny an application. The decision must be in writing and must include any special conditions which are to be applied to the development. 
3.  Phasing. The entitlement period for which a final plan is valid is specified in section 38.230.140. Preliminary single phase plan applications will only be accepted for development that can occur under building permits issued within this final plan approval period. 
a.  Any development that includes phases or where construction of a building would extend past the final plan approval period must proceed under the master site plan application process with a first phase plan for those portions that can be constructed under the single phase final plan approval. The master site plan and first phase site plan may be reviewed concurrently as a single application. Each future project phase must submit a stand-alone site plan application following initial master site plan approval. 
b.  Each phase of a plan must not include more buildings than will be constructed within a one-year timeframe. These subsequent site plan applications may be expedited through the review process if they are consistent with the master site plan. Independent fees will be assessed for each required application. 
c.  A preliminary site plan application may be received where it is unclear whether the buildings or units can be constructed under building permits issued within one year of final site plan approval. In this case, the director of community development may request proof of a construction financing commitment prior to accepting the application. Applications, where it is clear that the buildings or units cannot be constructed under building permits issued within one year of final site plan approval will be deemed unacceptable for review. Such applications must proceed pursuant to a master site plan with first phase site plan process.  
Sec. 38.230.100. - Plan review criteria. 
A.  In considering applications for plan approval under this chapter, the review authority and advisory bodies must consider the following criteria. When considering the criteria for future phases of a master site plan, other than those for criteria 1—3, the evaluation may be of a more generalized demonstration of compliance, recognizing that a subsequent site plan will be submitted in the future which will provide evidence of specific compliance. See division 38.220 of this chapter for required submittal materials. 
1.  Conformance to and consistency with the city's adopted growth policy; 
2.  Conformance to this chapter, including the cessation of any current violations; 
3.  Conformance with all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations; 
4.  Conformance with special review criteria for applicable permit type as specified in article 2; 
5.  Conformance with the zoning provisions of article 3, including: 
a.  Permitted uses (division 38.310); 
b.  Form and intensity standards (division 38.320); 
c.  Applicable zone specific or overlay standards (divisions 38.330-340); 
d.  General land use standards and requirements (division 38.350); 
e.  Applicable supplemental use criteria (division 38.360); 
f.  Wireless facilities and/or affordable housing provisions (divisions 38.370-380) if applicable; 
6.  Conformance with the community design provisions of article 4, including: 
a.  Transportation facilities and access (division 38.400), notably: 
(1)  The impact of the proposal on the existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; 
(2)  Pedestrian and vehicular ingress, egress and circulation, including: 
(a)  Design of the pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems to assure that pedestrians and vehicles can move safely and easily both within the site and between properties and activities within the neighborhood area; 
(b)  Non-automotive transportation and circulation systems design features to enhance convenience and safety across parking lots and streets, including, but not limited to, paving patterns, grade differences, landscaping and lighting; 
(c)  Adequate connection and integration of the pedestrian and vehicular transportation systems to the systems in adjacent developments and general community; and 
(d)  Dedication of right-of-way or easements necessary for streets and similar transportation facilities; 
(3)  Loading and unloading areas; 
b.  Community design and element provisions (division 38.410), notably: 
(1)  Lot and block standards; 
(2)  Provisions for utilities, including efficient public services and facilities; 
(3)  Site surface drainage and stormwater control; 
(4)  Grading; 
c.  Park and recreational requirements (division 38.420); 
7.  Conformance with the project design provisions of article 5, including: 
a.  Compatibility with, and sensitivity to, the immediate environment of the site and the adjacent neighborhoods and other approved development relative to architectural design, building mass, neighborhood identity, landscaping, historical character, orientation of buildings on the site and visual integration; 
b.  Design and arrangement of the elements of the plan (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space and landscaping, etc.) so that activities are integrated with the organizational scheme of the community, neighborhood, and other approved development and produce an efficient, functionally organized and cohesive development; 
c.  Design and arrangement of elements of the plan (e.g., buildings circulation, open space and landscaping, etc.) in harmony with the existing natural topography, natural water bodies and water courses, existing vegetation, and to contribute to the overall aesthetic quality of the site configuration; 
d.  Landscaping, including the enhancement of buildings, the appearance of vehicular use, open space and pedestrian areas, and the preservation or replacement of natural vegetation; 
e.  Open space, including: 
f.  Lighting; 
g.  Signage; 
8.  Conformance with environmental and open space objectives set forth in articles 4—6, including: 
a.  The enhancement of the natural environment (e.g., through low impact development stormwater features or removal of inappropriate fill material); 
b.  Watercourse and wetland protections and associated wildlife habitats; and 
c.  If the development is adjacent to an existing or approved public park or public open space area, have provisions been made in the plan to avoid interfering with public access to and use of that area; 
9.  Conformance with the natural resource protection provisions of article 4 and article 6. 
10.  Other related matters, including relevant comment from affected parties. 
11.  If the development includes multiple lots that are interdependent for circulation or other means of addressing requirements of this chapter, whether the lots are either: 
a.  Configured so that the sale of individual lots will not alter the approved configuration or use of the property or cause the development to become nonconforming; or 
b.  The subject of reciprocal and perpetual easements or other agreements to which the city is a party so that the sale of individual lots will not cause one or more elements of the development to become nonconforming; and 
12.  Phasing of items listed in section 38.230.020.B, including but not limited to buildings and infrastructure. 
B.  If the review authority, after recommendation from the applicable advisory bodies, determines the proposed plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the community, is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this chapter and the Bozeman growth policy, the review authority must approve the proposed plan and may require conditions and safeguards that must be met prior to final approval as deemed necessary. Notice of action must be given in writing. 
C.  Plan approval may be denied upon a determination the application does not meet the criteria of this section. Persons objecting to the recommendations of review bodies carry the burden of proof. A denial of approval must be in writing. 
D.  Following approval of a master site plan, the applicant must submit to the community development department, sequential individual site plans for specific areas within the master site plan. Each subsequent application for a site plan must be consistent with the approved master site plan and subject to the review criteria set forth in subsection A above. Evidence that the review criteria have been met through the master site plan review process may be incorporated by reference in order to eliminate duplication of review.  
Sec. 38.230.110. - Conditional use permit. 
A.  The person applying for a conditional use permit must fill out and submit to the community development department the appropriate form with the required fee. The request for a conditional use permit must follow the procedures and application requirements of this division 38.230. 
B.  In consideration of all conditional use permit applications, a public hearing must be conducted by the review authority. Notice of the public hearing must be provided in accordance with article 2 of this chapter. 
C.  If a rezoning is required prior to approval of a conditional use permit, the application for rezoning and the conditional use permit may be filed and acted upon simultaneously, however the conditional use permit is not effective until the rezoning has been implemented by ordinance. 
D.  The review authority, in approving a conditional use permit, must review the application against the review requirements of section 38.230.100. 
E.  In addition to the review criteria of section 38.230.100, the review authority must, in approving a conditional use permit, determine favorably as follows: 
1.  That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and topography to accommodate such use, and all setbacks, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading and landscaping are adequate to properly relate such use with the land and uses in the vicinity; 
2.  That the proposed use will have no material adverse effect upon the abutting property. Persons objecting to the recommendations of review bodies carry the burden of proof; 
3.  That any additional conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Regulation of use; 
b.  Special setbacks, spaces and buffers; 
c.  Special fences, solid fences and walls; 
d.  Surfacing of parking areas; 
e.  Requiring street, service road or alley dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds; 
f.  Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress; 
g.  Regulation of signs; 
h.  Requiring maintenance of the grounds; 
i.  Regulation of noise, vibrations and odors; 
j.  Regulation of hours for certain activities; 
k.  Time period within which the proposed use must be developed; 
l.  Duration of use; 
m.  Requiring the dedication of access rights; and 
n.  Other such conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner. 
F.  In addition to all other conditions, the following general requirements apply to every conditional use permit granted: 
1.  The right to a use and occupancy permit is contingent upon the fulfillment of all general and special conditions imposed by the conditional use permit procedure; and 
2.  All of the conditions constitute restrictions running with the land use, apply and must be adhered to by the owner of the land, successors or assigns, are binding upon the owner of the land, his successors or assigns, must be consented to in writing, and must be recorded as such with the county clerk and recorder's office by the property owner prior to the issuance of any building permits, final plan approval or commencement of the conditional use. 
G.  Applications for conditional use permits may be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the review authority. If an application is denied, the denial constitutes a determination that the applicant has not shown that the conditions required for approval do exist. 
H.  The applicant must be notified in writing of the final action taken within seven working days of the action. If the conditional use permit has been granted the notification must include any conditions, automatic termination date, period of review or other requirements. If the conditional use permit has been granted, the permit will be issued upon the signature of the community development director after completion of all conditions and final plan. 
I.  Termination/revocation of conditional use permit approval. 
1.  Conditional use permits are approved based on an analysis of current local circumstances and regulatory requirements. Over time these things may change and the use may no longer be appropriate to a location. A conditional use permit will be considered as terminated and of no further effect if: 
a.  After having been commenced, the approved use is not actively conducted on the site for a period of two continuous calendar years; 
b.  Final zoning approval to reuse the property for another principal or conditional use is granted; 
c.  The use or development of the site is not begun within the time limits of the final site plan approval in section 38.230.140. 
2.  A conditional use which has terminated may be reestablished on a site by either, the review and approval of a new conditional use permit application, or a determination by the community development director that the local circumstances and regulatory requirements are essentially the same as at the time of the original approval. A denial of renewal by the community development director may not be appealed. If the community development director determines that the conditional use permit may be renewed on a site then any conditions of approval of the original conditional use permit are also renewed. 
3.  If activity begins for which a conditional use permit has been given final approval, all activities must comply with any conditions of approval or code requirements. Should there be a failure to maintain compliance the city may revoke the approval through the procedures outlined in section 38.200.160.  
Sec. 38.230.120. - Special use permit. 
A.  The person applying for a special use permit must fill out and submit to the community development department the appropriate form with the required fee. The request for a special use permit must follow the procedures and application requirements of this division 38.230. 
B.  The review authority, in approving a special use permit, must review the application against the review requirements of section 38.230.100. 
C.  In addition to the review criteria of section 38.230.100, the review authority must, in approving a special use permit, determine favorably that applications meet the review criteria set forth for conditional use permits as set forth in subsections 38.230.110.E through I.  
Sec. 38.230.130. - Community design framework master plans. 
A.  The person applying for a community design framework master plan must fill out and submit to the community development department the appropriate form with the required fee. The request for a community design framework master plan must follow the procedures and application requirements of this division 38.230. 
B.  The review authority, in approving a community design framework master plan, must review the application against the review requirements of sections 38.230.100 and 38.510.030.L. 
C.  Applications for community design framework master plans may be approved or denied by the review authority.  
Sec. 38.230.140. - Final plan. 
A.  If the review authority is the city commission, no later than six months after the date of the commission's approval of the plan, the applicant must submit to the community development department a final plan. The number of copies of the final plan to be submitted is established by the director of community development. The final plan must contain the materials required in sections 38.220.080 and 38.220.090 and whatever revisions to the preliminary site plan or master site plan are required to comply with any conditions of approval. Prior to the passage of six months, the applicant may seek an extension of not more than an additional six months from the director of community development. 
B.  In addition to the materials required in subsection A of this section, the applicant must submit a certification of completion and compliance stating that they understand any conditions of approval and the submitted final plans have complied with any conditions of approval or corrections to comply with code provisions. 
C.  If a plan is fully compliant with all applicable standards the review authority may approve the final plan after the close of the public comment period. In addition to the materials required in subsections A and B of this section, the owner must submit a statement of intent to construct according to the final plan. Such statement must acknowledge that construction not in compliance with the approved final plan may result in delays of occupancy or costs to correct noncompliance. 
D.  Following approval of a final plan, the approval of the final plan is effective for one year. Prior to the passage of one year, the applicant may seek an extension of not more than one additional year. In such instances, the director of community development must determine whether the relevant terms of this chapter and circumstances have significantly changed since the initial approval. If relevant terms of this chapter or circumstances have significantly changed, the extension of the approval may not be granted. 
E.  Following approval of a final master site plan, approval of the final master site plan is effective for not less than three but not more than five years with the initial duration to be specified during the final action of the review authority. Owners of property subject to the master site plan may seek extensions to not exceed five years. Approval of an extension must be granted if the director of community development determines the criteria of subsection F of this section are met. 
F.  Any request for an extension must be in writing and be dated and signed by the owner of the undeveloped area or incomplete development for which the extension is sought. More than one extension may be requested for a particular development. Each request must be considered on its individual merits. An extension of the development approval under this division 38.230 does not extend other city or non-city agency approvals, e.g. for design of infrastructure extensions, necessary to complete the project. When evaluating an extension request, the city must consider: 
1.  Changes to the development regulations since the original approval and whether the development as originally approved substantially complies with the new regulations; 
2.  Progress to date in completing the development as a whole and any phases; 
3.  Phasing of the development and the ability for existing development to operate without the delayed development; 
4.  Dependence by other development on any public infrastructure or private improvements to be installed by the development; 
5.  For extensions of approval greater than one year, the demonstrated ability of the developer to complete the development; 
6.  Overall maintenance of the site; and 
7.  Whether mitigation for impacts of the development identified during the preliminary plan review remain relevant, adequate, and applicable to the present circumstances of the development and community. 
G.  Upon approval of the final plan by the community development director the applicant may obtain a building permit as provided for by division 38.220 of this chapter. 
1.  Subsequent site plan approvals are required to implement a master site plan, and approval of a master site plan only does not entitle an applicant to obtain any building permits. 
H.  Prior to the expiration of an approved plan, but not later than beginning of construction, a landowner may request to abandon approval of an application which has received final approval per this section. 
1.  Such a request for abandonment must be in writing to the director of community development, must clearly identify the project by the city's assigned application number, and must clearly state that the landowner is abandoning the application and all associated rights and privileges. The director of community development may establish standards for the content, form, and supporting materials to be included in a request to abandon an approval. 
2.  The director of community development may approve such an abandonment in writing. 
3.  An application abandoned under this section is void. 
( Ord. No. 2031 , § 1, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.230.150. - Amendments to plans. 
A.  It is the intent of this section to assure that issues of community concern are addressed during the redevelopment, reuse or change in use of existing facilities in the community. Specific areas of community concern include public safety, mitigation of off-site environmental impacts and site character in relation to surroundings. The following procedures for amendments to approved plans, reuse of existing facilities and further development of sites assure that these concerns are adequately and expeditiously addressed. 
B.  Any amendment to or modification of a plan approved under the ordinance codified in this division 38.230 (September 3, 1991—Ordinance 1332) must be submitted to the community development director for review and possible approval. Proposals for further development, reuse or change in use of sites developed pursuant to this chapter must be reviewed as an amendment to an approved plan. All amendments must be shown on a revised plan drawing. Amendments to approved plans must be reviewed and may be approved by the community development director upon determining that the amended plan is in substantial compliance with the originally approved plan. If it is determined that the amended plan is not in substantial compliance with the originally approved plan, the application must be resubmitted as a new application and will be subject to all standards and plan review and approval provisions of this chapter. Substantial compliance may be shown by demonstrating that the amendments do not exceed the thresholds established in section 38.230.160.C. 
C.  Modifications or amendments to a master site plan at the time an extension of approval is sought may be proposed by either the applicant or the review authority, and must be based on substantive current information that indicates that relevant circumstances have changed and that such circumstances support the proposed modifications. Such circumstances may include market analyses, economic conditions, changes in surrounding land uses, changes in ownership, etc. 
D.  For building additions and/or remodels to all existing development, except single to four-household dwellings in any configuration, see section 38.500.020.B to determine how the design standards within article 5 are applied.  
Sec. 38.230.160. - Reuse, change in use or further development of sites developed prior to the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
A.  It is the policy of the city to work with owners of property during the reuse, change in use, or further development process to correct existing violations of the city's and other agency's regulations, to encourage reinvestment and renewal of existing developed sites, and to move existing sites toward compliance with current standards while recognizing the limitations that may exist in relation to an existing site. 
B.  Sites legally developed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter (September 3, 1991—Ordinance 1332) are considered to have developed under an approved plan. Proposals for reuse, change in use or the further development of sites legally developed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be approved by the review authority upon determining that no significant alteration of the previous use and site are proposed, and upon a determination that adequate access and site surface drainage are provided. All such proposals must be shown on a plan drawing as required by section 38.220.110. 
C.  The criteria for determining that no significant alteration of the previous use and site will result from the proposed reuse, change in use or further development of a site must include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  The proposed use is allowed under the same zoning district use classification as the previous use, however replacement of nonconforming uses must comply with the provisions of division 38.270 of this chapter; 
2.  Changes proposed for the site, singly or cumulatively, do not increase lot coverage by buildings, storage areas, parking areas or impervious surfaces and/or do not result in an increase in intensity of use as measured by parking requirements, traffic generation or other measurable off-site impacts; 
a.  By more than 20 percent for developments not meeting one or more of the criteria of section 38.230.040.C; or 
b.  By more than ten percent for developments meeting or exceeding one or more of the criteria of section 38.230.040.C; 
3.  The proposed use does not continue any unsafe or hazardous conditions previously existing on the site or associated with the proposed use of the property. 
D.  If it is determined that the proposed reuse, change in use or further development of a site contains significant alterations to the previous use and/or site, the application must be resubmitted as a new application and will be subject to all plan review and approval provisions of this division 38.230. 
E.  When proposals for reuse, change in use or further development of a site are located in the neighborhood conservation overlay district, review by ADR staff or the DRB may be required to determine whether resubmittal as a new application is necessary. 
F.  For building additions and/or remodels to all existing development, except single to four-household dwellings in any configuration, see section 38.500.020.B to determine how the design standards within article 5 are applied.  
Sec. 38.230.170. - Improvements to existing developed sites independent of site plan review. 
The continued improvement of existing developed sites is desired to increase the level of compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to encourage maintenance and viability of the site. An applicant may propose improvements, not in association with a plan review, to increase conformity with the standards of this chapter for landscaping, lighting, parking or similar components of a site to occur over a defined period of time, not to exceed three years. Such improvements must be depicted on a site plan drawn to scale and which must be sufficiently detailed to clearly depict the current conditions, the intended end result of the proposed improvements and any phasing of work. Such improvements must be reviewed by and approved at the discretion of the review authority which may require surety in accordance with the terms of division 38.270 of this chapter for work performed. A certificate of appropriateness may be required if the site is located within the neighborhood conservation overlay district.  
Sec. 38.230.180. - Building permits based upon approved sketch or site plans. 
Based upon the approved sketch or final plan and after any appeals have been resolved, a building permit for the site may be requested and may be granted pursuant to division 38.220 of this chapter. No building permit may be granted on the basis of an approved sketch or other plan whose approval has expired.  
Sec. 38.230.190. - Appeals. 
Appeals of decisions rendered in conjunction with this division 38.230 may be taken as set forth in division 38.250 of this chapter.  
DIVISION 38.240. - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES  
Part 1. - Subdivision and Platting Administrative Procedures 
 
Sec. 38.240.010. - Transfers of title. 
A.  Unless the plat is located in an area where the state or the city does not have jurisdiction, every final subdivision plat must be filed for record with the county clerk and recorder before title to the subdivided land can be sold or transferred in any manner. After a preliminary subdivision plat has been approved or conditionally approved, the developer may enter into contracts to sell lots in the proposed subdivision if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Under the terms of the contracts, the purchasers of lots in the proposed subdivision must make any payments to an escrow agent which must be a bank or savings and loan association chartered to do business in the state; 
2.  Under the terms of the contracts and the escrow agreement, the payments made by purchasers of lots in the proposed subdivision may not be distributed by the escrow agent to the developer until the final plat of the subdivision is filed and of record with the county clerk and recorder; 
3.  The contracts and the escrow agreement provide that if the final plat of the proposed subdivision is not filed with the county clerk and recorder within two years of the preliminary plat approval, the escrow agent must immediately refund to each purchaser any payment made under the contract; 
4.  The county treasurer has certified that no real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be divided are delinquent; and 
5.  The contracts must contain the following language conspicuously set out therein: "The real property which is the subject hereof has not been finally platted, and until a final plat identifying the property has been filed with the county clerk and recorder, title to the property cannot be transferred in any manner." 
B.  Unless the plat is located in an area where the state or the city does not have jurisdiction, the county clerk and recorder may not record any instrument that purports to transfer title to a parcel or tract of land that is required to be surveyed by the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.) unless the required certificate of survey or subdivision plat has been filed with the county clerk and recorder and the instrument of transfer describes the parcel or tract by reference to the filed certificate or plat. This provision does not apply if the parcel or tract to be transferred was created before July 1, 1973, and the instrument of transfer for the parcel or tract includes a reference to a previously recorded instrument of transfer or is accompanied by documents that, if recorded, would otherwise satisfy the requirements of this subsection B. The reference or document must demonstrate that the parcel or tract existed before July 1, 1973. However, these references or documents do not constitute a legal description of the property and may not be substituted for a legal description of the property.  
Sec. 38.240.020. - Effect of recording complying plat. 
The recording of any plat made in compliance with the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.) serves to establish the identity of all lands shown on and being a part of such plat. Where lands are conveyed by reference to a plat, the plat itself or any copy of the plat, properly certified by the county clerk and recorder as being a true copy thereof, must be regarded as incorporated into the instrument of conveyance and must be received in evidence in all courts of this state.  
Sec. 38.240.030. - Correction of errors, amendments or vacation of recorded final plats. 
A.  Correction of errors. Correction of errors that, in the opinion of the city, will not materially alter the plat may be made by the submission of a corrected final plat for the city's approval. The plat may be filed under the procedures for first minor subdivision plats. The plat must be entitled "amended plat of the (name of subdivision) subdivision," and the reason for the correction must be stated on the face of the plat. 
B.  Material alterations. Amendments that materially alter the final plat, or any portion thereof, must be made by the filing of an amended plat showing all alterations. The amended plat must be approved by the city under the major or minor subdivision procedure, as is appropriate. Prior to such approval, the amended plat must be reviewed by the community development department. The city may not approve an amendment which will place the plat in nonconformance with the standards contained herein unless a public hearing is held on the plat and a written variance from the standards issued pursuant to procedures contained herein for such variances is granted. The plat must be entitled "amended plat of (the name) subdivision," and the reason for the amendment must be stated on the face of the plat. 
C.  Vacating recorded plats. Any plat prepared and recorded as provided by this chapter may be vacated, in whole or in part, as provided by MCA 7-5-2501, 7-5-2502, 7-14-2616(1) and (2), 7-14-2617, 7-14-4114(1) and (2), and 7-14-4115. Upon vacation, the city, or the district court, as provided in MCA 7-5-2502, must determine to which properties the title to the streets and alleys of the vacated portions must revert. The city, or the district court, as provided in MCA 7-5-2502, must take into consideration the previous platting; the manner in which the right-of-way was originally dedicated, granted or conveyed; the reasons stated in the petition requesting the vacation; the parties requesting the vacation; and any agreements between the adjacent property owners' regarding the use of the vacated area. The title to the streets and alleys of the vacated portions may revert to one or more of the owners of the properties within the platted area adjacent to the vacated portions. 
1.  Utility easements. When any poleline, pipeline or any other public or private facility is located in a vacated street or alley at the time of the reversion of the title to the vacated street or alley, the owner of the public or private utility facility has an easement over the vacated land to continue the operation and maintenance of the public or private utility facility.  
Sec. 38.240.040. - Correction of recorded plat by governing body. 
When a recorded plat does not definitely show the location or size of lots or blocks, or the location or width of any street or alley, the city may at its own expense cause a new and correct survey and plat to be made and recorded in the office of the county clerk and recorder. The corrected plat must, to the extent possible, follow the plan of the original survey and plat. The surveyor making the resurvey must endorse the corrected plat referring to the original plat, and noting the defect existing therein and the corrections made.  
Sec. 38.240.050. - Disposition of water rights. 
A.  When a subdivision creates parcels with lot sizes averaging less than five acres, the developer must: 
1.  Reserve all or a portion of the appropriation water rights owned by the owner of the land to be subdivided and transfer the water rights to a single entity for use by the landowners within the subdivision who have a legal right to the water and reserve and sever any remaining surface water rights from the land; 
2.  If the land to be subdivided is subject to a contract or interest in a public or private entity formed to provide the use of a water right on the subdivision lots, establish a landowner's water use agreement administered through a single entity that specifies administration and the rights and responsibilities of landowners within the subdivision who have a legal right and access to the water; or 
3.  Reserve and sever all surface water rights from the land proposed for subdivision.  
Part 2. - Review Procedures for Subdivisions 
 
Sec. 38.240.100. - General review procedure. 
Every plat of subdivision must be reviewed, approved and filed for record with the county clerk and recorder in accordance with the procedures contained herein before title to the subdivided land can be sold or transferred in any manner. Subdivisions containing six or more lots are considered major subdivisions. A subdivision containing five or fewer lots, in which proper access to all lots is provided and in which no land is to be dedicated to public use for parks and playgrounds, is a minor subdivision.  
Sec. 38.240.110. - Presubmittal meeting and pre-application plan review. 
A.  The purpose of a pre-application plan review is to discuss this chapter and these standards, to familiarize the developer with the standards, goals and objectives of applicable plans, regulations and ordinances, and to discuss the proposed subdivision as it relates to these matters. 
1.  Minor subdivisions. Prior to the submittal of a subdivision application for a minor subdivision, the developer must submit an application for subdivision pre-application review. 
2.  Major subdivisions. Prior to the submittal of a subdivision application for a major subdivision, the developer must submit an application for subdivision pre-application review. The developer is encouraged to have a presubmittal meeting with the community development department prior to submitting a subdivision pre-application. 
3.  Pre-application plan review. For subdivision pre-application review, the developer must submit a complete application for pre-application plan review, the appropriate review fee, and copies of all required pre-application information as set forth in section 38.220.030. 
a.  Community development department review. The community development department must review the pre-application plan and advise the developer as to whether the plans and data meet the goals and objectives of applicable plans and this chapter. 
(1)  Agency review. The community development department will distribute the pre-application information to appropriate county and city departments and state and federal agencies for review and written comment. All written comments received from various agencies, along with the community development department's comments regarding whether the plans and data meet the standards, goals and objectives of applicable plans, ordinances, and this chapter, and for informational purposes identification of local regulations, state laws, and growth policy provisions that may apply to the subdivision process, will be forwarded to the applicant to aid in the preparation of the subdivision application. The community development department must provide a list of the public utilities, agencies of government, and other parties who may be contacted and their timeframes for comment on the subdivision application. The comments collected by the community development department must be provided in person or by letter to the subdivider or their agent within 30 working days of a complete application being received by the city. The 30 working day review period is met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the 30 working day review period. 
(2)  Time for review. The community development department must review the pre-application plan and within 30 working days advise the developer as to whether the plans and data meet the goals and objectives of applicable plans and this chapter. Every effort must be made by the community development department to obtain department and agency comment within this time period. 
b.  Optional planning board review. If the developer so wishes, the developer may request in writing that the planning board review pre-application plans. The letter of request and additional copies of the pre-application materials are required for this optional review. 
(1)  The request must be received at least 30 working days prior to the planning board meeting at which it is to be considered. The application will be submitted to the planning board at their next available meeting. A copy of the approved minutes of the planning board meeting will be forwarded to the developer. 
c.  Time for follow-up submittal. A complete subdivision preliminary plat application must be submitted to the community development department within one calendar year of the date the planning office dates, signs and places the letter in the outgoing mail or sends the letter via electronic mail. 
d.  The property owner will not receive formal written notification on the acceptability or adequacy of a subdivision pre-application plan submittal.  
Sec. 38.240.120. - Concurrent review. 
For Sanitation and Subdivision Act review, the developer has the option of submitting a state department of environmental quality (DEQ)/local government joint application form in the place of a preliminary plat application form, and to request concurrent subdivision review by the state department of environmental quality and the city, pursuant to MCA 76-4-129.  
Sec. 38.240.130. - Preliminary plat. 
A.  After the requirement for a pre-application review has been satisfied, the developer may submit a subdivision application within one year of the date of the city's written comments as required by section 38.240.110.A.3.a(2). Subdivision applications must be submitted, along with the appropriate review fee and all required subdivision application information as set forth in division 38.220 of this chapter to the community development department and must conform to the requirements of this chapter. The preliminary plat must be prepared by a surveyor licensed to practice in the state. 
1.  Acceptability and adequacy of application. The time limits in subsections 1.a and b of this section apply to each successive submittal of the application until a determination is made that the application contains the required materials and is adequate for review and the subdivider or their agent is notified. 
a.  The community development department must review a subdivision application within five working days of receipt of the application and applicable fee. A subdivision application is considered to be received on the date of delivery to the reviewing agency if it is accompanied by the applicable review fee. An application is acceptable only if it contains all of the information required by this chapter. If the application is unacceptable, the application, and a written explanation of why the application is unacceptable will be returned to the subdivider. If the application is acceptable the subdivider must be so notified. The property owner may designate in writing another party to receive notifications regarding acceptability. The five working day review period is met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the five working day review period. If the applicant chooses to withdraw the application, the applicant may request a refund if procedures for such have been created in the administrative manual adopted by the director of community development. Subsequent resubmittal must require payment of a review fee as if it were a new application. 
b.  After the application is deemed acceptable it must be reviewed for adequacy. The review for adequacy must be conducted by the appropriate agency with expertise in the subject matter. The adequacy review period begins on the next working day after the date that the community development department determines the application is acceptable and sends the required notice to the subdivider; and must be completed within not more than 15 working days. The 15 working day review period is met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the 15 working day review period. If the application is inadequate, a written explanation of why the application is inadequate will be returned to the subdivider. If the application is adequate the subdivider must be so notified. The property owner may designate in writing another party to receive notifications regarding adequacy. 
(1)  In the event the missing information is not received by the city within 15 working days of notification to the subdivider of inadequacy, all application materials except the city's file record copy must be returned to the subdivider or their representative. Subsequent resubmittal will require payment of a review fee as if it were a new application. 
(2)  A determination that an application is adequate does not restrict the city from requesting additional information during the subdivision review process. A determination of adequacy establishes the applicable review criteria as specified in section 38.200.080.A. 
c.  The DRC may grant reasonable waivers from submittal of application materials required by these regulations where it is found that these regulations allow a waiver to be requested and granted. If in the opinion of the final approval authority the waived materials are necessary for proper review of the development, the materials must be provided before review is completed. 
d.  In order to be granted a waiver the applicant must include with the submission of the subdivision application a written statement describing the requested waiver and the reasons upon which the request is based. The final approval body must then consider each waiver at the time the subdivision application is reviewed. All waivers must be initially identified with the pre-application stage of review. 
2.  Review by affected agencies. After an application is deemed acceptable, the community development department may submit copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary information to relevant public utilities and public agencies for review and comment, and for major subdivisions to the planning board for its advice pertaining to the approval or denial of the subdivision application. Review by public agencies or utilities must not delay the city commission's consideration of the subdivision application beyond the statutorily specified review period. If the community development department must request review by a public utility, agency of government, and other parties regarding the subdivision application that was not identified during the pre-application review the community development department must notify the subdivider. 
3.  Planning board review. At a regularly noticed public hearing, the planning board must review all major subdivision applications, together with required supplementary plans and information, and determine whether the plat is in compliance with the city's growth policy. The planning board must hold a public hearing on all major subdivisions. Pursuant to MCA 76-1-107, the planning board has delegated its review of all minor subdivisions from a tract of record to the community development director. 
a.  Public testimony. All written public comment received at or prior to a public hearing must be incorporated into the written record of the review. Minutes must be taken of verbal comment received during the public hearing or public meeting before the planning board and must be incorporated into the written record of the review. Copies of the minutes and written comments must be included in any recommendation made to the city commission by the planning board. 
b.  Planning board recommendation. Within ten working days of their review, the planning board must submit in writing to the city commission its advice regarding compliance with the city's growth policy, and a recommendation for approval, conditional approval or denial of the subdivision application. 
4.  Community development director review. The community development director must review all minor subdivision applications, together with required supplementary plans and information, and determine whether the plat is in compliance with the city's growth policy. The community development director must make a written recommendation including a summary of the agency review and analysis of the review criteria established in this chapter and a recommendation for approval, conditional approval or denial of the subdivision application. 
a.  Public testimony. All written public comment received during the community development director's review must be incorporated into the written record of the review. Copies of written comments must be included in any recommendation made to the city commission by the community development director. 
5.  City commission review. The city commission must review and take action on all proposed subdivisions. 
a.  The following requirements for a public hearing or a public meeting, and for statutory review periods, must be met: 
(1)  First minor subdivision created from a tract of record. The city commission must consider the subdivision application and the community development director's recommendation during a regular public meeting of the commission. The city commission, when legal and physical access is provided to all lots must approve, conditionally approve or deny the subdivision application of a first minor subdivision within 35 working days of the determination that the application is adequate, unless there is a written extension from the developer for a period not to exceed one year from the date the application was determined to be adequate. A minor subdivision must be reviewed as a second or subsequent minor subdivision if the tract has been previously subdivided or created by a subdivision; or the tract has descended from a tract of record which has previously been divided by exemption or other means into 6 or more tracts of record since July 1, 1973. 
(a)  Variance requests for minor subdivisions. If the developer of a minor subdivision is requesting a variance from any requirement of this chapter, the procedures of section 38.250.080 must be followed except that a public hearing must not be held. 
(2)  Subdivisions eligible for summary review. The city commission must consider the application and the community development director's recommendation during a regular public meeting of the commission. The city commission must approve, conditionally approve or deny a proposed subdivision that is eligible for summary review within 35 working days of determination that the application is adequate, unless there is a written extension from the developer. The written extension may not exceed one year. Minor subdivisions are eligible for summary review if the plat has been approved by the state department of environmental quality whenever approval is required by MCA 76-4-101 et seq. 
(3)  Second or subsequent minor subdivision created from a tract of record. For the second or subsequent minor subdivision created from a tract of record, the city commission must hold a public hearing on the subdivision application. The city commission must approve, conditionally approve or deny the subdivision application of a second or subsequent minor subdivision within 60 working days of the determination that the application is adequate for review, unless there is a written extension from the developer, not to exceed one year from the date the application was determined to be adequate. 
(4)  Major subdivisions. For a major subdivision, the city commission must hold a public hearing on the subdivision application. The city commission must approve, conditionally approve or deny the subdivision application within 60 working days of the determination that the application is adequate for review if the subdivision has less than 50 lots, and within 80 working days of the determination that the application is adequate for review if the subdivision has 50 or more lots, unless there is a written extension from the developer, not to exceed one year from the date the application was determined to be adequate. 
(5)  Public testimony. All written public comment received at a public meeting or public hearing prior to a decision to approval, approve with conditions, or deny a subdivision application must be incorporated into the written record of the review. Minutes must be taken of verbal comments received during the public hearing before the city commission and must be incorporated into the written record of the review maintained by the city. 
(6)  New and credible information. The city commission must determine whether public comments or documents presented to the city commission at a public hearing regarding a subdivision application held pursuant to section 38.240.130.A.5 constitute: 
(a)  Information or analysis of information that was presented at a public hearing held pursuant to section 38.240.130.A.5 that the public has had a reasonable opportunity to examine and on which the public has had a reasonable opportunity to comment; or 
(b)  New information regarding a subdivision application that has never been submitted as evidence or considered by either the city commission, planning board or by city staff at a hearing during which the subdivision application was considered. 
(c)  If the city commission determines that the public comments or documents constitute new information not previously considered at a public hearing, the city commission may: 
(i)  Approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed subdivision without basing its decision on the new information if the governing body determines that the new information is either irrelevant or not credible; or 
(ii)  Schedule or direct its agent or agency to schedule a subsequent public hearing before the city commission for consideration of only the new information that may have an impact on the findings and conclusions that the governing body will rely upon in making its decision on the proposed subdivision. 
(iii)  In deciding whether the information is both new and credible the city commission must consider: 
(A)  Whether the topic of the information has previously been examined or available for examination at a public hearing on the subdivision application; 
(B)  Whether the information is verifiable, and if applicable developed by a person with professional competency in the subject matter; 
(C)  Whether the information is relevant to a topic within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(d)  If a subsequent public hearing is held to consider new and credible information, the 60 working day review period required in section 38.240.130.A.5 is suspended and the new hearing must be noticed and held within 45 working days of the governing body's determination to schedule a new hearing. After the new hearing, the otherwise applicable time limit for review resumes at the governing body's next scheduled public meeting for which proper notice for the public hearing on the subdivision application can be provided. The governing body may not consider any information regarding the subdivision application that is presented after the hearing when making its decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Criteria for city commission action. The basis for the city commission's decision to approve, conditionally approve or deny the subdivision must be whether the subdivision application, public hearing if required, planning board advice and recommendation and additional information demonstrates that development of the subdivision complies with this chapter, the city's growth policy, the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act and other adopted state and local ordinances, including, but not limited to, applicable zoning requirements. The city commission may not deny approval of a subdivision based solely on the subdivision's impacts on educational services; or based solely on parcels within the subdivision having been designated as wildland-urban interface parcels by the most recent city-adopted hazard mitigation plan and its supporting documentation. When deciding to approve, conditionally approve or deny a subdivision application, the city commission must: 
(1)  Review the preliminary plat, together with required supplementary plans and information, to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, the development standards and policies of the city's growth policy, the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act, and other adopted state laws and local ordinances, including but not limited to applicable zoning requirements. 
(2)  Consider written comments from appropriate public agencies, utilities or other members of the public. 
(3)  Consider the following: 
(a)  Relevant evidence relating to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(b)  Other regulations, code provisions or policies in effect in the area of the proposed subdivision; 
(c)  The recommendation of the advisory bodies; and 
(d)  Any relevant public testimony. 
(4)  When the subdivision does not qualify, pursuant to MCA 76-4-125(2), for the certification established in section 38.240.100 the city commission may conditionally approve or deny a proposed subdivision as a result of the water and sanitation information provided pursuant to section 38.220.050.A.9. or public comment received pursuant to MCA 76-3-604 on the information provided pursuant to section 38.220.050. A conditional approval or denial must be based on existing subdivision, zoning, or other regulations that the city commission has the authority to enforce. 
(5)  The city may not approve a proposed subdivision if any of the features and improvements of the subdivision encroach onto adjoining private property in a manner that is not otherwise provided for under Title 76, chapters 3 or 4, MCA, or if the well isolation zone of any proposed well to be drilled for the proposed subdivision encroaches onto adjoining private property unless the owner of the private property authorizes the encroachment. For the purposes of this section, "well isolation zone" has the meaning provided in 76-4-102, MCA. 
c.  City commission action. If the city commission denies or conditionally approves the subdivision application, it must forward one copy of the plat to the developer accompanied by a letter over the appropriate signature stating the reason for disapproval or enumerating the conditions that must be met to ensure approval of the final plat. This written statement must include: 
(1)  The reason for the denial or condition imposition; 
(2)  The evidence that justifies the denial or condition imposition; and 
(3)  Information regarding the appeal process for the denial or condition imposition. 
d.  Mitigation. The city commission may require the developer to design the subdivision to reasonably minimize potentially significant adverse impacts identified through the review required by this chapter. The city commission must issue written findings to justify the reasonable mitigation required by this chapter. The city commission may not unreasonably restrict a landowner's ability to develop land, but it is recognized that in some instances the unmitigated impacts of a proposed development may be unacceptable and will preclude approval of the plat. When requiring mitigation under this subsection, the city commission must consult with the developer and must give due weight and consideration to the expressed preference of the developer. 
e.  Findings of fact. Within 30 working days of the final action to approve, deny, or approve with conditions a subdivision, the city commission must issue written findings of fact that discuss and weigh the following criteria, as applicable (pursuant to MCA 76-3-608): 
(1)  Criteria. 
(a)  Compliance with the survey requirements of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act; 
(b)  Compliance with this chapter and the review process of these regulations; 
(c)  The provision of easements to and within the subdivision for the location and installation of any necessary utilities; 
(d)  The provision of legal and physical access to each parcel within the subdivision and the notation of that access on the applicable plat and any instrument transferring the parcel; and 
(e)  For major subdivisions, the findings of fact must also address the effect on agriculture, agricultural water user facilities, local services, the natural environment, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and public health and safety. 
(2)  Required components. The written findings of fact must contain at a minimum: 
(a)  Information regarding the appeal process for the denial or imposition of conditions; 
(b)  The regulations and statutes used in reaching the decision to deny or impose conditions and explains how they apply to the decision; 
(c)  The facts and conclusions that the governing body relied upon in making its decision to deny or impose conditions. The documents, testimony, or other materials that form the basis of the decision and support the conclusions of the governing body may be incorporated into the written findings by reference. 
(3)  Federal or state governmental entity input. If a federal or state governmental entity submits a written or oral comment or an opinion regarding wildlife, wildlife habitat, or the natural environment relating to a subdivision application for the purpose of assisting a governing body's review, the comment or opinion may be included in the governing body's written statement under this section only if the comment or opinion provides scientific information or a published study that supports the comment or opinion. A governmental entity that is or has been involved in an effort to acquire or assist others in acquiring an interest in the real property identified in the subdivision application must disclose that the entity has been involved in that effort prior to submitting a comment, an opinion, or information as provided in this subsection. 
f.  Initial subdivision application approval period. Upon approving or conditionally approving a subdivision application, the city commission must provide the developer with a dated and signed findings of fact and order. This initial approval must be in force for not more than: 
(1)  One calendar year for minor subdivisions; 
(2)  Two calendar years for single-phased major subdivisions; and 
(3)  Three calendar years for multi-phased major subdivisions after the date of the findings of fact and order. At the end of this period, the city may, at the written request of the developer, extend its approval for a mutually agreed-upon period of time. 
g.  Extensions of preliminary plat approval period. Any mutually agreed upon extension must be in writing and dated and signed by the subdivider or their authorized agent and by the city commission or their authorized agent. More than one extension may be requested for a particular subdivision. Each request is considered on its individual merits. An extension of the subdivision approval under this chapter does not extend other city or non-city agency approvals, e.g. for design of infrastructure extensions, necessary to complete the project. Review authority for extensions is established in division 38.220. When evaluating an extension request, the city must consider: 
(1)  Changes to the development regulations since the original approval and whether the subdivision as originally approved is substantially compliant with the new regulations; 
(2)  Progress to date in completing the subdivision as a whole and any phases, including maintenance of the remainder of the site in good condition; 
(3)  Phasing of the subdivision and the ability for existing development to operate without the delayed development; 
(4)  Dependence by other development on any public infrastructure or private improvements to be installed by the subdivision; 
(5)  Demonstrated ability of the subdivider to complete the subdivision; 
(6)  Whether mitigation for impacts of the subdivision identified during the preliminary plat review and findings of fact and order remain relevant, adequate, and applicable to the present circumstances of the subdivision and community. 
h.  Changes to conditions after approval. Upon written request of the developer, the city commission may amend conditions of subdivision application approval where it can be found that errors or changes beyond the control of the developer have rendered a condition unnecessary, impossible or illegal. Changes to conditions that are not unnecessary, impossible or illegal are subject to the provisions of section 38.100.070. 
(1)  The written request must be submitted to the community development department. 
(2)  The written consent of all purchasers of land (via contract for deed, etc.) must be included with the written request to amend conditions. 
(3)  If it is an application for a major subdivision, the city commission must conduct a public hearing on the request. If it is an application for a minor subdivision, the city commission must consider the request at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(a)  If a public hearing is held, public notice of the hearing must be given in accordance with this chapter. 
(4)  The city commission may approve the requested change if it meets the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  The city commission must issue written findings of fact as required in this chapter.  
Sec. 38.240.140. - Notice of certification that water and waste services will be provided by local government. 
A.  If the developer is proposing to request an exemption from the department of environmental quality (DEQ) for infrastructure plan and specification review, the subdivision application must include a written request from the developer's professional engineer, licensed in the state, that indicates the intent to request the exemption, and details the extent of water, sewer and stormwater infrastructure that will be completed prior to final plat approval. A detailed preliminary stormwater drainage plan must also be submitted with the written request. The director of public works must, prior to final plat approval, send notice of certification to the DEQ per MCA 76-4-127. 
1.  The notice of certification must include the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  A copy of the preliminary plat included with the application for the proposed subdivision or a final plat where a preliminary plat is not necessary; 
c.  The number of proposed parcels in the subdivision; 
d.  A copy of any applicable zoning ordinances in effect; 
e.  How construction of the sewage disposal and water supply systems or extensions will be financed; 
f.  Certification that the subdivision is within a jurisdictional area that has adopted a growth policy pursuant to title 76, chapter 1, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-1-101 et seq.) and a copy of the growth policy, when applicable; 
g.  The relative location of the subdivision to the city; 
h.  Certification that adequate municipal facilities for the supply of water and disposal of sewage and solid waste are available or will be provided within the time provided in MCA 76-3-507; 
i.  If water supply, sewage disposal or solid waste facilities are not municipally owned, certification from the facility owners that adequate facilities are available; and 
j.  Certification that the city commission has reviewed and approved plans to ensure adequate stormwater drainage.  
Sec. 38.240.150. - Final plat application. 
A.  After the conditions of preliminary approval and the requirements for the installation of improvements have been satisfied, the developer must cause to be prepared a final plat. The final plat must conform to the uniform standards for final subdivision plats as set forth in 24.183.1107 ARM as may be amended and to the standards required by the county clerk and recorder. The applicant is responsible to verify that they are complying with the most recently adopted clerk and recorder standards. Plans and data must be prepared under the supervision of a registered surveyor, licensed in the state, as their licensing laws allow. 
1.  Final plat submittal. The final plat and all supplementary documents must be submitted to the community development department at least 30 working days prior to the expiration of subdivision application approval or any extension thereto. The submittal must include a final plat application form, the appropriate review fee, all information required by section 38.220.070 and a written explanation of how each of the conditions of subdivision application approval has been satisfied. 
a.  The final park plan, if one is associated with the plat, must be reviewed and approved, after a recommendation from the city recreation and parks advisory board, prior to or simultaneously with the final plat. The installation of any park improvements to meet minimum development standards or conditions of approval must comply with division 38.270 of this chapter. 
2.  County treasurer certification. A final plat will not be accepted as complete until the county treasurer has certified that no real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided are delinquent. 
3.  Review of abstract, deeds, and covenants. 
a.  With the final plat, the developer must submit to the community development department a certificate of a licensed title abstractor showing the names of the owners of record of the land to be subdivided and of any off-site land used to satisfy parkland dedication requirements, and the names of lienholders or claimants of record against the land, and the written consent to the subdivision by the owners of the land, if other than the developer, and any lienholders or claimants of record against the land. The certificate of licensed title abstractor must be dated no earlier than 30 calendar days prior to submittal. If necessary, the certificate must be updated so that the certificate is dated no earlier than 90 days prior to the city commission's action on the final plat. 
b.  Covenants must be submitted to the community development department with the final plat application. At least 30 working days prior to submission of the final plat application to the community development department, the developer must submit a copy of the covenants to the city attorney's office. 
c.  If an improvements agreement will be required per section 38.270.060 then the proposed associated financial security must be provided at least 30 working days prior to submission of the final plat application for review by the city attorney. 
d.  Transfer of ownership of public land, off-site land, private land, personal property, improvements and water rights; documents required. 
(1)  For the transfer of real property in satisfaction of required or offered dedications to the city, and required or offered donations or grants to the property owners' association (POA), the subdivider or owner of the property must submit with the application for final plat a warranty deed or other instrument acceptable to the city attorney transferring fee simple ownership to the city or the POA. 
(2)  For the transfer of personal property installed upon dedicated parkland or city-owned open space, or POA-owned parkland or open space, the subdivider must provide the city an instrument acceptable to the city attorney transferring all its rights, title and interest in such improvements including all applicable warranties to such improvements to the city or the POA. 
(3)  The subdivider or owner of the property must record the deed or instrument transferring ownership or interests at the time of recording of the final plat with the original of such deed or instrument returned to the city or POA as applicable. 
(4)  For the transfer of ownership interest in water, the subdivider or owner of the property must submit with the application for final plat a deed or other instrument acceptable to the city attorney transferring ownership to the city or POA, along with all required state department of natural resources and conservation documentation, certification and authorization. 
d.  Certificates. 
(1)  Public lands/improvements must be described in the certificate of dedication/consent, listed in the certificate of completion, be completed or subject to an improvements agreement. 
(2)  Private lands/improvements must be described and addressed in the certificate of donation/grant and completion of private improvements, be completed or subject to an improvements agreement. 
4.  Review by the community development department. The community development department will then review the final plat application to ascertain that all conditions and requirements for final approval have been met. If all conditions and requirements for final approval have been met, the community development department must forward a report to the city commission for their action. 
5.  Final plat approval. The city commission must examine every final plat, and within 45 working days of the date of receipt of a complete final plat application to the community development department, must approve it if it conforms to the conditions of preliminary approval and the terms of this chapter. "Date of receipt" means the date of delivery to the reviewing agency if accompanied by the applicable review fee. The city commission must examine every final plat at a regular meeting. 
A final subdivision plat may not be approved by the city unless all certificates, with the exception of the director of public works and the county clerk and recorder, have been complied with, signed and notarized and all subdivision regulations and conditions of preliminary plat approval have been met. A final subdivision plat may not be filed with the county clerk and recorder unless all certificates, with the exception of the county clerk and recorder, have been complied with, signed and notarized. This shall include the certification by the county treasurer that no real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided are delinquent. A final subdivision plat may not be approved by the city commission or filed by the county clerk and recorder unless it complies with the uniform standards for final subdivision plats as established 24.183.1107, ARM as may be amended and as required by the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder. 
a.  If the final plat is approved, the director of public service shall so certify the approval in a printed certificate on the plat. 
b.  If the final plat is denied, the city commission shall cause a letter to be written to the developer stating the reasons therefore. 
6.  Filing. The developer must file the approved, signed final plat and all other required certificates and documents with the county clerk and recorder within 60 days of the date of final approval.  
Sec. 38.240.160. - Changes to filed subdivision plats. 
Changes to a filed subdivision plat must be filed with the county clerk and recorder as an amended plat. An amended plat may not be filed unless it meets the filing requirements for a final subdivision plat specified in these regulations.  
Part 3. - Land Divisions Created by Rent or Lease 
 
Sec. 38.240.200. - General. 
A.  Land subdivisions created by rent or lease, rather than sale, refer to areas that provide multiple spaces for manufactured homes, mobile homes or recreational camping vehicles regardless of the size of the area or whether the spaces will be made available for rent by the general public for a fee. The land must be owned as one parcel under single ownership, which can include a number of persons owning the property in common. Subsequent action to sell interests in less than the entirety of the development may necessitate review under Parts 5 and 6 of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act prior to any sale. Land subdivisions created by rent or lease are not subject to this division 38.240 or the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act if: 
1.  They are developed on property which has been subdivided in compliance with Parts 5 and 6 of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act or which have a boundary documented by a certificate of survey recorded after July 1, 1973; and 
2.  They are reviewed as a site plan, conditional use permit, or planned unit development as described and authorized under this chapter; and 
3.  They comply with the adopted zoning regulations and other land development standards adopted by the city. 
B.  DPHHS license. If a land subdivision by rent or lease, that will provide multiple spaces for manufactured homes, mobile homes or recreational camping vehicles is also a "campground," "trailer court," "work camp," or "youth camp" as defined below, the city must not grant final approval until the developer obtains a license for the facility from the state department of public health and human services (DPHHS) under MCA tit. 50, ch. 52. 
1.  "Campground" means a parcel of land available to and principally used by the public for camping, where persons can camp, secure tents or cabins, or park trailers for camping and sleeping purposes. 
2.  "Trailer court" means a parcel of land upon which two or more spaces are available to the public and designated for occupancy by trailers, manufactured homes or mobile homes for use as residences. The term does not include a parcel composed of platted lots, if each lot: 
a.  Is filed with the county clerk and recorder; 
b.  Contains only one trailer space; and 
c.  Is served by a public water supply system and public sewage system that meet the requirements of rules for systems adopted pursuant to MCA tit. 75, ch. 6, pt. 1, and that are located within the boundaries of the City of Bozeman. 
3.  "Work camp" means a parcel of land on which housing is provided by a person for two or more families or individuals living separately, for the exclusive use of the employees of the person and the families, if any, of the employees. For purposes of this subsection, "housing" includes but is not limited to camping spaces; trailer parking spaces; manufactured, mobile, modular or permanent barracks or structures; and any appurtenant water supply and distribution system, sewage collection and disposal system, solid waste collection and disposal system, or food service and dining facilities. Housing does not include shelter provided by an employer for persons who are employed to perform agricultural duties on a ranch or farm. 
4.  "Youth camp" means a parcel of land on which permanent buildings, tents or other structures are maintained as living quarters for ten or more people and that is used primarily for educational or recreational use by minors. The term includes any appurtenant water supply and distribution system, sewage collection and disposal system, solid waste collection and disposal system, or food service and dining facilities. 
C.  Surveying and filing requirements exemption. Land subdivisions created by rent or lease are exempt from the surveying and filing requirements of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act. 
D.  Buildings for lease or rent. A building or buildings created for lease or rent on a single lot is not a subdivision of land but must be in conformance with applicable zoning regulations. For this section "building" means a structure or a unit of a structure with a roof supported by columns or walls for the permanent or temporary housing or enclosure of persons or property or for the operation of a business. Except as provided in MCA 76-3-103(15) the term includes a recreational camping vehicle, mobile home, or cell tower. The term does not include a condominium or townhome.  
Sec. 38.240.210. - Land subdivisions created by rent or lease—Procedure, submittal requirements and review criteria. 
A.  Land subdivisions created by rent or lease must be submitted, reviewed and approved by the city before any portions of the development may be rented or leased. The developer must apply for site plan and subdivision review. 
B.  Site plan review. All relevant procedures, submittal requirements and review criteria contained in division 38.230 of this chapter apply. The development must also comply with the requirements of division 38.310 of this chapter and sections 38.360.180 and 38.360.240. 
C.  Subdivision review. The subdivision review procedure and review criteria for land subdivisions created by rent or lease will depend upon the number of spaces within the proposed development. Proposed developments containing five or fewer spaces for rent or lease must be reviewed as minor subdivisions according to the provisions of article 2 of this chapter and proposed developments containing six or more spaces for rent or lease must be reviewed as major subdivisions according to the provisions of division 38.240 of this chapter. 
1.  Pre-application plan. The pre-application plan must be reviewed using the procedures contained in section 38.240.110. The submittal materials listed in section 38.220.030 must be provided. 
2.  Preliminary plan submittal and procedure. For land subdivisions created by rent or lease, the developer must submit a preliminary plan in lieu of a preliminary plat, a completed application for minor subdivision or major subdivision as appropriate, and the materials listed in sections 38.220.050 and 38.220.060. 
3.  Final plan submittal and procedure. For land subdivisions created by rent or lease, the developer must submit a final plan in lieu of a final plat, a completed final plat application and the materials listed in section 38.220.070. 
4.  Supplementary materials. In addition to the submittal requirements of division 38.220 of this chapter, preliminary and final plans for land subdivisions created by rent or lease must show the following: 
a.  A layout of all spaces proposed for rent or lease; 
b.  Location of commonly owned areas and facilities; and 
c.  Parks and/or recreation areas. 
5.  Boundary lines. All preliminary and final plans may show approximate boundary, lot, right-of-way or other lines.  
Sec. 38.240.220. - Land subdivisions created by rent or lease—Timing of improvements. 
Before any portion of a land subdivision created by rent or lease can be rented or leased, all required improvements must be installed, inspected and found compliant with the approved plan, and where applicable accepted by the city.  
Sec. 38.240.230. - Land subdivisions created by rent or lease—filing of final plan. 
Once the final plan has been approved by the city, an original copy of the approved plan must be filed with the county clerk and recorder as a "miscellaneous" document and another copy of the approved plan must be retained by the engineering division of the department of public works.  
Part 4. - Subdivision Exemptions 
 
Sec. 38.240.300. - Divisions of land entirely exempt from the requirements of this chapter pertaining to subdivisions and the state subdivision and platting act. 
A.  Unless the method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading this chapter or the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (the "Act"), the requirements of this chapter pertaining to subdivisions and the Act may not apply to any division of land that: 
1.  Is created by order of any court of record in this state or by operation of law or that, in the absence of agreement between the parties to the sale, could be created by an order of any court in the state pursuant to the law of eminent domain (MCA 76-3-201(1)(a)); 
a.  Before a court of record orders a division of land, the court must notify the governing body of the pending division and allow the governing body to present written comment on the division; 
b.  Lots created as described in this section that do not comply with the standards of chapter 38, BMC are not "nonconforming" lots subject to section 38.32.030 and are not individual buildable lots. 
2.  Is created to provide security for mortgages, liens or trust indentures for the purpose of construction, improvements to the land being divided, or refinancing purposes (MCA 76-3-201(1)(b)). 
a.  This exemption applies: 
i.  To a division of land of any size; 
ii.  To a parcel that is created to provide security, however the remainder of the tract of land is subject to the provisions of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act and division 38.240 of this chapter if applicable. 
b.  Lots created as described in this section that do not comply with the standards of chapter 38, BMC are not "nonconforming" lots subject to section 38.280.030 and are not individual buildable lots. 
3.  Creates an interest in oil, gas, minerals or water that is severed from the surface ownership of real property (MCA 76-3-201(1)(c)); 
4.  Creates cemetery lots (MCA 76-3-201(1)(d)); 
5.  Is created by the reservation of a life estate (MCA 76-3-201(1)(e)); 
6.  Is created by lease or rental for farming and agricultural purposes (MCA 76-3-201(1)(f)); 
7.  Is created for rights-of-way or utility sites. A subsequent change in the use of the land to a residential, commercial or industrial use is subject to the requirements of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act and division 38.240 of this chapter (MCA 76-3-201(1)(h)); 
8.  Is created by lease or rental of contiguous airport-related land owned by a city, county, the state, or a municipal or regional airport authority provided that the lease or rental is for onsite weather or air navigation facilities, the manufacture, maintenance, and storage of aircraft, or air carrier-related activities (MCA 76-3-205(1)); 
9.  Is state-owned land unless the division creates a second or subsequent parcel from a single tract for sale, rent or lease for residential purposes after July 1, 1974 (MCA 76-3-205(2)); and 
10.  Is created by deed, contract, lease or other conveyance executed prior to July 1, 1974 (MCA 76-3-206).  
Sec. 38.240.310. - Specific divisions of land exempt from review but subject to survey requirements and zoning regulations for divisions of land not amounting to subdivisions. 
A.  Unless the method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading this chapter or the Act, the following divisions or aggregations of tracts of record of any size, regardless of the resulting size of any lot created by the subdivision or aggregation, are not subdivisions under this chapter and the Act, but are subject to the surveying requirements of MCA 76-3-401 for lands other than subdivisions and are subject to applicable zoning regulations adopted under title 76, chapter 2, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-2-101 et seq.). A division of land may not be made under this section unless the county treasurer has certified that no real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be divided are delinquent. The county clerk and recorder must notify the community development department of any land division described in this section or MCA 76-3-207(1). 
1.  Divisions made outside of platted subdivisions for the purpose of relocating common boundary lines between adjoining properties (MCA 76-3-207(I)(a)); 
2.  Divisions made outside of platted subdivisions for the purpose of a single gift or sale in each county to each member of the landowner's immediate family (MCA 76-3-207(I)(b)); 
3.  Divisions made outside of platted subdivisions by gift, sale or an agreement to buy and sell in which the parties to the transaction enter a covenant running with the land and revocable only by mutual consent of the city and the property owner that the divided land will be used exclusively for agricultural purposes (MCA 76-3-207(I)(c)); 
4.  For lots within a platted subdivision, the relocation of common boundaries where the relocation does not cross public or private street rights-of-way or an external boundary of the subdivision. (MCA 76-3-207(I)(d)). The restriction of MCA 76-3-207(2) on the number of lots to be rearranged and designation of review authority does not apply in such instances; and 
5.  Divisions made for the purpose of relocating a common boundary line between a single lot within a platted subdivision and adjoining land outside a platted subdivision. A restriction or requirement on the original platted lot or original unplatted parcel continues to apply to those areas (MCA 76-3-207(I)(e)). 
6.  Aggregation of parcels or lots when a certificate of survey or subdivision plat shows that the boundaries of the original parcels have been eliminated and the boundaries of the larger aggregate parcel are established. A restriction or requirement on the original platted lot or original unplatted parcel continues to apply to those areas (MCA 76-3-207(I)(f)). The restriction of MCA 76-3-207(2) on the number of lots to be rearranged and designation of review authority does not apply in such instances. 
7.  Divisions of one or more lots within a platted subdivision to create cottage lot developments subject to section 38.360.110 as authorized by MCA 76-3-203. This section is not applicable to the development of condominiums. An amended plat of the original subdivision showing the new dependent lots and all common lots must be filed and must comply with the uniform standards for final subdivision plats specified in 24.183.1107, ARM and as updated.  
Sec. 38.240.320. - Reserved.  
Sec. 38.240.330. - Condominiums. 
A.  Condominium developments are exempt from the surveying and filing requirements of article 2 of this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act. 
B.  Condominiums, constructed on land divided in compliance with the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act, are exempt from the provisions of division 38.240 of this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act if either: 
1.  The approval of the original division of land expressly contemplated the construction of the condominiums and any applicable park dedication requirements of MCA 76-3-621 are complied with; or 
2.  The condominium proposal is in conformance with applicable local zoning regulations where local zoning regulations are in effect.  
Sec. 38.240.340. - Exemption from surveying and platting requirements for lands acquired for state highways. 
Instruments of transfer for land which is acquired for state highways may refer by parcel and project number to state highway plans which have been recorded in compliance with MCA 60-2-209 and are exempted from the surveying and platting requirements of this chapter and the Act (MCA 76-3-209). If such parcels are not shown on highway plans of record, instruments of transfer of such parcels must be accompanied by and refer to appropriate certificates of survey and plats when presented for recording.  
Sec. 38.240.350. - Procedures and general requirements. 
A.  All certificates of survey or amended subdivision plats claiming an exemption inside city limits and subject to survey requirements must be submitted to the community development department. The procedures and requirements of this chapter are limited to the exemptions discussed in section 38.240.360. 
1.  Submittal. A claimant seeking an exemption under the Act and this chapter must submit to the community development department a claim on the appropriate application form, including a signed certificate of exemption, together with evidence to support the claim and any other information required by this chapter. 
2.  Review. The community development department will review the claimed exemption to verify that it is the proper use of the claimed exemption. 
a.  During this review, community development department staff will visit the proposed site, understand thoroughly the nature of all activity occurring on the site, and must identify any existing or potential zoning conflicts. The community development department must prepare a memo evaluating the claimed exemption against applicable review criteria, which must also be made available to the claimant or the claimant's representative. 
b.  In assessing the claimant's purpose for the exemption, the community development department will evaluate all relevant circumstances including the nature of the claimant's business, the prior history of the particular tract in question, and the proposed configuration of the tract, if the proposed exemption transactions are completed. 
c.  Where a rebuttable presumption is declared in this chapter, the presumption may be overcome by the claimant with evidence contrary to the presumption. If the community development department concludes that the evidence overcomes the presumption and that from all the circumstances the exemption is justified, the exemption will be allowed. If the community development department concludes that the presumption is not overcome and that from all the circumstances the exemption is not justified, the exemption will be disallowed. 
d.  If the exemption is allowed, the community development department must so certify in a printed certificate on the certificate of survey or amended plat within 30 days of submission of a complete application. 
e.  If the exemption is disallowed, the community development department must provide written notification, within 30 days of submission of a complete application, of its decision to the person claiming the exemption and to the county clerk and recorder. 
3.  Filing requirements. An amended plat or a certificate of survey of a division of land which is exempt from review must be filed within 180 days of the completion of the survey. 
a.  Certificates of survey. A certificate of survey may not be filed by the county clerk and recorder unless it complies with the following procedures for divisions of land exempted from public review as subdivisions. Certificates of survey for divisions of land meeting the criteria set out in MCA 76-3-207, must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A certificate of survey of a division of land that would otherwise be a subdivision, but that is exempted from subdivision review under MCA 76-3-207, may not be filed by the county clerk and recorder unless it bears the acknowledged certificate of the property owner stating that the division of land is exempt from review as a subdivision and citing the applicable exemption. 
(2)  If the exemption relied upon requires that the property owner enter into a covenant running with the land, the certificate of survey may not be filed unless it bears a signed and acknowledged recitation of the covenant. 
(3)  If a certificate of survey invokes the exemption for gifts and sales to members of the landowner's immediate family, the certificate must indicate the name of the proposed grantee, the relationship of the grantee to the landowner and the parcel to be conveyed to the grantee. 
(4)  If a certificate of survey invokes the exemption for the relocation of common boundary lines: 
(a)  The certificate of survey must bear the signatures of all landowners whose tracts of record will be altered by the proposed relocation. The certificate of survey must show that the exemption was used only to change the location of or eliminate a boundary line dividing two or more tracts of record, and must clearly distinguish the prior boundary location (shown, for example, by a dashed or broken line or a notation) from the new boundary (shown, for example, by a solid line or notation); 
(b)  The certificate of survey must show the boundaries of the area that is being removed from one tract of record and joined with another tract of record. The certificate of survey may, but is not required to, establish the exterior boundaries of the resulting tracts of record. Unsurveyed portions of the parcels must be labeled, "NOT A PART OF THIS CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY" or "NOT INCLUDED IN THIS CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY". However, the certificate of survey must show portions of the existing unchanged boundaries sufficient to clearly identify both the location and the extent of the boundary relocation; 
(c)  If a boundary line will be completely eliminated, the certificate must establish the boundary of the resulting tract of record; and 
(d)  The certificate of survey must contain the following notation: "The area that is being removed from one tract of record and joined with another tract of record is not itself a tract of record. Said area must not be available as a reference legal description in any subsequent real property transfer after the initial transfer associated with the [certificate of survey or amended plat] on which said area is described, unless said area is included with or excluded from adjoining tracts of record." 
(5)  If the certificate of survey invokes an exemption from subdivision review under MCA 76-3-207, the certificate of survey must bear, or be accompanied by, a certification by the county treasurer that all taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the surveyed land have been paid. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, when the parcel of land for which an exemption from subdivision review is claimed is being conveyed under a contract-for-deed, the terms "property owner," "landowner" and "owner" mean the seller of the parcel under the contract-for-deed. 
(7)  Procedures for filing certificates of survey of divisions of land entirely exempted from the requirements of the Act. The divisions of land described in MCA 76-3-201, 76-3-205 and 76-3-209, and divisions of federally owned land made by a United States government agency are not required to be surveyed, nor must a certificate of survey or subdivision plat showing these divisions be filed with the county clerk and recorder. A certificate of survey of one of these divisions may, however, be filed with the county clerk and recorder if the certificate of survey meets the requirements for form and content for certificates of survey contained in this section and bears a certificate of the surveyor performing the survey citing the applicable exemption from the Act or, when applicable, that the land surveyed is owned by the federal government. 
(8)  A certificate of survey must not be filed by the county clerk and recorder unless it complies with the uniform standards for certificate of surveys specified in section 24.183.1104, ARM as may be amended or as required by the county clerk and recorder. 
(9)  Certificates of survey that do not represent a division or aggregation of land, such as those depicting the retracement of an existing parcel and those prepared for informational purposes, must contain a statement as to their purpose and must meet applicable requirements of ARM 24.183.1104 for form and content. If the purpose of a certificate of survey is stated as a retracement or partial retracement, and if multiple tracts of record contained within the parcel's perimeter boundary on the certificate of survey are not individually shown, then the certificate of survey does not expunge the tracts of record unless it represents a division or aggregation of land, contains the acknowledged certificate of the property owner(s) citing the applicable exemption in its entirety, and conforms with the Administrative Rules of Montana for certificates of survey exempted from review as subdivisions. 
b.  Amended plats. Unless a division of land is exempt from subdivision review by MCA 76-3-201 or 76-3-207(1)(d) or (e), an amended plat must not be filed by the county clerk and recorder unless it complies with the uniform standards for final subdivision plats specified in section 24.183.1107, ARM as may be amended or as required by the Gallatin county clerk and recorder. A survey document that modifies lots in a platted and filed subdivision and invokes an exemption from subdivision review under MCA 76-3-201 or 76-3-207(1)(d) or (e), must be entitled "amended plat of the (name of subdivision)," but for all other purposes is to be regarded as a certificate of survey and subject to the requirements of this code.  
Sec. 38.240.360. - Exemption review criteria. 
A.  The following criteria must be used to ensure that exemptions are not claimed for the purposes of evading this chapter or the Act. Appeals regarding a final decision by the community development department that an exemption is an evasion of the Subdivision and Platting Act may be taken in the manner established for administrative project decision appeals as set forth in section 38.250.030. 
1.  A division of land is created to provide security for mortgages, liens or trust indentures for the purpose of construction, improvements to the land being divided or refinancing purposes (MCA 76-3-201(1)(b)). 
a.  The proper use of the exemption is to provide security for construction mortgages, liens or trust indentures, when a survey of the parcel has been required. 
b.  The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a division of land that is created to provide security is adopted for the purpose of evading the Act under the following conditions: 
(1)  If the division of land is created for the purpose of conveyance to any entity other than the financial or lending institution to which the mortgage, lien or trust indenture was given or to a purchaser upon foreclosure of the mortgage, lien or trust indenture; or 
(2)  The security is provided for construction or improvements on, or refinancing for, land other than on the exempted parcel. 
c.  When the security for construction financing exemption is to be used, the landowner must submit, in addition to such other documents as may be required, a written statement explaining: 
(1)  How many parcels within the original tract will be created by use of the exemption; 
(2)  Who will have title to the remainder of the original parcel; and 
(3)  A signed and notarized statement from a lending institution that the creation of the exempted parcel is necessary to secure a construction loan for buildings or other improvements on the parcel. 
d.  The written statement and the instruments creating the security must be filed at the same time as the survey with the clerk and recorder. 
2.  Divisions made outside of platted subdivisions for the purpose of relocating common boundary lines between adjoining properties (MCA 76-3-207(I)(a)). 
a.  The proper use of the exemption for relocating common boundary lines is to establish a new boundary between adjoining parcels of land outside of a platted subdivision, without creating an additional parcel. 
b.  A certificate of survey for the relocation of common boundary lines may include five or fewer parcels and/or lots. 
c.  Certificates of survey showing the relocation of common boundary lines must be accompanied by: 
(1)  An original deed exchanging recorded interest from every person having a recorded interest in adjoining properties for the entire newly described parcel that is acquiring additional land; 
(2)  Documentation showing the need or reason for the relocation (for example: structure encroachment, surveyor error, or enhancement of the configuration of the property); and 
(3)  The certificate of survey must bear the signatures of all landowners whose parcels are changed by the relocation, and show that the exemption was used only to change the location of a boundary line dividing two parcels, and must clearly distinguish the prior boundary location (shown, for example, by a dashed or broken line or a notation) from the new boundary (shown, for example, by a solid line or notation). 
d.  The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a proposed relocation of common boundary lines is adopted for the purpose of evading the Act, if: 
(1)  The community development department determines that the documentation submitted according to this section does not support the stated reason for relocation, or an additional parcel is created. 
3.  Division made outside of platted subdivisions for the purpose of a single gift or sale in each county to each member of the landowner's immediate family (MCA 76-3-207(I)(b)). 
a.  A member of the immediate family is the spouse of the grantor, or whether by blood or adoption, a son, daughter, mother or father of the grantor. 
b.  The proper use of the exemption as a gift or sale to a member of the immediate family is to convey one parcel of land outside of a platted subdivision to each member of the landowner's immediate family in each county, providing that the use of the exemption creates no more than one additional parcel of less than 160 acres in size. Each exemption under this section will be reviewed by the community development department under this chapter. 
c.  A certificate of survey for a family transfer may include more than one exempt parcel if all parcels meet the criteria of this section. 
d.  Certificates of survey showing the creation of new parcels of land pursuant to this exemption as a gift or sale to a member of the immediate family must be accompanied by an original deed transferring interest in the parcel being created, or a statement detailing where the deed is in escrow, how long it will be in escrow and authorization to contact the escrow agent for verification. 
e.  The certificate of survey for an exemption for a family transfer must indicate the name of the grantee, the relationship of the grantee to the landowner and the parcel to be conveyed to the grantee. 
f.  The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a family transfer is adopted for the purpose of evading this chapter and the Act if it is determined that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The exemption would create more than one additional parcel of less than 160 acres. 
(2)  The member of the landowner's immediate family would have received more than one exempted parcel in the county. 
4.  Division made outside of platted subdivisions by gift, sale or an agreement to buy and sell in which the parties to the transaction enter a covenant running with the land and revocable only by mutual consent of the city and the property owner that the divided land will be used exclusively for agricultural purposes (MCA 76-3-207(I)(c)). 
a.  An agricultural exemption is a division of land made outside of a platted subdivision by gift, sale or agreement to buy and sell in which the parties to the transaction enter a covenant running with the land, revocable only by mutual consent of the city and the transferee/property owner, that the divided land will be used exclusively for agricultural purposes. No building or structure requiring water or sewer facilities must be utilized on such a parcel. 
(1)  A change in use of the land for anything other than agricultural purposes subjects the division to this chapter and review under parts 5 and 6 of the Act. 
5.  For lots within a platted subdivision, relocation of common boundaries and the aggregation of lots (MCA 76-3-207(d), (f)). 
a.  The proper use of the exemption for aggregation of lots and/or relocation of common boundaries is the rearrangement and/or aggregation of lots within a platted subdivision which does not increase the total number of lots within the subdivision. The plat must contain the title "amended plat" and must be filed with the county clerk and recorder. 
b.  The amended plat showing the aggregation of lots and/or relocation of common boundary within a platted subdivision must be accompanied by: 
(1)  An original deed exchanging recorded interest from every person having a recorded interest in adjoining properties for the entire newly-described parcel(s) that is acquiring additional land; 
(2)  Documentation showing the need or reason for the relocation (for example: structure encroachment, surveyor error, or enhancement of the configuration of the property); and 
(3)  The amended plat must bear the signatures of all landowners whose parcels are changed by the relocation or aggregation. The amended plat must show that the exemption was used only to change the location of boundary lines or aggregate lots, and must clearly distinguish the prior boundary location (shown, for example, by a dashed or broken line or a notation) from the new boundary (shown, for example, by a solid line or notation). 
c.  The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a proposed aggregation of lots and/or relocation of common boundaries within a platted subdivision is adopted for the purpose of evading the Act if it determines that the relocation crosses the boundary of a public or private street right-of-way or the external boundary of the subdivision. 
d.  Any division of lots which results in an increase in the number of lots must be reviewed as a subdivision and approved by the city prior to the filing of the final plat. 
6.  Divisions made for the purpose of relocating a common boundary line between a single lot within a platted subdivision and adjoining land outside a platted subdivision (MCA 76-3-207(1)(e)). 
a.  The proper use of the exemption for relocating common boundary lines is to establish a new common boundary line between a single lot within a platted subdivision and adjoining land outside a platted subdivision. A restriction or requirement on the original platted lot or original unplatted parcel continues to apply to those areas. 
b.  A certificate of survey for the relocation of common boundary lines may include five or fewer parcels and/or lots. 
c.  Certificates of survey showing the relocation of common boundary lines must be accompanied by: 
(1)  A original deed exchanging recorded interest from every person having a recorded interest in adjoining properties for the entire newly-described parcel that is acquiring additional land; 
(2)  Documentation showing the need or reason for the relocation (for example: structure encroachment, surveyor error, or enhancement of the configuration of the property); and 
(3)  The certificate of survey must bear the signatures of all landowners whose parcels are changed by the relocation, and show that the exemption was used only to change the location of a boundary line dividing two parcels, and must clearly distinguish the prior boundary location (shown, for example, by a dashed or broken line or a notation) from the new boundary (shown, for example, by a solid line or notation). 
d.  The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a proposed relocation of common boundary lines is adopted for the purpose of evading the Act, if: 
(1)  The community development department determines that the documentation submitted according to this section does not support the stated reason for relocation, or an additional parcel is created. 
7.  For lots within a platted subdivision, divisions made for the purpose of creating lots subject to zoning regulations as cottage development and not recorded as condominiums. (MCA 76-3-203). 
a.  The proper use of the exemption is to create lots for cottage development in compliance with section 38.360.110. A restriction or requirement on the original platted lot continues to apply to those areas. 
b.  An amended plat of the original subdivision showing the new dependent lots must be filed and must comply with the uniform standards for final subdivision plats specified in 24.183.1107, ARM and as updated. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 2, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.240.370. - Procedures for filing certificates of survey of divisions of land entirely exempted from the requirements of the act. 
A certificate of survey of a division of land entirely exempted from the requirements of this chapter and the Act may be filed with the county clerk and recorder if it meets the requirements for form and content for certificates of survey contained in this section and bears a certificate of the surveyor performing the survey stating the applicable exemption from the Act.  
Sec. 38.240.380. - Correction of errors. 
Correction of errors may be made by the submission of a corrected certificate of survey for the city's approval.  
Part 5. - Subdivision Certificates 
 
Sec. 38.240.400. - General. 
The certificates listed in sections 38.240.410 through 38.240.530 must be shown on plats and certificates of survey, as appropriate. Other certificates than those shown may be required by the city when deemed appropriate. The proper notary block must be used.  
Sec. 38.240.410. - Dedication or consent. 
A.  All plats of subdivisions must contain a certificate of dedication or certificate of consent. In the case of corporate ownership, the proper corporation officer must sign, a corporate notary form must be used, and the corporate seal must be affixed. The certificate must read as follows: 
1.  Certificate of dedication. 
CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION 
(I), (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that (I) (We) have caused to be surveyed, subdivided and platted into lots, blocks, streets, and alleys, and other divisions and dedications, as shown by the plat hereunto included the following described tract of land to wit: 
Description 
(Exterior Boundary Description of Area Contained in Plat and Total Acreage) 
The above-described tract of land is to be known and designated as (name of subdivision), City of Bozeman, Gallatin County, Montana; and the lands included in all streets, avenues, alleys, roads, highways, and parks, playgrounds, or public lands or other public improvements shown on said plat are hereby granted and donated to the City of Bozeman for the public use and enjoyment. Unless specifically listed herein, the lands included in all streets, avenues, alleys, roads, highways, and parks or public lands or other public improvements dedicated to the public are accepted for public use, but the city accepts no responsibility for maintaining the same. The owner(s) agree(s) that the city has no obligation to maintain the lands included in all streets, avenues, alleys, roads, highways, and parks, or public lands or other public improvements, hereby dedicated to public use. The lands included in all streets, avenues, alleys, roads, highways, and parks, or public lands or other public improvements dedicated to the public for which the city accepts responsibility for maintenance include (list specific streets, avenues, alleys, roads highways, and parks or other public lands or other public improvements). 
The undersigned hereby grants unto each and every person firm or corporation, whether public or private, providing or offering to provide telephone, electric power, gas, internet, cable television or other similar utility or service, the right to the joint use of an easement for the construction, maintenance, repair and removal of their lines and other facilities in, over, under and across each area designated on this plat as "Utility Easement" to have and to hold forever. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all record owners of platted property) 
2.  Certificate of consent. 
CERTIFICATE OF CONSENT 
(I), (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that (I), (We) caused to be surveyed, subdivided and platted into lots, blocks, streets, and alleys, and other divisions and dedications, as shown by this plat hereunto included, the following described tract of land, to wit: 
Description 
(Exterior Boundary Description of Area Contained in Plat and Total Acreage) 
The above described tract of land is to be known and designated as (name of subdivision), City of Bozeman, Gallatin County, Montana. 
The undersigned hereby grants unto each and every person, firm of corporation, whether public or private, providing or offering to provide telephone, electric power, gas, internet, cable television or other similar utility or service, the right to the joint use of an easement for the construction, maintenance, repair and removal of their lines and other facilities in, over, under and across each area designated on this plat as "Utility Easement" to have and to hold forever. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all record owners of platted property)  
Sec. 38.240.420. - Mortgagee. 
In those cases where the area being platted or the plat of subdivision is subject to any liens, mortgages, claims, or other encumbrances by parties or other owners, the following certificate is required: 
CONSENT OF MORTGAGEE(S) 
(I), (We), the undersigned mortgagee(s) or encumbrancer(s), do hereby join in and consent to the described plat, (I) (We) release (my) (our) respective liens, claims or encumbrances as to any portion of said lands now being platted into streets, avenues, parks or other public areas which are dedicated to the City of Bozeman for the public use and enjoyment. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Acknowledged and notarized signature of all encumbrances of record)  
Sec. 38.240.430. - Parkland. 
A.  Cash-in-lieu of parkland. Where there will be a cash donation in-lieu of parkland dedication, plats of subdivision must show the following certificate: 
CERTIFICATE ACCEPTING CASH DONATION IN-LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION 
Finding dedication of parkland within the platted area of (Subdivision Name) would be undesirable for park and playground purposes, it is hereby ordered by the city commission of the City of Bozeman, that land dedication for park purposes be waived and that cash-in-lieu, in the amount of _______ dollars, be accepted in accordance with the provisions of the Montana, Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 through 76-3-625) and the Bozeman Municipal Code. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
_____
Signature 
City of Bozeman Director of Parks and Recreation 
B.  Off-site parkland dedication. Where parkland will be provided off-site, in accordance with section 38.420.100.A.4 or 5, plats of subdivision must show the following certificate: 
CERTIFICATE ACCEPTING OFF-SITE PARKLAND DEDICATION 
Finding an alternative to dedication of parkland, for park and playground purposes within the platted area of (Subdivision Name) is desirable, it is hereby ordered by the city commission of the City of Bozeman that land dedication for park purpose be provided off-site with land outside of the platted area of (Subdivision Name) in accordance with the provisions of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 through 76-3-625), and the Bozeman Municipal Code. The off-site parkland dedication will be provided with the following described tract(s) of land or easement(s) to wit: 
Description 
(Exterior Boundary Description of Area Contained in Plat/Easement and Total Acreage) 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
_____
Signature 
City of Bozeman Director of Parks and Recreation 
C.  Parkland dedication to School District 7. Where parkland will be provided in accordance with section 38.420.100.A.6, plats of subdivision must show the following certificate: 
CERTIFICATE ACCEPTING PARKLAND 
DEDICATION TO SCHOOL DISTRICT 7 
In as much as an alternative to dedication of parkland, for park and playground purposes within the platted area of (Subdivision Name), would be desirable, it is hereby ordered by the city commission of the City of Bozeman that required land dedication for park purposes be met with land dedicated to School District 7 in accordance with the provisions of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.), and the Bozeman Municipal Code. If School District 7 chooses to no longer use the land for school buildings and facilities, the ownership of the land must revert to the City of Bozeman for park purposes and School District 7 must transfer the land to the city with clear title and in a condition meeting the minimum development standards for parks established in section 38.420.080. The land dedication will be provided with the following described tract(s) of land, to wit: 
Description 
(Exterior Boundary Description of Area Contained in Plat and Total Acreage) 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
_____
Signature 
City of Bozeman Director of Parks and Recreation 
_____
Signature 
Chairman, School District 7 Board of Trustees  
Sec. 38.240.440. - Surveyor. 
All subdivision plats or certificates of survey must contain a certificate of surveyor which must read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR 
I, the undersigned, (Type or Print Name), Registered Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that between _______/_______/_______, _______, and _______/_______/_______, _______, I surveyed (Name of Subdivision or Certificate of Survey), and drew the same as shown on the accompanying plat (or certificate of survey) and as described in accordance with the provisions of the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 through 76-3-625), and the Bozeman Municipal Code. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
_____
Signature 
Printed or Typed Name 
Registration No. 
(Seal of Surveyor)  
Sec. 38.240.450. - Improvements. 
A.  Where improvements are to be installed prior to final plat approval, the final plat of subdivision must contain a certificate of completion of public improvements. The certificate must list all completed and accepted improvements, and must read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS 
I, (Name of Subdivider), and I, (Name of Subdivider's Registered Engineer), a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of Montana, hereby certify that the following improvements, required to meet the requirements of chapter 38 of the Bozeman Municipal Code or as a condition(s) of approval of (Name of Subdivision), have been installed in conformance with the approved plans and specifications, or financially guaranteed and covered by the improvements agreement accompanying this plat. 
Installed Improvements: (List improvements in accordance with section 38.240.450.A). 
Financially Guaranteed Improvements: (List improvements in accordance with section 38.240.450.B). The subdivider hereby warrants said improvements against any and all defects for a period of two years from the date of acceptance by the City of Bozeman. 
The subdivider grants possession of all public infrastructure improvements to the City of Bozeman and the city hereby accepts ownership of all public infrastructure improvements, subject to the above indicated warranty. 
Signature of Subdivider 	(Date)_______ 
Signature, Number, and Seal of Engineer 	(Date)_______ 
Signature, Director of Public Works 	(Date)_______ 
 
B.  If all required subdivision improvements will not be installed prior to final plat approval, and the final plat will be recorded subject to an improvements agreement and financial guarantee, this certificate must be modified to also list all improvements not completed.  
Sec. 38.240.460. - Governing body. 
The city commission or their designated agent must certify approval of the plat of subdivision. Said certificate must read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 
I, Director of Public Works, City of Bozeman, Montana, do hereby certify that the accompanying plat has been duly examined and has found the same to conform to the law, approves it, and hereby accepts the dedication to the City of Bozeman for the public use of any and all lands shown on the plat as being dedicated to such use. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Signature), Director of Public Works  
Sec. 38.240.470. - Exclusion from MDEQ review. 
The following certificate must be added to all subdivision plats to certify that adequate stormwater drainage and adequate municipal facilities will be provided. 
CERTIFICATE OF EXCLUSION FROM MONTANA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW 
The (Name of Subdivision), Gallatin County, Montana, is within the City of Bozeman, Montana, a first-class municipality, and within the planning area of the Bozeman growth policy which was adopted pursuant to MCA 76-1-601 et seq., and can be provided with adequate stormwater drainage and adequate municipal facilities. Therefore, under the provisions of MCA 76-4-125, this subdivision is excluded from the requirement for Montana Department of Environmental Quality review. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Signature), Director of Public Works 
City of Bozeman, Montana 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 3, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.240.480. - County treasurer. 
All final subdivision plats, and certificates of survey unless prepared for a subdivision exemption to provide security for construction mortgages, liens or trust indentures, must show the following certificate of county treasurer: 
CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY TREASURER 
I, (Name of County Treasurer), Treasurer of Gallatin County, Montana, do hereby certify that the accompanying plat (or certificate of survey) has been duly examined and that all real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided are paid. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Signature), Treasurer of Gallatin County  
Sec. 38.240.490. - Clerk and recorder. 
All plats or certificates of survey must show the following certificate of clerk and recorder: 
CERTIFICATE OF CLERK AND RECORDER 
I, (Name of Clerk and Recorder), Clerk and Recorder of Gallatin County, Montana, do hereby certify that the foregoing instrument was filed in my office at _______ o'clock, (a.m. or p.m.), this _______ day of _______, _______, and recorded in Book _______ of Plats on Page _______, Records of the Clerk and Recorder, Gallatin County, Montana. 
(Signature), Clerk and Recorder  
Sec. 38.240.500. - Certification of use of exemption claim. 
A.  The following certificates must be provided in a printed certificate on the amended plat or certificate of survey for allowed exemptions: 
1.  Certificate of governing body. 
CERTIFICATE OF GOVERNING BODY 
I, (Director of Community Development), do hereby certify that the accompanying (Certificate of Survey or Amended Plat) has been duly reviewed, and has been found to conform to the requirements of the Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.), and the Bozeman Municipal Code. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Signature), Director of Community Development 
2.  Certificate of exemption. Reference to exclude the survey from state department of environmental quality review can also be added to this certificate, as appropriate. 
CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION 
(I), (We) certify that the purpose of this survey is to (state exemption), and therefore this survey is exempt from review as a subdivision pursuant to MCA 76-3-207(1) (add appropriate subsection). 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all record owners of surveyed property)  
Sec. 38.240.510. - Conditions of approval notifications and certifications. 
The following certificate must be required on the conditions of approval sheet: 
NOTIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS 
(I), (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that the text and/or graphics shown on the Conditions of Approval sheet(s) represent(s) requirements by the governing body for final plat approval and that all conditions of subdivision application have been satisfied. 
(I), (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that the information shown is current as of the date of this certification, and that changes to any land-use restrictions or encumbrances may be made by amendments to covenants, zoning regulations, easements, or other documents as allowed by law or by local regulations. 
(I), (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that (I) (We) acknowledge that federal, state, and local plans, policies, regulations, and/or conditions of subdivision approval may limit the use of the property, including the location, size, and use as shown on the Conditions of Approval sheet or as otherwise stated. Buyers of property should ensure that they have obtained and reviewed all sheets of the plat and all documents recorded and filed in conjunction with the plat. Buyers of property are strongly encouraged to contact the local planning department and become informed of any limitations on the use of the property prior to closing. 
DATED this _______ day of _______, _______. 
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all record owners of platted property)  
Sec. 38.240.520. - Certificate of completion of non-public improvements. 
Where non-public improvements are to be installed prior to final plat approval, the final plat of subdivision must contain a certificate of completion of non-public improvements. The certificate must list all completed and accepted improvements, and must read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION OF NON-PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
I, (Name of Subdivider), hereby certify that the following non-public improvements, required to meet the requirements of Chapter 38 of the Bozeman Municipal Code or as a condition(s) of approval of (Name of Subdivision), have been installed in conformance with any approved plans and specifications prepared in accordance with the standards of Chapter 38 or other City design standards, or have been financially guaranteed and are covered by the subdivision improvements agreement accompanying and recorded with this plat. 
Installed Improvements: (LIST ITEMS EXCLUDING THOSE LISTED BELOW). 
Financially Guaranteed Improvements: (LIST ITEMS OR STATE NONE). 
I, (Name of Subdivider) hereby warrant said improvements against any and all defects for a period of two years from the date of acceptance by (Name of Property Owners' Association). Unless specifically listed in the Certificate of Dedication, the city accepts no responsibility for maintaining the same. 
The subdivider hereby grants ownership of all non-public infrastructure improvements to the (Name of Property Owners' Association) created by Document Number _______ (To be filled in when recorded) 
By: (Signature of Subdivider) 
Date: _______  
Sec. 38.240.530. - Certificate of completion of water-related improvements. 
A.  When irrigation of public facilities are to be installed prior to final plat approval, the final plat of subdivision must contain a certificate of completion of water-related improvements. The certificate must list all completed and accepted improvements, including but not limited to all irrigation system record drawings, and must read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION OF WATER-RELATED IMPROVEMENTS 
I, (Name of Subdivider), hereby certify that the following improvements, necessary to meet the requirements of chapter 38 of the Bozeman Municipal Code or as a condition(s) of approval of (Name of Subdivision), have been installed in conformance with the approved plans and specifications, or financially guaranteed and covered by the improvements agreement accompanying this plat. 
Installed Improvements: (List improvements). 
Financially Guaranteed Improvements: (List improvements). 
The subdivider hereby warrants said improvements against any and all defects for a period of two years from the date of acceptance by the City of Bozeman. 
The subdivider hereby grants ownership of all public infrastructure improvements to the City of Bozeman and the city hereby accepts ownership of all public infrastructure improvements, subject to the above indicated warranty. 
Signature of Subdivider 	(Date)_______ 
Signature, Director of Public Works 	(Date)_______ 
  
DIVISION 38.250. - APPEALS, DEVIATIONS, DEPARTURES AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 38.250.010. - Purpose. 
A.  This division 38.250 is adopted: 
1.  To establish procedures for granting relief from the requirements of this chapter subject to the standards of this division 38.250 in order to preserve equitable implementation of the law, prevent special treatment to particular parties and preserve the various rights established by the state and United States constitutions of all persons subject to this chapter; 
2.  To allow for appeals from decisions made by administrative staff approving, approving with conditions or denying applications for development approval; 
3.  To provide through appeals of administrative interpretations a procedure for consideration of and resolution of disputes regarding the meaning and implementation of this chapter; 
4.  To provide through deviations a procedure for flexibility, as a means to support creativity and excellence of design, in the application of the standards of this chapter in overlay districts and planned unit developments as provided for in this chapter; 
5.  To provide through departures a procedure for applicants to propose alternative design treatments provided such departures meet the "purpose" of the particular standard and any additional departure criteria set forth; 
6.  To provide through zoning variances a procedure for relief from the occasional inequities created by the physical standards of this chapter relating to zoning when such standards create a substantially unequal burden on a particular parcel of land in a fashion that would otherwise prevent the reasonable use of property, owing to physical circumstances unique to that parcel; 
7.  To prohibit the granting of variances that would be contrary to the public interest and endanger public health, safety and welfare; 
8.  To provide through subdivision variances a procedure for relief from standards relating to platting requirements or improvements within public rights-of-way when such standards would result in undue hardship and are not essential to the public health, safety and general welfare; and 
9.  To provide a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for individuals and groups seeking equal access to housing under applicable non-discrimination laws in the application of the standards of this chapter. 
B.  The community development director must hear and decide requests for reasonable accommodation as follows: 
1.  Authorize in specific cases such requests for reasonable accommodation from the terms of this chapter as will advance the intent and purpose of this chapter and applicable non-discrimination laws and meet the standards for the granting of reasonable accommodation. 
C.  The board of adjustment must hear and decide variances and deviations as follows: 
1.  Authorize in specific cases such deviations from the terms of this chapter relating to zoning as will advance the intent and purposes of this chapter and meet the standards established for the granting of deviations; 
2.  Authorize in specific cases such zoning variances from the physical standards of this chapter, exclusive of those items included as subdivision variances, that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter will be observed and substantial justice done. 
D.  The city commission must hear and decide appeals of administrative decisions, variances and deviations, and requests for reasonable accommodation and must: 
1.  When reclaimed per section 38.200.010C, 
a.  Authorize in specific cases such deviations from the terms of this chapter relating to zoning as will advance the intent and purposes of this chapter and meet the standards established for the granting of deviations; and 
b.  Authorize in specific cases such zoning variances from the physical standards of this chapter, exclusive of those items included as subdivision variances, that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter must be observed and substantial justice done; and 
c.  Authorize in specific cases such requests for reasonable accommodation from the terms of this chapter as will advance the intent and purposes of this chapter and applicable non-discrimination laws and meet the standards established for the granting of reasonable accommodation. 
2.  Hear and decide subdivision variances from the platting requirements and standards for improvements within public rights-of-way required by this chapter where it is found that strict compliance would result in undue hardship and is not essential to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
3.  Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the community development director regarding subdivision exemptions. 
4.  Hear and approve or deny deviations to standards of the title when proposed through a planned unit development. 
5.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any standards adopted pursuant thereto. An aggrieved person may appeal the final decision of the community development director in the manner provided in this division 38.250.  
Sec. 38.250.020. - Hearing and notice requirements. 
A.  There must be an opportunity for public comment to the review authority for any appeal of administrative decisions and interpretations and for each application for any variance or deviation. When a public hearing is required, the hearing must be held at an appointed time and place. Comment must be taken by the review authority from persons interested in the application and from the staff. 
B.  The community development director must give public notice as required by division 38.220 of this chapter of all public hearings or public comment periods.  
Sec. 38.250.030. - Administrative project decision appeals. 
A.  An aggrieved person may appeal the final decision of the administrative review authority in the manner provided in this section. Any appeal of a final administrative decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny an application must be an appeal on the basis of the information available to the administrative review authority including this chapter, all submitted application materials, review and recommendations by administrative staff or advisory bodies, public comment and such other materials as were available. Denial of requests for waiver or alteration of applicable regulations is not a decision subject to appeal of an administrative decision. This section also applies to decisions by the administrative review authority regarding evasion of the Subdivision and Platting Act per section 38.240.360. 
B.  Failure to raise an issue during the provided public comment opportunity, in person or in writing, or the failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the administrative review authority an opportunity to respond to an issue, precludes an appeal based on that issue, unless the issue could not have been reasonably known by any party during the time of the public comment opportunity. 
C.  Appeal procedures. Appeals from administrative review authority to the appellate review authority or the courts are set forth in the various sections of this division 38.250. Appeals are permitted under the provisions of this section in the manner set forth herein. 
1.  These appeal procedures apply to decisions by an administrative review authority in their actions to administer this chapter. 
2.  Appeals must be from the administrative review authority to the appellate review authority according to section 38.250.010. 
D.  Filing of appeal. An appeal must be taken by filing with the department of community development by 5:00 p.m. on the tenth working day following the final decision of the administrative review authority a documented appeal and appeal fee. Upon receipt of the completed appeal the department of community development must inform the administrative review authority from whom the appeal is being made of the submission of the appeal. 
E.  Appeal contents. In all cases, the complete appeal application must include, and must not be deemed filed until, all of the materials required by section 38.220.140 are submitted. 
F.  Notice of appeal. Once a complete appeal has been filed and date for consideration of the appeal is set per subsection G below, notice of the appeal must be provided in the same manner as was required for notice of the initial application. The date, time and location for the consideration of the appeal before the appellate review authority must be included in the required notice of the appeal. 
G.  Scheduling. Upon receipt of a complete appeal application the city clerk must place the appeal on the regularly scheduled appellate review authority agenda. The appeal must be scheduled for consideration not later than 45 working days of the receipt of a complete appeal. 
H.  Material. The material to be considered by the review authority must be the record of the project review, including the administrative review authority's decision, in addition to materials that may be submitted during the processing and review of the appeal. 
I.  Procedure of the appeal. At the consideration of the appeal, the following procedure must be followed: 
1.  Only arguments and evidence relevant to the application may be presented. The presentation must be made in the following order, subject to such limitations, in time and scope as may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer: 
a.  Explanation of the application and nature of the appeal and presentation by administrative staff; 
b.  Presentation of position by the appellant and/or representative; 
c.  If requested, presentation by landowner if landowner is different than the appellant; 
d.  Presentation by any person who is a proponent or an opponent of the application; and 
e.  Motion, discussion and vote by the review authority. 
2.  No person making a presentation may be subject to cross-examination except that members of the appellate review authority and the city attorney may inquire of such person for the purpose of eliciting information and for the purpose of clarifying information presented. 
J.  Alternative actions available to the appellate body. At the conclusion of the consideration of the appeal, the review authority may uphold, amend, or overturn the administrative project decision. 
K.  Construction hold. During the time of the appeal all construction must cease and may not commence unless notified in writing to do so by the appellate review authority.  
Sec. 38.250.040. - Administrative interpretation appeals. 
A.  A request for appeal of an interpretation of this chapter, including classifications of use per division 38.310 of this chapter, must be made by filing an application, with appropriate fees, with the department of community development within 20 working days of the interpretation decision. After receiving a completed application the city clerk must schedule consideration of the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting of the review authority. In all cases, the complete application must include, and will not be deemed filed until, all of the materials required by section 38.220.150 are submitted. 
B.  The appellate review authority must cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing on the application as will provide necessary information to ensure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. During the time of the appeal all construction must cease and may not commence unless notified in writing to do so by the by the appellate review authority. 
C.  When interpreting the meaning of this chapter, sections of the chapter must be construed in a manner that will give effect to them all as the chapter derives its meaning from the entire body of text taken together.  
Sec. 38.250.050. - Deviations. 
All requests for deviations in the neighborhood conservation overlay district or through the PUD process must be heard by the review authority established in section 38.200.010. Deviations may only be applied for in conjunction with submittal of a development proposal of a type authorized by divisions 38.230 and 430 of this chapter. Standards and criteria for award of deviations are contained in divisions 38.340 and 430 of this chapter. The granting of a deviation is an exercise of administrative power that can effect no change in the chapter. A deviation may be granted only in a specific instance permitting a nonconformity in order to accomplish the specific objectives of sections 38.340.070 and 38.430.030.D., and provided the standards and criteria imposed are met. Deviations must not be granted for relief from procedural requirements, or to waive or vary the application of an ordinance provision imposing specific safety requirements, or to waive or vary the application of other ordinances or statutes.  
Sec. 38.250.060. - Departures. 
A.  Overview and purpose. This chapter provides for a number of specific departure opportunities to development standards. The purpose is to provide applicants with the option of proposing alternative design treatments provided such departures meet the purpose of the particular standard and any additional departure criteria set forth for the particular departure opportunity. 
B.  Departures are voluntary. This provision allows the flexibility for applicants to propose alternative designs on a voluntary basis, provided they meet the purpose of the standard and applicable departure criteria as noted above. 
C.  Applicability. Departure opportunities are available only to those specific standards that allow for departures. 
D.  Procedures. Permit applications that include departure requests go through the standard review procedures set forth in article 2 depending on the application type. 
E.  Approval criteria. Project applicants must successfully demonstrate to the review authority how the proposed departure meets the purpose(s) of the standard and other applicable departure criteria that applies to the specific standard. 
F.  Documentation. The review authority must document the reasons for approving all departures (to be maintained with project application records) for the purpose of providing consistency in decision-making by the city.  
Sec. 38.250.070. - Zoning variances. 
A.  Application. A request for one or more variance must be made by filing an application, with appropriate fees, with the community development department at least 30 calendar days prior to the review authority's consideration of the application and must be accompanied by the materials described in section 38.220.160. 
B.  Investigation of facts. The review authority must cause to be made such investigation of facts bearing on the application as will provide necessary information to ensure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
C.  Criteria for consideration and decision. In acting on an application for a variance, the review authority must designate such lawful conditions as will secure substantial protection for the public health, safety and general welfare, and must issue written decisions setting forth factual evidence that the variance meets the standards of MCA 76-2-323 in that the variance: 
1.  Will not be contrary to and will serve the public interest; 
2.  Is necessary, owing to conditions unique to the property, to avoid an unnecessary hardship which would unavoidably result from the enforcement of the literal meaning of this chapter: 
a.  Hardship does not include difficulties arising from actions, or difficulties otherwise self-imposed, by the applicant or previous predecessors in interest, or potential for greater financial returns; and 
b.  Conditions unique to the property may include, but are not limited to, slope, presence of watercourses, after the fact imposition of additional regulations on previously lawful lots, and governmental actions outside of the owners control; 
3.  Will observe the spirit of this chapter, including the adopted growth policy, and do substantial justice; 
4.  In addition to the criteria specified above, in the case of a variance relating to the flood hazard provisions of article 6 of this chapter: 
a.  Variances may not be issued for areas within a floodway if any additional increase in flood elevations or velocities after allowable encroachments into the floodway fringe would result; 
b.  Variances may only be issued upon: 
(1)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood hazards, present additional threats to public safety, be an extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud, victimize the public, or conflict with existing state and local laws; 
(2)  A determination that the proposed use would be adequately floodproofed as specified in article 6 of this chapter; 
(3)  A determination that a reasonable alternate location outside the floodplain is not available; 
(4)  A determination that the variance requested is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard; and 
(5)  Approval of the state department of natural resources and conservation, upon request from the city, prior to formally approving any permit application that is in variance to these regulations. 
D.  Authorization and limitations on approval. 
1.  The review authority may, after public notice, opportunity for public comment, and consideration of the application, deny, approve or conditionally approve all requests for variances meeting all the criteria of this section, including: 
a.  Requests to modify dimensional or other numerical requirements of this chapter; 
b.  Requests for multiple variances; 
c.  Requests to modify flood hazard district requirements subject to the provisions of article 6 of this chapter, except that no variance may be granted to allow construction of buildings within the floodway of a 100-year frequency flood as defined in title 76, chapter 5, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-5-101 et seq.); and 
d.  Requests for variances in conjunction with conditional use permits. Approvals of all such variances must be conditioned upon review authority approval of the conditional use permit. 
2.  The scope and extent of the variance must be limited to the minimum relief necessary to provide reasonable use of the property. 
3.  In no case may the review authority grant variances to allow uses not already permitted pursuant to this chapter or alter administrative requirements of this chapter. Permission to change uses allowed on a parcel may be sought through a zone map amendment, or an amendment to the text of the applicable zoning district, or through a planned unit development subject to division 38.430. 
4.  Notifications of approval for variances related to flood hazard requirements of article 6 of this chapter must notify the applicant that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a building below the 100-year floodplain elevation will result in increased premium rates; and 
b.  Such construction below the 100-year flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
E.  Effective time for decisions; variances void when. The decision of the review authority is final except as provided in section 38.250.090. If a building permit or land use permit is not obtained for the subject property within six months from the date of the review authority's decision, the variance will be automatically canceled and become null and void. 
F.  Variances. Variances are subject to MCA 76-2-321 through 76-2-328.  
Sec. 38.250.080. - Subdivision variances. 
A.  Procedure. The subdivider must provide during the pre-application process, and include with the submission of the preliminary plat, a written statement describing the requested variance and the facts of hardship upon which the request is based. The relevant advisory bodies must include their findings and conclusion regarding the requested variance in its recommendation. The city must then consider each variance at the public hearing on the preliminary plat. A public hearing may not be held on a variance in association with a first minor subdivision. 
B.  Review criteria. Per MCA 76-3-506, a variance to this chapter must be based on specific variance criteria, and may not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. The city must not approve subdivision variances unless it makes findings based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that: 
1.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or be injurious to other adjoining properties; 
2.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, an undue hardship to the owner would result if strict interpretation of this chapter is enforced; 
3.  The variance will not cause a substantial increase in public costs; and 
4.  The variance will not, in any manner, place the subdivision in nonconformance with any other provisions of this chapter or with the city's growth policy. 
C.  Variances from floodway provisions not authorized. The review authority may not, by subdivision variance, permit subdivision for building purposes in areas located within the floodway of a flood of 100-year frequency as defined in title 76, chapter 5, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-5-101 et seq.). Any variances related to floodways must meet the standards of 38.250.070.C.4.a. 
D.  Conditions. In granting subdivision variances, the review authority may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure the objectives of this chapter. Any approval under this section must be subject to the terms of the conditions designated in connection therein. Any conditions required must be related both in purpose and scope with the relief sought through the variance. 
E.  Statement of facts. When any variance from this chapter is granted, the motion of approval must contain a statement describing the variance and conditions upon which the issuance of the variance is based. 
F.  Planned unit development. Where the standards and requirements of this chapter are proposed to be modified through a planned unit development, the applicable process is a deviation rather than a variance. 
G.  Limitations on approvals. For subdivision variances, the variance approval will be null and void if the final plat is not filed within the time allowed for final approval by the city's decision.  
Sec. 38.250.090. - Appeals from city commission or board of adjustment actions. 
Appeals may be made as authorized by state law.  
Sec. 38.250.100. - Reasonable accommodation. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by the following: 
a.  Any disabled person, their representative, or any entity, when the application of a requirement of this chapter acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities based on their physical or mental disability or handicap as defined under the applicable non-discrimination laws. 
b.  Any person, their representative, or any entity, when the application of a requirement of this chapter acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities based on race, color, religion, sex, creed, familial status, marital status, age, or national origin, as defined under the applicable non-discrimination laws, or because of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. 
2.  A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide equal opportunity to housing of their choice. 
3.  A reasonable accommodation is granted to the applicant that needs the accommodation and does not apply to successors in interest to the site. 
4.  A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this chapter without the need for the approval of a variance. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  Application. A request for reasonable accommodation must be submitted on an application form provided by the community development department or in the form of a letter to the community development director, and must contain the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number; 
b.  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
c.  Authorization from the owner of the subject property for the applicant to request the reasonable accommodation; 
d.  The current actual use of the property; 
e.  The basis for the claim as follows: 
(1)  That the individual or group of individuals is considered physically or mentally disabled or handicapped under the applicable non-discrimination laws, including identification and description of the disability or handicap which is the basis for the request for accommodation and current, written medical certification and description of disability or handicap and its effects on the person's medical, physical or mental limitations; or 
(2)  That the individual or group of individuals is a protected class based on race, color, religion, sex, creed, familial status, marital status, age, or national origin, as defined under the applicable non-discrimination laws, including identification and description of the protected class which is the basis of the request for accommodation. 
f.  The code provision, regulation, procedure and/or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; 
g.  The type and extent of reasonable accommodation sought; 
h.  The reason(s) why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the individual(s), including a summary of any potential alternatives contained in this chapter considered in requesting the accommodation and why other alternatives contained in this chapter are not feasible; 
i.  Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation; and 
j.  Other supportive information deemed necessary by the department to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with applicable non-discrimination laws. 
2.  Review with other land use applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including conditional use permit, etc.), then the applicant must file the information required by subsection 1 of this section for concurrent review of the request for reasonable accommodation with the application for discretionary approval. 
3.  Review authority. 
a.  Community development director. A request for reasonable accommodation must be reviewed by the community development director if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. No fee may be charged for the review of such a request for reasonable accommodation. 
b.  Other review authority. A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application must be reviewed by the authority responsible for the discretionary land use application. No fee in addition to that charged for the other discretionary land use application may be charged for the review of such a request for reasonable accommodation. 
4.  Review. 
a.  Community development director. The director must make a written determination within 20 calendar days of the application being deemed complete and either grant, grant with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant consistent with applicable non-discrimination laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the 20-day period to issue a decision must be stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
b.  Other review authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation must be made by the authority responsible for the discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. 
5.  Notice. 
a.  Community development director. No advance notice or public hearing is required for consideration of reasonable accommodation requests by the community development director. 
b.  Other review authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation subject to review by other review authorities require public notice and a public review process pursuant to the requirements for the other discretionary land use application that is the subject of the review, including all public notice provisions pursuant to section 38.220.420. 
6.  Balancing rights and requirements. In reviewing applications for requests for reasonable accommodation, the city must balance: 
a.  The privacy rights and reasonable request of an applicant for confidentiality; with 
b.  The land use requirements for notice and public hearing, factual findings and rights to appeal, in the city's requests for information, considering an application, preparing written findings and maintaining records for a request for reasonable accommodation. 
c.  Any document identifying the disability or medical condition of any specific person must be treated as confidential and is subject to disclosure by the city for any reason, including for compliance with the Open Records Act, unless ordered to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction and notice is given to the person who provided the document to the city. Specifically, any medical records regardless of source, including statements of medical providers, must not be disclosed. For any other type of document, such as an application or determination, the document may be subject to disclosure, but only after the nature or description of the person's disability or medical condition is redacted by the city. A statement regarding the city's handling of information subject to this provision must be printed on the city's reasonable accommodation application form, posted on the city's website, and printed at the bottom of any written document issued by the city determining a reasonable accommodation application. 
C.  Findings—Other requirements. 
1.  Findings. The review authority must approve the application, with or without conditions, if it can make the following findings: 
a.  The housing will be used by a disabled person or a person from a protected class; 
b.  The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to a disabled person or a person from a protected class; 
c.  There are no uses identified in the Tables of Authorized Uses found in division 38.310 for which the use proposed in the request for reasonable accommodation would qualify; 
d.  The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
e.  The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city land use planning and zoning program. 
2.  Other requirements. 
a.  An approved request for reasonable accommodation is subject to the applicant's compliance with all other applicable zoning regulations. 
b.  A modification approved under this chapter is considered a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and does not run with the land. 
c.  Where appropriate, the review authority may condition its approval on any or all of the following: 
(1)  Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this section and any conditions of approval; 
(2)  Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists; 
(3)  Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists; 
(4)  Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists; 
(5)  Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses; 
(6)  Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures; 
(7)  Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit and/or that will result in reduced variation or waiver of otherwise applicable standards specified for the zone district; and 
(8)  Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  
DIVISION 38.260. - TEXT AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS  
Part 1. - Text Amendments 
 
Sec. 38.260.010. - Initiation of amendments and changes. 
A.  The city commission may, from time to time, amend this chapter. An amendment may be initiated by the city commission, city manager, zoning commission, planning board or upon petition from an owner of property within the city. 
B.  The city commission, planning board or zoning commission may upon a vote of a majority of its members direct the initiation of an amendment to this chapter. When one of these bodies initiates an amendment, the application must be signed by the mayor, chair of the planning board or chair of the zoning commission as applicable. 
C.  Whenever any person or entity allowed to initiate an amendment desires a change in regulations, they may file with the community development department, on forms provided by the city for this purpose, an application duly signed and notarized by that person or authorized representative of that entity requesting an amendment or change of regulations. 
1.  When the application initiated by an owner of property, bearing the property owners' signature, is filed with the department it must contain or be accompanied by: 
a.  All the data and information pertinent to the understanding and judgment of the proposal, as may be prescribed by the commission for that purpose so as to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record; and 
b.  A notarized statement by at least one of the owners of property within the area subject to the proposed changes attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented with the petition.  
Sec. 38.260.020. - Amendments; investigation requirements. 
Upon initiation of an amendment, the city must cause to be made an investigation of facts bearing on such initiation or petition. The purpose of the investigation is to provide the necessary information to ensure that the action of each such petition is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter as set forth in section 38.100.040; this includes but is not limited to accordance with the city growth policy. Amendments only addressing zoning standards will be measured against the zoning purposes. Amendments which address only subdivision standards will be measured against the purposes related to the subdivision purposes. Amendments which apply to both zoning and subdivision standards will be reviewed against all the purposes.  
Sec. 38.260.030. - Public hearing procedures and requirements. 
A.  The city commission, zoning commission and/or planning board must hold one or more public hearings on the matters referred to in such initiation or petition at which parties in interest and citizens must have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of such public hearings must be provided as required by division 38.220 of this chapter. 
B.  Any text amendment must be the subject of one or more public hearing before the city commission, after receiving a recommendation from the zoning commission and/or planning board as set forth in this section. 
C.  The public hearings to be heard by the zoning commission and/or planning board must be conducted by the bodies specified in this subsection: 
1.  Any text amendment affecting only zoning provisions of this chapter must be heard by the zoning commission. 
2.  Any text amendment affecting only subdivisions must be heard by the planning board. 
3.  Any text amendment affecting both zoning and subdivision must be heard as a joint hearing of the planning board and zoning commission with the president of the planning board to preside. When there is a question as to whether an amendment would affect both subdivision and zoning, the public hearing must be jointly held. 
4.  After such hearing or hearings, the zoning commission and/or planning board will make reports and recommendations on the petition or initiation to the city commission. 
D.  In the event that there is a question as to whether a proposed text amendment affects both zoning and subdivision, or only one of the subjects, the community development director will determine which subject is affected. 
E.  Recommendations to the city commission and other official actions by both the zoning commission and the planning board will only be official if made by at least a majority of a quorum of the body. 
F.  In the case of protest against such changes, signed by the owners of 25 percent or more of either the area of the lots included in any proposed change or those lots or condominium units 150 feet from a lot included in a proposed change, such amendment may not become effective except upon a favorable vote of two-thirds of the present and voting members of the city commission. When considering protests from owners of condominiums the provisions of MCA 76-2-305(3) apply. The provisions of this subsection D include the ability for an applicant to protest a possible decision to adopt a zoning less than originally requested when the applicant meets the same criteria as other affected landowners.  
Part 2. - Zoning Map Amendments 
 
Sec. 38.260.100. - Initiation of zoning map amendments and changes. 
A.  The city commission may, from time to time, amend the zoning district maps appertaining to this chapter. An amendment may be initiated by the city commission, zoning commission or upon application from an owner of property within the city. 
B.  The city commission or zoning commission may upon a vote of a majority of its members direct the initiation of an amendment to the zoning map. When either body initiates an amendment, the application must be signed by the mayor or chair of the zoning commission as applicable. 
C.  Whenever the property owner of any land or building desires a reclassification on the owner's property, they may file with the community development department an application requesting an amendment or change of regulations prescribed for such property. Applications for change of district boundaries or reclassification of districts as shown on the zoning district map must be on forms supplied and prepared by the department. When the application, bearing property owner' signatures, is filed with the department it must contain or be accompanied by: 
1.  All the data and information pertinent to the understanding and judgment of the proposal, as may be prescribed by the commission for that purpose so as to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record; and 
2.  A notarized statement by at least one of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented with the application. 
D.  Whenever an owner of any land within the city desires a reclassification on property that they do not own, such as a request to establish a different zoning classification for a block or other group of properties, they may file with the community development department on forms provided by the city for this purpose an application duly signed by the owners of no less than 51 percent of either the area of lots or number of lots of the affected property requesting an amendment for such property. When the application, bearing property owners' signatures, is filed with the department it must contain or be accompanied by: 
1.  All the data and information pertinent to the understanding and judgment of the proposal, as may be prescribed by the commission for that purpose so as to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record; and 
2.  A notarized statement by at least one of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented with the petition. 
E.  An application containing less than the required number of signatures will be considered incomplete and invalid and will not be processed.  
Sec. 38.260.110. - Zoning map amendments and rezonings; investigation requirements. 
Upon initiation of an amendment the city must cause to be made an investigation of facts bearing on such initiation or application as will provide necessary information to ensure that each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Specifically the investigation must address the criteria of MCA 76-2-304 which are contained in section 38.100.040.C.  
Sec. 38.260.120. - Zoning map amendments—Public hearing procedures and requirements. 
A.  The city commission and zoning commission must hold public hearings on the matters referred to in such application at which parties of interest and citizens must have an opportunity to be heard. 
1.  If there is a protest, to be valid the protest must be submitted on a zoning protest form provided by the city. 
B.  The community development director must give public notice as required by division 38.220 of this chapter. The community development director must provide to the city commission and zoning commission a report of the staff's analysis of the application. 
C.  After such hearing or hearings, the zoning commission will make reports and recommendations on the application to the city commission. 
D.  After the zoning commission has forwarded a recommendation on the amendment to the zoning district map, a public hearing must be held by the city commission for the purpose of acting upon the proposed amendment after public notice. 
1.  In the case of protest against such changes, signed by the owners of 25 percent or more of either the area of the lots included in any proposed change or those lots or condominium units 150 feet from a lot included in a proposed change, such amendment may not become effective except upon a favorable vote of two-thirds of the present and voting members of the city commission. When considering protests from owners of condominiums the provisions of MCA 76-2-305(3) apply. The provisions of this subsection D include the ability for an applicant to protest a possible decision to adopt a zoning less than originally requested when the applicant meets the same criteria as other affected landowners. 
2.  If the city commission intends to adopt a zoning designation different than that applied for, the hearing will be continued for a minimum of one week to enable the applicant to consider their options and whether to protest the possible action. In the case of protest against a change to the zoning map by the applicant the same favorable vote of two-thirds of the present and voting members of the city commission is required as for any other protested zoning action.  
DIVISION 38.270. - IMPROVEMENTS AND GUARANTEES 
 
Sec. 38.270.010. - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  This division provides standards and procedures relating to the installation of physical improvements and compliance with requirements related to development. As these improvements are necessary to meet requirements of the law and to protect public health, safety and general welfare and other purposes of this chapter it is also necessary to provide means by which their installation can be ensured. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, design elements such as landscaping, parking facilities, storm drainage facilities, architectural features, pedestrian walkways and public utilities. Furthermore, in some situations it is in the best interest of the person conducting development to be able to guarantee the completion of certain work and be able to begin utilization of a development sooner than would otherwise be possible if all improvements had to be physically installed before use could begin. This article therefore has the following purposes: 
1.  Ensure completion of required improvements or compliance with other requirements of development to an acceptable standard; 
2.  Provide buyer/lessee protection while allowing a person undertaking development to proceed with sales/leases before the project is totally complete, especially multiphased projects; 
3.  Ensure adequate warranty or maintenance, when appropriate, of improvements; 
4.  Provide for mechanisms to ensure performance of or conformance with conditions of approval or development requirements; and 
5.  Accomplish the purposes listed in this subsection A through mechanisms that reduce the need to rely on costly litigation to accomplish those purposes. 
B.  This division applies to all subdivisions and site developments as follows: 
1.  Subdivisions must install or provide security for installation of improvements prior to final platting as set forth in detail in this article. 
2.  Site developments including, site plans, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, reuses and certificates of appropriateness, must install improvements or provide security for installation prior to occupancy or commencement of use. 
3.  The city may determine the nature and timing of required installation of improvements as part of the subdivision or site development process. When necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and ensure the function and viability of development, certain needed improvements may not be allowed to be financially guaranteed.  
Sec. 38.270.020. - Standards for improvements. 
A.  General. The responsibility of the developer must comply with the following procedures and standards for the installation of development improvements, including parks. 
1.  Construction routes. For all developments, excluding sketch and reuse/further development, a construction route map must be provided showing how materials and heavy equipment will travel to and from the site. The route must avoid, where possible, local or minor collector streets or streets where construction traffic would disrupt neighborhood residential character or pose a threat to public health and safety. 
2.  Protection of existing improvements. The developer, and the developer's contractors and suppliers are jointly and severally responsible to ensure that existing improvements are not damaged or rendered less useful by the operation of the developer, and the developer's contractors or suppliers. Such protection of improvements may include requirements for cleaning of vehicles leaving a construction site. This provision is intended to preclude damage to existing roads, streets, water, sewer and drainage systems. The city may instruct the developer as to the streets or roads to be used for access by construction equipment, and the developer must require the same from the developer's contractors and their suppliers. The city may require the developer to post a surety to guarantee repair of damages. 
B.  Improvements to be dedicated to the public. 
1.  Plans and specifications. Engineering and survey plans, specifications and reports required in connection with public improvements and other elements of the subdivision, or other development required by the city, must be prepared by a registered engineer and/or a registered land surveyor, licensed in the state, as their respective licensing laws allow. The plans and specifications must be prepared in compliance with the city's design standards and specifications policy and/or park design standards as applicable. Plans and specifications for nonengineering improvements must be prepared by a person whose qualifications are acceptable to the city department with responsibility for that type of improvements. Plans and specifications for nonengineering improvements must be prepared in compliance with any applicable adopted design standards and specifications policy. 
2.  Scope of work. The intent of these regulations is to provide standards by which the contractor and the developer must execute their respective responsibilities and guarantee proper construction and completion in every detail of the work in accordance with the plans, specifications and terms set forth under these regulations. 
a.  The developer must furnish the plans, specifications and typical sections for approval by the city. 
b.  The city may make or cause to be made any reasonable changes, alterations, amendments and additions to the standard specifications for infrastructure or park improvements. 
c.  The city may require work to be done that is outside of the right-of-way or park boundaries. 
3.  Control of work. During the course of construction, and at the completion of each phase of the project, the developer's registered civil engineer, or other person acceptable to the city, must submit a statement that the improvements have been inspected and found to have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Prior to making any changes, the developer's engineer must notify and receive written approval or disapproval from the city for any changes in approved plans and specifications. 
4.  Improvement procedure. 
a.  Approval of the improvement plans and specifications must be completed before installation of improvements or the entering into of an agreement where surety is to be provided for the completion of the improvements. 
b.  The procedure for submittal, review and approval of improvement plans and specifications is contained in the city's design standards and specifications policy, and must be followed by the developer and/or the developer's contractors. All plans and specifications related to park and public trail improvements must be submitted to the parks division for review and approval. 
c.  After the preliminary plat has received approval or conditional approval, and before the final plat is submitted, the developer must either install the required improvements or enter into an agreement with the city financially guaranteeing the installation and performance of the improvements. 
d.  After the final site plan is approved, subject to section 38.270.030, and prior to occupancy of any buildings, the developer must either install the required improvements or enter into an agreement with the city financially guaranteeing the installation and performance of the improvements. 
5.  Sanitary facilities. Water supply, sewage disposal and solid waste disposal systems must meet the minimum standards of the city and the state department of environmental quality as required by MCA 76-4-101 through 76-4-135, and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and are subject to the approval of the city. 
C.  Private improvements. Improvements must be constructed as shown on the approved final site plan, final plat, or plans and specifications, as may be applicable. The developer is responsible for coordinating installation with all necessary parties and to restore to its original condition any public improvements or any private improvements or property damaged during installation of private improvements.  
Sec. 38.270.030. - Completion of improvements. 
A.  General. The applicant must provide certification by the architect, landscape architect, engineer or other applicable professional that all improvements to be dedicated to the public were installed in accordance with the approved site plan, plans and specifications, or plat as applicable. For required private improvements, the applicant must provide certification by the architect, landscape architect, engineer or other applicable professional that all improvements, including, but not limited to, landscaping, ADA accessibility requirements, private infrastructure, or other required elements were installed in accordance with the approved site plan, plans and specifications, or plat as applicable, unless a waiver of certification in whole or part is explicitly approved by the DRC. 
1.  Improvements to be dedicated to the public. Improvements to be dedicated to the public, such as water mains, sewer mains, parkland and related improvements, and public streets, must be installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications by the developer, and certified by a registered professional civil engineer, licensed in the state, and accepted by the city prior to the approval of the final plat, building permit, issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other identified benchmark as may be appropriate. As-built drawings complying with the city's design standards and specifications policy, including timing for submittal of materials, must be provided. 
a.  Public street means a public right-of-way or easement developed to adopted city standards including, but not limited to, the following improvements: curbs, gutters, storm drainage, sidewalks, paving, traffic control signage or equipment, and lighting. 
2.  Private improvements and other required improvements. Improvements, such as, but not limited to, private parks or open space, landscaping, paving or irrigation must be installed in accordance with the approved preliminary plat or final site plan by the developer and inspected and found to comply with the city standards or requirements prior to the approval of the final plat, issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or site, or other identified benchmark as may be appropriate. All improvements required as part of a subdivision must be installed and accepted, or financially secured in accordance with an improvements agreement, prior to final plat approval. 
3.  Improvements agreement required. All improvements necessary or required to meet the standards of this chapter or conditions of approval must be the subject of an improvements agreement and be guaranteed if final plat approval, occupancy of buildings or other utilization of an approved development is allowed before the improvements are completed and inspected by the city. 
a.  Reservation. The city reserves the right to require actual installation of improvements prior to occupancy when such improvements are necessary to provide for health, safety and welfare or adequate function of systems or on-site development. 
B.  Completion time for subdivisions. 
1.  Improvements. All subdivision improvements, including parks, must be constructed and completed as approved by the city. 
a.  All improvements must be installed prior to the issuance of a building permit for any lot within a subdivision unless otherwise provided for in development proposals occurring under the provisions of article 20 of this chapter, planned unit development (PUD), when concurrent construction is an identified purpose of the initial project review, and pursuant to the criteria established in subsection D of this section. 
b.  The subdivider must meet one of the following requirements for completion of street improvements. The option must be specified in the preliminary plat submittal. Should the applicant not identify which option is desired, the option presented in subsection B.1.b.(1) of this section must be required. Altering the choice of option after approval of the development must constitute a material modification to the project and require re-review of the project for modification to the approval subject to the provisions of section 38.100.070. 
(1)  The subdivision streets improvements must be installed prior to final plat approval. This requirement may be modified by the review authority for streets where dictated by circumstances, and where acceptable improvement security for the ultimate development of the streets is provided. However, under no circumstances must the required gravel courses, curbs or gutters be waived. This requirement must generally not be modified for non-residential developments; or 
(2)  The subdivider must enter into an improvements agreement guaranteeing the completion of the paving, curb, gutter, storm drainage, street lighting or other street infrastructure improvements not yet completed. The improvements agreement must be financially guaranteed, as explained in this article. However, at a minimum, the plans and specifications for the street improvements must be approved by the review authority prior to final plat approval. Building permits will not be issued until the street improvements are completed and accepted by the city unless otherwise provided for in development proposals occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, Planned Unit Development (PUD), and pursuant to the criteria established in subsection D of this section; or 
(3)  The subdivider may request that street improvements be guaranteed by the creation of a special improvements district (SID). If a SID is formed for the improvements, the SID bonds must be sold before the final plat can be filed. SIDs must not be permitted for the installation of subdivision water and sewer improvements. Building permits will not be issued until the street improvements are completed and accepted by the city unless otherwise provided for in development proposals occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, Planned Unit Development (PUD), and pursuant to the criteria established in subsection D of this section. 
2.  Sidewalks. City standard sidewalks (including a concrete sidewalk section through all private drive approaches) must be constructed on all public and private street frontages prior to occupancy of any structure on individual lots. Should a subdivider choose not to install all sidewalks prior to final plat, an improvements agreement must be entered into with the city guaranteeing the completion of all sidewalks within the subdivision within a three-year period or as described in subsection b. below. The developer must supply the city with an acceptable method of security equal to 150 percent of these remaining sidewalk improvements. 
a.  The subdivider must install sidewalks adjacent to public lands, including but not limited to, parks, open space, and the intersection of alleys and streets or street easements. Sidewalks in these areas must be installed prior to final plat approval, or must be subject to an approved improvements agreement and financially guaranteed. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection c. below, upon the third anniversary of the plat recordation of any phase of the subdivision, any lot owner who has not constructed the required sidewalk must, without further notice, construct within 30 days, the sidewalk for their lot(s), regardless of whether other improvements have been made upon the lot. 
c.  On any face of a block between any two intersecting streets where less than 50 percent of lots have been issued a building permit, and when construction of a sidewalk is not immediately required to provide pedestrian connectivity to the destinations described in subsection (4) below, the community development director may allow the lot owner up to an additional two-year period to construct the sidewalk. The additional time is subject to either an extension of an existing improvements agreement with the subdivider or the entering into of a new improvements agreement with the lot owner(s). The community development director may authorize subsequent extensions in up to two-year increments. The granting of an extension does not allow sidewalk installation to be delayed beyond occupancy of any structure on an individual lot. The provision of a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the city must not be waived. 
The following information in map and/or text form must be provided for all requests to extend the time period to complete subdivision sidewalks: 
(1)  The total number of residential lots in the subdivision. 
(2)  The percent of subdivision lots that have been sold and are no longer under subdivider's/applicant's ownership. 
(3)  The percent of subdivision lots that have been sold and are still vacant. 
(4)  A description of adjoining subdivisions, public parklands, open spaces, neighborhood commercial nodes, commercial centers and public trail corridors within one-half mile of the subdivision. 
(5)  Which public sidewalks and/or public trails within the interior of the subdivision are proposed to be completed that will provide effective connectivity within the interior of the subdivision, as well as adjoining subdivisions, public parklands, open space, neighborhood commercial nodes, commercial centers and public trail systems. 
(6)  The extended time period being requested to complete the required subdivision sidewalks. 
(7)  A copy of the final plat and at least one colored exhibit illustrating the subdivision being considered, along with the number of lots sold, those developed with residential structures, vacant lots, those lots/areas where sidewalks have been constructed, and remaining lots still under applicant's ownership. 
3.  Subdivision lighting. Subdivision lighting, as required in division 38.570 must be incorporated into all subdivisions. Prior to final plat approval, subdivision lighting must be installed or financially guaranteed. If the subdivision lighting is financially guaranteed, they must be considered as part of the required street improvements and building permits must not be issued until the improvements are installed, unless otherwise provided for in development proposals occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, planned unit development (PUD), and pursuant to the criteria established in subsection D of this section. 
C.  Completion time for site development. Whenever any building lots and/or building sites are created inside the city limits, and prior to the issuance of any building permits on such lots or sites, municipal water distribution systems, and municipal sanitary sewer collection systems, and streets must be provided to the site. Each building site must utilize and be connected to both the municipal water distribution and municipal sanitary sewer collection systems. Subject to the provisions of subsection C.1 of this section, these improvements must be designed, constructed and installed according to the standards and criteria as adopted by the city and approved by the review authority prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
1.  Provision of municipal central water distribution, municipal sanitary sewer collection systems, and streets means that the criteria in either subsection a or subsections b and c are met as follows: 
a.  Water, sewer and street services are installed and accepted by the city with service stubs being extended into the site, with such stubs being of adequate size to provide water and sewer service to the proposed development without modification to publicly owned infrastructure; or 
b.  The water mains, sewer mains and streets to be extended to provide service to the development are: located within a publicly dedicated right-of-way or easement; constructed to city standards; are physically adjacent to the site proposed for construction; are installed and accepted by the city; and are adequate in capacity to provide necessary service to the proposed development; and comply with the requirements of this subsection C.1.b and subsection C.1.c of this section; 
c.  Water mains, sewer mains and streets must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Any required on-site extensions of water mains, sewer mains or streets to be dedicated to the public must be located entirely within publicly held easements or rights-of-way; must serve only a single lot; are the subject of an irrevocable offer of dedication to the city upon completion of the project; the development is under the control of a single developer who must retain control of the entire project until final completion; all work is under the supervision of a single general contractor; and no subdivision of land is involved; 
(2)  The DRC must determine when the standards of this subsection C.1 are met. The fire department must consider whether adequate fire protection services are available from existing hydrants, and water supply exists to meet needs during construction. If adequate fire protection does not exist then concurrent infrastructure and building construction may only occur under the provisions of subsection C.1.c.(3) of this section. Based on evaluation by the fire department, simultaneous construction of infrastructure to be dedicated to the public and private construction may be permitted only within a defined portion of the site; 
(3)  Approval of the final engineering design, including location and grade, for the infrastructure project must be obtained from the engineering department, and the state department of environmental quality when applicable, prior to issuance of any building permit for the development; and 
(4)  No occupancy, either temporary or final, may be issued until all on-site and offsite water, sewer and street or drive improvements are installed and accepted or approved as applicable by the city. 
D.  Exception. When municipal water distribution and municipal sanitary sewer collection systems and city streets are being provided to serve a development proposal occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, planned unit development (PUD), the issuance of a building permit may be allowed prior to completion of the public infrastructure, provided that the following criteria are met: 
1.  The subject property must be developed under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter; 
2.  The subdivider or other developer must enter into an improvements agreement to ensure the installation of required infrastructure and other applicable improvements, to be secured by a financial guarantee in an amount to be determined by the city, with said guarantee to be in the name of the city; 
3.  Approval of the final engineering design, including location and grade, for the infrastructure project must be obtained from the engineering department, and the state department of environmental quality when applicable, prior to issuance of any building permit for the development; 
4.  Building permits may be issued incrementally, dependent upon the status of installation of the infrastructure improvements. All building construction within the PUD must cease until required phases of infrastructure improvements as described in the PUD have been completed, and inspected and accepted by the city; 
5.  The subdivider must provide and maintain fire hazard and liability insurance which must name the city as an additional insured and such issuance must not be cancelled without at least 45 days prior notice to the city. The subdivider must furnish evidence, satisfactory to the city, of all such policies and the effective dates thereof; 
6.  The subdivider must recognize, acknowledge and assume the increased risk of loss because certain public services do not exist at the site; 
7.  The subdivider must enter into an agreement with the city which provides for predetermined infrastructure funding options; 
8.  No occupancy of any structures or commencement of any use constructed or proposed within the boundaries of the PUD will be allowed until required infrastructure improvements have been completed, and inspected and accepted by the city, and a certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
a.  No occupancy of structures or commencement of any use must occur when such action would constitute a safety hazard in the opinion of the city; 
9.  The subdivider must enter into an agreement with the city to address the provision of any services on an interim basis during construction, if deemed appropriate; 
10.  The subdivider must execute a hold harmless and indemnification agreement indemnifying, defending and holding harmless the city, its employees, agents and assigns from and against any and all liabilities, loss, claims, causes of action, judgments and damages resulting from or arising out of the issuance of a building permit under this section; 
11.  The subdivider must pay for any extraordinary costs associated with the project which the city may identify, including, but not limited to, additional staff hours to oversee the planning, engineering and construction of the project and infrastructure improvements, inspection of the infrastructure improvements and any extraordinary administrative costs; 
12.  The development must be under the control of a single developer and all work must be under the supervision of a single general contractor. The developer and general contractor must agree that there must be no third-party builders until required infrastructure improvements have been completed, and inspected and accepted by the city; and 
13.  Subsequent to preliminary plat or plan approval, a concurrent construction plan, addressing all requirements of this section, must be submitted for review and approval of the review authority with a recommendation from the development review committee. 
E.  Limitations. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D of this section, the city may limit the scope, type and number of projects eligible for simultaneous construction consideration.  
Sec. 38.270.040. - Special provisions for timing of certain improvements. 
A.  Park, pathway, and boulevard improvements. 
1.  These required improvements must be installed, or subject to an approved improvements agreement and financially guaranteed, prior to final plat approval or occupancy of a building subject to development review, excluding sketch plans. 
2.  Due to seasonal considerations, building and occupancy permits may be issued prior to installation of these improvements as long as the improvements are subject to an approved improvements agreement and are financially guaranteed. 
B.  Neighborhood center improvements. 
1.  With the exception of neighborhood commercial and civic buildings and their grounds, neighborhood center improvements must be installed, or subject to an approved improvements agreement and financially guaranteed, prior to final plat approval. 
2.  Due to seasonal considerations, building and occupancy permits may be issued prior to installation of improvements related to greens, plazas and squares as long as the improvements are subject to an approved improvements agreement and are financially guaranteed.  
Sec. 38.270.050. - Acceptance of improvements. 
A.  Improvements dedicated to the public. 
1.  Acceptance of street, road, and bridge improvements. Before any subdivision street, whether new or existing, can be accepted into the city street system by the city, it must be built to meet or exceed the required standards. Any improvements made to county roads must meet or exceed standards set by the county road office, and must be reviewed and approved by the county road office. Any bridge improvement, within the city or the county, must meet or exceed standards set by the state department of transportation, and must be reviewed and approved by the county road office and the city, and accepted by the county road office into the county's bridge maintenance system. 
2.  Acceptance of park, water, sewer, and storm drainage improvements. Before any public park, water, sewer or storm drainage improvement, whether new or existing, can be accepted into the city system by the city, it must be built to meet or exceed the required standards. Any improvement, within the city or county, must meet or exceed standards set by the city, state department of environmental quality and county road office, and must be reviewed and approved by the city and the county road office, as applicable. 
3.  Record drawings. Record drawings of all public infrastructure improvements constructed within the city, drawn to the specifications required by the city, must be submitted prior to final plat approval, per section 24.183.1107(5)(f), ARM as may be amended, or other equivalent final benchmark for site development. 
4.  The city may require verification that all liens have been released and payments made prior to accepting dedication of improvements. 
B.  Private improvements. The DRC and/or ADR or their representative must conduct an "as-built" inspection to verify compliance and must sign off on a certificate of occupancy, final plat or other conclusory action if all terms and details of the approval are complied with. Except as provided for in section 38.270.060, no final plat approval or occupancy must be permitted, or certificate of occupancy issued, unless the terms and details of an approved plat, site or sketch plan are met. Prior to grant of occupancy, the developer must certify the completion of the improvements as required in section 38.270.030.A.  
Sec. 38.270.060. - Improvements agreements. 
A.  When required. 
1.  When occupancy of a development subject to zoning review will commence prior to completion of all required site improvements, generally excluding sketch plans; or 
2.  When a subdivision is to be granted final plat approval prior to the completion of all required improvements, the applicant must enter into an improvements agreement with the city. 
3.  At the discretion of the community development director, certain projects receiving a certificate of appropriateness may be required to enter into an improvements agreement with the city at the time of final approval of the certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  If an improvements agreement is used to guarantee the completion of required improvements, including infrastructure, it may allow for the staged installation of improvements in defined areas and in accordance with an approved time schedule. At the city's discretion, the improvements in a prior increment may be required to be completed or the payment or guarantee of payment for costs of the improvements incurred in a prior increment must be satisfied before development of future increments. 
1.  If an improvements agreement is filed with the final subdivision plat to secure infrastructure improvements, a separate document must be filed with the final plat that clearly states that building permits will not be issued until all water, sewer, storm drainage infrastructure and streets are installed and accepted. This requirement may be modified by the city for streets where dictated by circumstances, and where acceptable improvement security for the ultimate development of the streets is provided. However, under no circumstances must the required gravel courses, curbs or gutters be waived. This requirement must generally not be modified for non-residential developments. No building permits will be issued for a subdivision within the city until all required water, sewer, storm drainage, required street lighting, and street gravel courses are installed and accepted unless otherwise provided for in development proposals occurring under the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, planned unit development (PUD), and pursuant to the criteria established in section 38.270.030.D. 
C.  Standards for improvements agreements. 
1.  All agreements. All improvements agreements must meet the following standards: 
a.  The agreement and security must be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form and manner of execution; 
b.  Detailed cost estimates and construction plans of all required on-site and off-site improvements must be made a part of the agreement; 
c.  Provide for security in the amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements to be secured if the agreement is to be activated; 
d.  The term for the security referenced in subsection C.1.c of this section must be at least six months longer than the time of performance required by the improvements agreement; 
e.  The agreement must provide for the city to claim the guarantee by certifying that the developer is in default of the performance to be secured; 
f.  Requests for partial release of security must only be in amounts such that the security will always equal 150 percent of the value of the remaining uncompleted work, and such that not more than 90 percent of the security is released prior to completion of all improvements. The city may take into account the location and scope of development phases in evaluating requests to reduce the amount of a financial guarantee. The city may require verification that all liens have been released and payments made prior to releasing a portion of the security; 
g.  Must provide for the city to require a replacement security in the event the issuer of the security becomes insolvent, enters receivership, or otherwise gives cause for the city to lack confidence in the ability of the issuer to honor the security; 
h.  Must permit the city in the event of default by the developer to include in the costs to be recovered from the security those costs resulting from the need to call in the security, including but not limited to costs for the city attorney's time; and 
i.  The financial security must be placed in the keeping of the city treasurer. 
2.  Subdivisions. Improvements agreements for subdivisions must meet the following standards in addition to those listed in subsection C.1 of this section: 
a.  The length of time of the agreement must not exceed one year from the date of final plat approval. The agreement must stipulate the time schedule the subdivider proposes for accomplishing the required improvements; 
b.  The estimated cost of improvements must be provided by the subdivider's professional engineer. The city engineer has the discretion to require a second estimate of the cost of improvements, with the cost of obtaining the second estimate borne by the subdivider. The agreement must stipulate which type of security arrangements will be used; 
c.  Security for improvements for internal subdivision streets, water, storm drainage and sewer mains, or other internal or external improvements must be reduced only upon recommendation of the city department with responsibility for the type of infrastructure which has been guaranteed; 
d.  The improvements agreement must be filed with the final plat; and 
e.  The security provided must be a financial security valid for 18 months. 
3.  Site development. Improvements agreements for developments other than subdivisions must meet the following standards in addition to those listed in subsection C.1 of this section: 
a.  If occupancy of the structure or commencement of the use is to occur prior to installation of the required improvements, the installation of those improvements must be secured in conformance with the requirements of this division 38.270; 
b.  The length of time of the agreement and method of security must not be less than 12 months, and the term for the security must be at least six months longer than the time for performance required by the improvements agreement; 
c.  All secured improvements must be completed by the developer within nine months of occupancy or the security must be forfeited to the city for the purpose of installing or contracting for the installation of the required improvements; 
d.  At the community development director's discretion, a developer may be permitted to extend the manner of security, in general for a period not to exceed one additional year. Factors such as, but not limited to, progress of installation achieved to date and phasing of projects may be considered; 
e.  The DRC and/or ADR must determine which, if any, of the required improvements must be installed prior to occupancy, regardless of the use of a secured improvements agreement. Such determination must be based on a finding that unsafe or hazardous conditions will be created or perpetuated without the installation of certain improvements or that the property will have an unacceptable adverse impact on adjoining properties until such improvements are installed; 
(1)  Items include but are not limited to walkways and signage necessary for ADA compliance, parking surfaces adequate to meet the needs of the uses to be conducted during the term of the improvements agreement, or matters related to life safety are required to be installed prior to any occupancy; and 
f.  When all provisions are met for occupancy of a facility or commencement of a use prior to the installation of all improvements, and adequate security has been provided in accordance with the terms of an improvements agreement, the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy which allows occupancy of the facility on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed nine months. When all required improvements are installed in compliance with all terms and details of the site or sketch plan approval, the temporary occupancy permit must be withdrawn and a permanent certificate of occupancy must be issued according to the provisions of this division 38.270. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city may limit the scope, type and number of improvements eligible for being secured by an improvements agreement and require installation prior to final plat approval, issuance of building permits, occupancy or other similar actions. 
E.  The community development director must be responsible to sign improvements agreements on behalf of the city. 
F.  When an improvements agreement is used to allow the filing of a final plat prior to the completion of infrastructure, a notice of improvements agreement must be recorded along with the plat which indicates that certain infrastructure work is still not complete and identifying that work. When the work has been completed and is accepted by the city as complete, the city must record a notice of completion stating that the work that was the subject of the improvements agreement is complete.  
Sec. 38.270.070. - Payment for extension of capital facilities. 
A.  The city may require a subdivider or other site developer to mitigate the impacts of subdivision or site development by the extension of existing capital facilities or the construction of new capital facilities. The review authority, established in section 38.200.010, may determine that the payment or the guarantee of payment for the construction of capital facilities are appropriate measures to coordinate with the city's planned capital facility improvements and to ensure public health, safety and welfare. Payment of cash in-lieu of constructing capital facilities by a subdivider or other site developer to the city is a mechanism for meeting regulatory requirements and mitigating subdivision and other site development impacts. The review authority, in its sole discretion, must determine the appropriate mitigation for any subdivision or site development impacts. 
B.  The city may require a subdivider or other site developer to pay or guarantee payment for part or all of the costs of extending capital facilities related to public health and safety, including but not limited to public roads or streets, sewer mains, water supply mains and stormwater facilities for a subdivision or other site development. The costs must reasonably reflect the expected impacts directly attributable to the subdivision or other site development. The city may not require a subdivider or other site developer to pay or guarantee payment for part or all of the costs of constructing or extending capital facilities related to education. 
C.  The review authority may accept direct payment of cash in-lieu of public street, water, sewer, and stormwater capital facilities required by this code. Should the review authority approve a request to pay cash in-lieu, a subdivider or other site developer is not required to obtain a variance from the requirement such facilities be constructed prior to development approval. A request to meet the terms of chapter 38 and 40 by payment of cash in-lieu must be submitted by an applicant prior to a determination of adequacy or any advisory body recommendation during review of a development application. The city may choose to require payment of cash rather than require the construction of capital facilities as determined by the review authority. A request received after determination of adequacy or advisory body recommendation is a material modification to the application. 
1.  The review authority, established in section 38.200.010, must evaluate proposals of cash in-lieu of capital facilities and make a decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny such requests. In evaluating a request to pay cash in-lieu, the review authority must consider the following criteria: 
a.  Whether there is a danger to public health and safety of accepting cash in-lieu rather than constructing the capital facilities; 
b.  Whether the work described in the proposal is part of a project scheduled for commencement of construction on the most recently adopted capital improvement plan no later than three years from the date of submittal; 
c.  Whether a public work is pending which would substantially damage the work otherwise required to be constructed; 
d.  Whether the installation of the otherwise required capital facilities would be disruptive to planned public improvements; 
e.  Whether the city has made a determination of the reasonableness of the cost estimate of the work; and 
f.  Whether the payment would enable a more efficient installation of required capital facilities. 
2.  The request to pay cash in-lieu of capital facilities and the findings of the review authority must be considered in any final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a development application. 
3.  All cash paid in-lieu must be held by the city in a fund dedicated to the work for which the monies are paid. 
4.  As a condition of accepting cash in-lieu, the city may require the property owner to execute a waiver of right to protest creation of a special improvement district, or other legal instrument, assuring participation, on a fair share, proportionate basis, in future capital facility improvements in the vicinity of the development proposal. 
5.  The city manager may adopt procedures by administrative order to implement this section. 
6.  The cash paid must include all component costs of the work deferred including but not limited to design, permitting, traffic management, construction, and record drawings. The cash paid must include a contingency amount to offset the uncertainty of cost estimating and potential escalation of costs. 
7.  Issuance of a refund is a material modification of a development per section 38.100.070. Refunds of cash paid in-lieu are not available if: 
a.  A final plat which relied upon cash-in-lieu of facilities has been recorded; 
b.  If building permits for a non-subdivision development have been issued; or 
c.  If the city has published an invitation to bid on work which relies upon the paid cash for project funding.  
Sec. 38.270.080. - Types of acceptable securities. 
A.  Financial securities. A variety of means of providing for the security of improvements agreements, ensuring adequate maintenance of required improvements and ensuring compliance with conditions of approval for various developments may be allowed. One or more of the following instruments may be used to provide a financial security for improvements to be completed. The method, terms and amount of security must be acceptable to the city. Financial security is the primary method to provide security for installation of physical improvements. 
1.  Direct payment of cash to the city; 
2.  Irrevocable letters of credit; 
3.  Cash escrows held by the city, or held by an approved escrow agent and subject to an executed escrow agreement; or 
4.  Performance bonds, in limited circumstances and subject to approval by the city attorney. 
B.  Nonfinancial securities. In addition to the possible financial securities listed above, the following nonfinancial securities may be used to ensure compliance with conditions of approval, ensure maintenance of required improvements and coordinate timing of development. When deemed appropriate, the city may use nonfinancial security methods in combination with a financial security method. 
1.  Granting of final permits; 
2.  Sequential approval of multiphased projects, with subsequent phases to not receive approval until prior approved phases have complied with all requirements; 
3.  Formation of a special improvement or maintenance district. This method must not be considered completed until after all final actions have occurred and the district is in existence and the bonds sold; 
4.  Establishment of a property owners' association with city enforceable duties to maintain certain improvements; 
5.  Irrevocable offer of dedication of improvements to be dedicated to the public after completion of the project; and 
6.  Recording of a special restrictive covenant or deed restriction which may only be released by written agreement of the city.  
Sec. 38.270.090. - Development or maintenance of common areas and facilities by developer or property owners' association. 
A.  General. For the purposes of this section, "common areas and facilities" include: 
1.  Public and/or private parkland; 
2.  Boulevard strips in public rights-of-way along external subdivision streets and adjacent to parks and/or open space; 
3.  Common open space (as defined in section 38.700.040); 
4.  Neighborhood centers (except for neighborhood commercial and civic uses and their grounds) as set forth in section 38.410.020; 
5.  Pathways (as defined in section 38.700.150); 
6.  Lighting; 
7.  Stormwater facilities, and 
8.  Irrigation facilities installed in common areas. 
B.  Development. If common areas or facilities will be developed by the subdivider or by a property owners' association, a development plan must be submitted with the preliminary plat application for review and approval. The development plan must be reviewed and approved by the city prior to the installation of improvements in common areas or the installation of common facilities. An approved park master plan would satisfy this requirement. 
1.  Landscaping. When landscaping and/or irrigation systems will be installed in parkland, boulevard strips or common open space, the development plan must be accompanied by a landscaping plan that was prepared by a qualified landscaping professional. When landscaping in common areas is installed by the subdivider, the subdivider must warrant these improvements against any and all defects for a period of two years from the date of installation of the landscaping. When landscaping in a park is installed by the subdivider, the subdivider must comply with the parks design standards and warrant these improvements against any and all defects for a period of two years from the date of installation of the landscaping. 
2.  Tree permits. If trees will be planted in dedicated city parkland or boulevard strips, tree planting permits must be obtained from the forestry department. 
C.  Maintenance. When common areas or facilities will be maintained by the subdivider or by a property owners' association, a maintenance plan that complies with section 38.220.320 must be submitted with the preliminary plat application for review and approval. The maintenance plan must include a maintenance schedule, and a mechanism to assess and enforce the common expenses for the common area or facility. The maintenance plan must be included in the subdivision covenants. The developer must provide all necessary maintenance until the improvements are transferred to a property owners' association, or other final custodian, at which point the property owners' association or other final custodian will be responsible for all necessary maintenance of common areas or facilities identified in the maintenance plan. Maintenance must be provided by the property owners' association for parks until the city must establish a park maintenance district or other dedicated funding source and affirmatively accept responsibility for maintenance. The provisions of sections 38.220.300—38.220.320 apply to this section. 
1.  Landscaping warranty. The maintenance plan must provide that any required or proposed landscaping must be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times, and that any plant that dies must be replaced with another living plant that complies with the approved landscape plan. 
2.  Irrigation system warranty. The maintenance plan must provide that any required or proposed irrigation system must be maintained in an appropriate and efficient manner and kept in good operating condition, and that any components of the irrigation system that break must be fixed and replaced if necessary with components approved in the irrigation system design plan. 
3.  Shade tree maintenance. The forestry department must be responsible for the maintenance of shade trees in all city rights-of-way and on city property, including parks. 
D.  Maintenance Area. For a multiphase project with common areas and facilities, the maintenance mechanism must include all phases of the project, and must be created for the entire project with the first phase. No property must be removed from the maintenance area or mechanism without prior approval by the city to ensure continued maintenance of common areas and facilities, and on-going fulfillment of all obligations.  
Sec. 38.270.100. - Warranty. 
All publicly dedicated improvements must be subject to a warranty of duration and scope to meet the city's design standards and specifications manual and/or park design standards as applicable.  
DIVISION 38.280. - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 
 
Sec. 38.280.010. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Any use lawfully existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter or any predecessor title or code is derived may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified, or in the case of signage as specified in division 38.560 of this chapter. 
B.  Except as otherwise specified in this division, the right to operate and maintain a nonconforming use must terminate when the structure or structures housing such use are destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. However, in the event of damage by natural disaster to the extent described herein, said nonconforming use or uses may be reestablished through a conditional use permit procedure as set forth in division 38.230 of this chapter. Such restoration must comply to the maximum extent reasonably feasible with the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it must not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming use. 
D.  Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a building, structure or land is discontinued for a period of 90 days, any future use of the building, structure or land must be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary structural repairs, provided such structural repairs do not enlarge, intensify or otherwise redefine the nonconforming use.  
Sec. 38.280.020. - Changes to or expansions of nonconforming uses. 
A.  Lawful nonconforming non-residential use. 
1.  A lawful nonconforming non-residential use must not be changed except in conformance with the use requirements of the zone in which it is located. Except, however, a lawful nonconforming non-residential use may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the proposed use is not of greater intensity than the original use, as determined by the criteria in section 38.280.020.A.2, and that a conditional use permit is obtained from the review authority. A lawful nonconforming non-residential use may be expanded only through the granting of a conditional use permit by the review authority. In considering the appropriateness of the conditional use permit application, the review authority must weigh the criteria set forth in 38.230.110. In addition, the review authority must consider whether the expansion is reasonable, natural and incidental to the growth and use of an existing business. In general, proposals to expand nonconforming uses must not be approved if the expansion would encompass new land or property which was not in use at the time of the enactment of zoning or a change in zoning. 
2.  To approve a conditional use permit to change or expand a nonconforming non-residential use, the review authority must determine that the proposed nonconforming use is more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use, and that no unsafe or unhealthy conditions are perpetuated. In making such a determination, the review authority must weigh the following criteria in addition to the criteria applicable to all conditional use permits: 
a.  Traffic impacts, both on-site and off-site; 
b.  Off-street parking and loading requirements; 
c.  The visual impact on the surrounding area; 
d.  The degree of compliance with the adopted growth policy and this chapter; 
e.  The level of conflict with other uses in the surrounding area; 
f.  The presence of other nonconformities in the surrounding area; 
g.  The degree to which any existing unsafe or hazardous conditions would be mitigated; 
h.  The viability of the subject structure; and 
i.  On-site and off-site impacts from noise, dust, smoke, surface or groundwater contamination, or other environmental impacts. 
B.  Lawful nonconforming residential use. 
1.  A lawful nonconforming residential use may be reduced in terms of the number of dwelling units, in an effort to achieve greater conformance with the underlying zoning designation, through the review process required by divisions 38.340 and 38.230 of this chapter, without the need to obtain a conditional use permit from the review authority. A lawful nonconforming residential use must not be permitted to increase the number of dwelling units. 
2.  The maintenance and reconstruction of existing nonconforming residential dwelling units is allowed, in compliance with applicable fire and building codes, including expansion of up to 20 percent of the existing total residential area, without the need of a conditional use permit, as long as the number of dwelling units on the lot is not increased. In instances where new construction is allowed, all appropriate approvals such as a certificate of appropriateness or building permit must be obtained prior to the initiation of construction.  
Sec. 38.280.030. - Nonconforming area and bulk requirements for existing lots. 
A.  At the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived if any owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots, as defined in section 38.700.110 of this chapter, in a subdivision of record does not own sufficient land within the lot of record to enable the owner to conform to the minimum lot size requirements, or does not have sufficient lot width to conform to the minimum lot width requirements, such plot of land may nevertheless be used as a building site. The lot dimension requirements of the district in which the piece of land is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit a structure of acceptable size to be built upon the lot, with such reduction to be determined by the review authority designated in section 38.200.010. Existing buildings on nonconforming lots may be expanded without deviations or variances so long as the expansion does not increase or create one or more nonconformities. 
1.  In the R-S, R-1 and R-2 districts, the reduction must permit only a single-household residence. 
2.  In the R-3, R-4 and R-O districts, the reduction must permit only a two unit structure. 
B.  No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in common ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, may be reduced in size so that lot width or size of setbacks or lot area per household or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained except as provided for in this chapter. This section views lots as merged for the purposes of planning and zoning regulation of bulk, size, or similar dimensional standards only, and does not aggregate individual parcels of land in a manner affected by MCA 76-3-103(17)(b). This section does not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
C.  Adjacent parcels which do not conform to minimum lot requirements, and which are in common ownership, are considered individual lots of record for the purposes of this code only if they are each greater than one acre in size and were created prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter.  
Sec. 38.280.040. - Nonconforming structures. 
A.  Any nonconforming structure lawfully existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued at the size and configuration existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified, or in the case of signage as specified in division 38.560 of this chapter and lighting as specified in section 38.570.110. 
B.  The right to operate and maintain a nonconforming structure terminates when the structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. However, in the event of damage by natural disaster to the extent described herein, said nonconforming nonresidential structure may be reestablished through a conditional use permit procedure as set forth in division 38.230 of this chapter. Such restoration must comply to the maximum extent feasible with the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Normal maintenance of a lawful nonconforming structure is permitted, including necessary structural repairs provided such structural repairs do not enlarge the structure or intensify the use.  
Sec. 38.280.050. - Changes to or expansions of nonconforming structures. 
A.  A lawful nonconforming structure must not be changed except in conformance with the requirements of the zone in which it is located or as provided in this division. 
B.  A lawful nonconforming structure may be expanded through the plan review process required by divisions 38.340 and 38.230 of this chapter. Unless the proposed expansion would create a new nonconformity or increase an existing nonconformity, no deviation or variance is required for the expansion. 
C.  If a lawful nonconforming structure is proposed to be changed or expanded in a manner which would increase the degree of nonconformity, or would create a new nonconformity, a deviation or variance must be properly granted prior to or in conjunction with the site development approval required in divisions 38.340 and 38.230 of this chapter. 
D.  The maintenance and reconstruction of existing nonconforming residential structures is allowed, in compliance with applicable fire and building codes, as well as the provisions of this division, so long as the number of dwelling units on the lot is not increased. Maintenance activities may not increase the degree of nonconformity. 
 
Figure 38.280.050
Clarifying acceptable and unacceptable examples of expanding nonconforming structures. 
  
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES  
DIVISION 38.300. - ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning, MCA 76-2-301 et seq. 
 
Part 1. - Zoning Districts and Zoning Map 
 
Sec. 38.300.010. - Purpose. 
Individual zoning districts are adopted for the purposes described in section 38.100.040. Furthermore: 
A.  A variety of districts is established to provide locations for the many uses needed within a healthy and dynamic community. 
B.  Each district, in conjunction with other standards incorporated in this chapter, establishes allowable uses of property, separates incompatible uses, and sets certain standards for use of land. 
C.  This provides predictability and reasonable expectation in use of land within particular zoning designations and sites. 
D.  The zoning provisions implement the community goals and objectives that are contained in the city's adopted growth policy. 
E.  Zoning districts and the zoning map communicate the City's expectation for land use in each particular district.  
Sec. 38.300.020. - Use districts designated, zoning map adopted. 
A.  The city is divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by this reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
B.  The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in part 2 of this division shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in the city. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided and classified into the following use districts: 
R-S 	Residential Suburban District 
R-1 	Residential Low Density District 
R-2 	Residential Moderate Density District 
R-3 	Residential Medium Density District 
R-4 	Residential High Density District 
R-5 	Residential Mixed-Use High Density District 
R-O 	Residential-Office District 
RMH 	Residential Manufactured Home Community District 
B-1 	Neighborhood Business District 
B-2 	Community Business District 
B-2M 	Community Business District - Mixed 
B-3 	Downtown Business District 
UMU 	Urban Mixed-Use District 
M-1 	Light Manufacturing District 
M-2 	Manufacturing and Industrial District 
B-P 	Business Park District 
PLI 	Public Lands and Institutions District 
NEHMU 	Northeast Historic Mixed-Use District 
NC 	Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District 
REMU 	Residential Emphasis Mixed-use District 
 
C.  Placement of any given zoning district on an area depicted on the zoning map indicates a judgment on the part of the city that the range of uses allowed within that district are generally acceptable in that location. It is not a guarantee of approval for any given use prior to the completion of the appropriate review procedure and compliance with all of the applicable requirements and development standards of this chapter and other applicable policies, laws and ordinances. It is also not a guarantee of immediate infrastructure availability or a commitment on the part of the city to bear the cost of extending services. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 4, 4-18-2018; Order No. 2019-01 , 9-13-2019)  
Sec. 38.300.030. - Official map availability, certification and authority; changes. 
A.  The official maps must be available in the community development department and must bear a certificate with the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk and the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  This certificate should read as follows: 
This is to certify that this is an Official Zoning Map referred to in section _______ of Ordinance No. _______ of the City of Bozeman, Montana. 
Mayor 	_______ 
Attested 	_______ 
Date of Adoption 	_______ 
 
C.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning maps, which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning maps kept in the community development department must be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city.  
Sec. 38.300.040. - Official map replacement conditions. 
A.  In the event that the official zoning maps become damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes or additions thereto, the city commission may adopt and certify new official zoning maps which must supersede the prior official zoning maps. The new official zoning maps may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning maps or any subsequent amendment thereof. 
B.  If any changes to the map are made by amendment of this chapter in accordance with division 38.260 of this chapter, such changes must be made to the official zoning maps and signed, dated and certified upon the map or upon the material attached thereto. Interpretations per 38.300.050 and revisions to the map to accommodate annexations and other changes necessitating interpretation must be reflected. 
C.  The new official zoning maps must be identified by signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk. The certificate should read as follows: 
This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of Ordinance No. _______ of the City of Bozeman, Montana. 
Mayor 	_______ 
Attested 	_______ 
Date of Adoption 	_______ 
  
Sec. 38.300.050. - Boundary interpretation guidelines. 
A.  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the boundaries must be interpreted as following the nearest logical line to that shown: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys must be construed to follow such centerlines; 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines must be construed as following such lot lines; 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits must be construed as following such city limits; 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines must be construed to be midway between the main track or rails; 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals or ditches must be construed to follow such centerlines; and 
6.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated on the official zoning map must be determined by the scale of the map. 
7.  When a parcel subject to two or more districts is subdivided and the district boundary is near a new parcel boundary the district must be construed to follow the new boundary. 
B.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or where other circumstances or controversy arise over district boundaries, the community development director must interpret the district boundary. Such interpretation is subject to appeal as set forth in division 38.250 in this chapter. 
C.  Where district boundaries divide a lot or parcel into two or more districts, the following rule applies: 
For the purpose of determining permitted uses and development form and intensity, the community development director may allow minor adjustments (up to ten percent increase or decrease in area, not to exceed one acre, of either zone on the applicable lot) to the zoning boundary. The criteria for making such a determination must include an evaluation of site topography, proximity of non-compatible uses adjacent to the subject property, and overall function and integration of the development with the community.  
Sec. 38.300.060. - Zoning of annexed territory. 
A.  All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city must, in conjunction with the annexation, be the subject of a zone map amendment in order to be designated and assigned to a city zoning district. 
B.  Areas of annexed public right-of-way must be considered to be zoned according to the provisions of section 38.300.040.A. The city commission must determine the appropriate zoning for any and all areas to be annexed to the city but must request a recommendation from the zoning commission and must take into consideration the city growth policy. Any ordinance adopting such zoning amendment must not take effect prior to the effective date of such annexation.  
Part 2. - Zoning District Intent and Purpose Statements 
 
Sec. 38.300.100. - Residential zoning districts—Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of the residential zoning districts is to establish areas within the city that are primarily residential in character and to set forth certain minimum standards for development within those areas. The residential districts also allow complementary non-residential uses. The purpose in having more than one residential district is to provide opportunities for a variety of housing types and arrangements within the community while providing a basic level of predictability. There is a presumption that the uses set forth for each district will be compatible with each other when the standards of this chapter are met and any applicable conditions of approval have been satisfied. The presumption of compatibility may be overcome by a showing of specific evidence through the development review process that proves a development to be non-compliant with applicable standards. 
Additional requirements for development apply within overlay districts. All development is subject to section 38.100.050. Residential density is correlated with many community goals and objectives that are contained in the city's adopted growth policy, as well as many standards and purposes of this chapter. Section 38.320.020 and Table 38.320.030 sets standards for minimum densities in residential districts which will advance these goals, objectives, and purposes. 
A.  Residential suburban district (R-S). The intent and purpose of the R-S residential suburban district is to commemorate and preserve existing RS zoning only. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Subdivision and site plan developments in this district are subject to the provisions of division 38.430 of this chapter, pertaining to planned unit development, and shall be developed in compliance with the adopted city growth policy. 
2.  Allowing permitted uses in circumstances where environmental constraints limit the desirable density. 
3.  Providing for a minimum lot size in developed areas consistent with the established development patterns while providing greater flexibility for clustering lots and housing types in newly developed areas. 
4.  This district is not available for newly created subdivisions, undeveloped land, or any land annexed into the city on or after January 1, 2018. 
B.  Residential low density district (R-1). The intent of the R-1 residential low density district is to provide for primarily single-household residential development and related uses within the city at urban densities. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for a minimum lot size in developed areas consistent with the established development patterns while providing greater flexibility for clustering lots and housing types in newly developed areas. 
2.  Providing for such community facilities and services as will serve the area's residents while respecting the residential character and quality of the area. 
C.  Residential moderate density district (R-2). The intent of the R-2 residential moderate density district is to provide for one- and two-household residential development at urban densities within the city in areas that present few or no development constraints. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for minimum lot sizes in developed areas consistent with the established development patterns while providing greater flexibility for clustering lots and housing types in newly developed areas. 
2.  Providing for community facilities to serve such development while respecting the residential quality and nature of the area. 
Use of this zone is appropriate for areas with moderate access to parks, community services and/or transit. 
D.  Residential medium density district (R-3). The intent of the R-3 residential medium density district is to provide for the development of one- to five-household residential structures near service facilities within the city. This purpose is accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for minimum lot sizes in developed areas consistent with the established development patterns while providing greater flexibility for clustering lots and mixing housing types in newly developed areas. 
2.  Providing for a variety of housing types, including single household dwellings, two to four household dwellings, and townhouses to serve the varied needs of households of different size, age and character, while reducing the adverse effect of non-residential uses. 
Use of this zone is appropriate for areas with good access to parks, community services and/or transit. 
E.  Residential high density district (R-4). The intent of the R-4 residential high density district is to provide for high-density residential development through a variety of housing types within the city with associated service functions. This purpose is accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for minimum lot sizes in developed areas consistent with the established development patterns while providing greater flexibility for clustering lots and mixing housing types in newly developed areas. 
2.  Providing for a variety of compatible housing types, including single and multi-household dwellings to serve the varying needs of the community's residents. 
3.  Allowing office use as a secondary use, measured by percentage of total building area. 
Use of this zone is appropriate for areas adjacent to mixed-use districts, commercial districts, and/or served by transit to accommodate a higher density of residents in close proximity to jobs and services. 
F.  Residential mixed-use high density district (R-5). The intent of the R-5 residential mixed-use high density district is to provide for high-density residential development through a variety of compatible housing types and residentially supportive commercial uses in a geographically compact, walkable area to serve the varying needs of the community's residents. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for a mixture of housing types, including single and multi-household dwellings to serve the varying needs of the community's residents. 
2.  Allowing offices and small scale retail and restaurants as secondary uses provided special standards are met. 
Use of this zone is appropriate for areas adjacent to mixed-use districts and/or served by transit to accommodate a higher density of residents in close proximity to jobs and services. 
G.  Residential-office district (R-O). The intent of the R-O residential-office district is to provide for and encourage the development of multi-household and apartment development and compatible professional offices and businesses that would blend well with adjacent land uses. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Providing for a mixture of housing types, including single and multi-household dwellings to serve the varying needs of the community's residents. 
Use of this zone is appropriate for areas characterized by office or multi-household development; and/or areas along arterial corridors or transitional areas between residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. 
H.  Residential manufactured home community district (RMH). The intent of the RMH residential manufactured home community district is to provide for manufactured home community development and directly related complementary uses at a density and character compatible with adjacent development. Use of this zone is appropriate for existing mobile home parks and areas adjacent to commercial or mixed-use districts and/or served by transit.  
Sec. 38.300.110. - Commercial and mixed-use zoning districts—intent and purpose. 
The intent and purposes of the commercial zoning districts are to establish areas within the city that are primarily commercial in character and to set forth certain minimum standards for development within those areas. The purpose in having more than one commercial district is to provide opportunities for a variety of employment and community service opportunities within the community, while providing predictability. There is a rebuttable presumption that the uses set forth for each district will be compatible with each other both within the individual districts and to adjoining zoning districts when the standards of this chapter are met and any applicable conditions of approval have been satisfied. Additional requirements for development apply within overlay districts. 
A.  Neighborhood business district (B-1). The intent of the B-1 neighborhood business district is to provide for smaller scale retail and service activities frequently required by neighborhood residents on a day to day basis, as well as residential development as a secondary purpose, while still maintaining compatibility with adjacent residential land uses. Design standards emphasizing pedestrian oriented design are important elements of this district. Use of this zone is appropriate for areas functioning as a center for surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Community business district (B-2). The intent of the B-2 community business district is to provide for a broad range of mutually supportive retail and service functions located in clustered areas bordered on one or more sides by limited access arterial streets. Multi-household dwellings, townhouses, and apartments are allowed as a secondary use due to their complementary nature and ability to enhance the walkability of these districts. Design standards emphasizing pedestrian oriented design are important elements of this district. Use of this zone is appropriate for arterial corridors, commercial nodes, and/or areas served by transit. 
C.  Community business district-mixed (B-2M). The intent of the B-2M community business district-mixed is to function as a vibrant mixed-use district that accommodates substantial growth and enhances the character of the city. This district provides for a range of commercial uses that serve both the immediate area and the broader trade area and encourages the integration of multi-household residential as a secondary use. Design standards emphasizing pedestrian oriented design are important elements of this district. Use of this zone is appropriate for arterial corridors, commercial nodes and/or areas served by transit. 
D.  Downtown district (downtown B-3). The intent of the downtown B-3 business district is to provide a central area for the community's business, government service and cultural activities with urban residential development as an essential supporting use. The downtown B-3 district should be the area of greatest density of development, intensity of use, and appropriate infill. Design standards reinforcing the area's historical pedestrian-oriented context are very important. 
This district encourages high volume, pedestrian-oriented uses in ground floor space in the "core area" of the city's central business district, i.e., along Main Street from Grand to Rouse and to the alleys one-half block north and south from Main Street. Lower volume pedestrian uses such as professional offices may locate on ground floor space in the downtown B-3 area outside the above-defined core. 
E.  Urban mixed-use zoning district (UMU) The intent and purposes of the UMU urban mixed-use district are to establish areas within the city that are mixed-use in character, and to set forth certain minimum standards for development within those areas which encourage vertical mixed-use development with high density. The purpose in having an urban mixed-use district is to provide options for a variety of employment, retail and community service opportunities within the community, with incorporated opportunity for some residential uses, while providing predictability in uses and standards to landowners and residents. There is a rebuttable presumption that the uses set forth for each district will be compatible both within the individual districts and with adjoining zoning districts when the standards of this chapter are met and any applicable conditions of approval have been satisfied. Additional requirements for development apply within overlay districts. 
1.  It is the further the intent of this district to: 
a.  Allow complementary land uses which encourage mixed uses on individual floors including, but not limited to, retail, offices, commercial services, restaurants, bars, hotels, recreation and civic uses, and housing, to create economic and social vitality and to encourage the linking of trips; 
b.  Foster the development of vertically oriented mixed uses, in contrast to single use development distributed along high vehicle capacity roadways; 
c.  Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics of vibrant, urban, pedestrian-oriented, storefront-style shopping streets with pedestrian amenities; 
d.  Provide roadway and pedestrian connections to residential areas; 
e.  Provide appropriate locations and design standards for automobile and truck-dependent uses; 
f.  Create central urban gathering places such as community squares or plazas; 
g.  Allow for urban oriented recreational activities consistent with the standards and intent of the district; and 
h.  To encourage and support the use of sustainable building practices. 
2.  To accomplish the intent of the district, the UMU district should ideally be located at the intersections of major traffic corridors; that is, at the intersections of two arterials, or, less frequently, an arterial and a collector street. The major intersections should have or be planned to have a stop light or other active traffic control. While placement at major intersections is a necessary precondition, not all major intersections should have the UMU district adjacent to them. Additionally, placement of this district should be adjacent or near to dense residential development to enhance walking and bicycle use. 
F.  Residential emphasis mixed-use zoning district (REMU). The intent and purpose of the REMU district is to establish areas within Bozeman that are mixed-use in character and to provide options for a variety of housing, employment, retail and neighborhood service opportunities within a new or existing neighborhood. These purposes are accomplished by: 
1.  Emphasizing residential as the primary use, including single household dwellings, two to four household dwellings, townhouses, and apartments. 
2.  Providing for a diverse array of neighborhood-scaled commercial and civic uses supporting residential. 
3.  Emphasizing a vertical and horizontal mix of uses in a compact and walkable neighborhood setting. 
4.  Promoting neighborhoods that: 
a.  Create self-sustaining neighborhoods that will lay the foundation for healthy lifestyles; 
b.  Support compact, walkable developments that promote balanced transportation options; 
c.  Have residential as the majority use with a range of densities; 
d.  Provide for a diverse array of commercial and civic uses supporting residential; 
e.  Have residential and commercial uses mixed vertically and/or horizontally; 
f.  Locate commercial uses within walking distance; 
g.  Incorporate a wider range of housing types; and 
h.  Encourage developments that exhibit the physical design characteristics of vibrant, urban, and pedestrian-oriented complete streets. 
5.  Providing standards and guidelines that emphasize a sense of place: 
a.  Support or add to an existing neighborhood context; 
b.  Enhance an existing neighborhood's sense of place and strive to make it more self-sustainable; 
c.  Encourage a new neighborhood commercial center(s) with a unique identity and strong sense of place; 
d.  Develop commercial and mixed-use areas that are safe, comfortable, and attractive to pedestrians; and 
e.  Reinforce the principle of streets as public places that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel, transit, on-street parking and physical elements of complete streets. 
6.  Providing standards and guidelines that emphasize natural amenities: 
a.  Preserve and integrate the natural amenities into the development; and 
b.  Appropriately balance a hierarchy of both parks and public spaces that are within the neighborhood. 
7.  Providing standards and guidelines that emphasize the development of centers: 
a.  Group uses of property to create vibrant centers; 
b.  Where appropriate create a center within an existing neighborhood; 
c.  Facilitate proven, market driven projects to ensure both long and short-term financial viability; 
d.  Allow an appropriate blend of complementary mixed land uses including, but not limited to, retail, offices, commercial services, restaurants, bars, hotels, recreation and civic uses, and housing, to create economic and social vitality; 
e.  Foster the master plan development into a mix of feasible, market driven uses; 
f.  Emphasize the need to serve the adjacent, local neighborhood and as well as the greater Bozeman area; and 
g.  Maximize land use efficiency by encouraging shared use parking. 
8.  Promoting the integration of action: 
a.  Support existing infrastructure that is within and adjacent to REMU zones; 
b.  Encourage thoughtfully developed master planned communities; 
c.  Provide flexibility in the placement and design of new developments and redevelopment to anticipate changes in the marketplace; 
d.  Provide flexibility in phasing to help ensure both long and short term financial viability for the project as a whole; 
9.  Providing standards and guidelines that promote sustainable design 
Use of this zone is appropriate for sites at least five acres in size and areas located adjacent to an existing or planned residential area to help sustain commercial uses within walking distance and a wider range of housing types. 
G.  Northeast historic mixed-use district—intent and purpose. 
1.  The intent of the northeast historic mixed-use district is to provide recognition of an area that has developed with a blend of uses not commonly seen under typical zoning requirements. The unique qualities and nature of the area are not found elsewhere in the city and should be preserved as a place offering additional opportunities for creative integration of land uses. The intent of this area is to allow private and case-by-case determination of the most appropriate use of land in a broad range of both non-residential and residential uses. Standards for buffering between different land uses are deliberately not as high as standards elsewhere in the community as it is assumed that persons choosing to locate in this area are aware of the variety of possible adjacent land uses and have accepted such possibilities as both acceptable and desirable. It is expected that the lots within this district will continue to develop under a variety of uses which may increase or decrease in scope in any given portion of the district. 
2.  The clear intent of this district is to support a mix and variety of non-residential and residential uses. Nothing in division 38.300 of this article shall be interpreted to be discouraging or prejudicial to any listed use except as set forth as principal and conditional uses.  
Sec. 38.300.120. - Industrial zoning districts—Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of the industrial zoning districts is to establish areas within the city that are primarily industrial in character and to set forth certain minimum standards for development within those areas. The purpose in having more than one industrial district is to provide opportunities for a variety of employment and community service functions within the community while providing predictability. There is a rebuttable presumption that the uses set forth for each district will be compatible with each other when the standards of this chapter are met and any applicable conditions of approval have been satisfied. Additional requirements for development apply within overlay districts. 
A.  Light manufacturing district (M-1). The intent of the M-1 light manufacturing district is to provide for the community's needs for wholesale trade, storage and warehousing, trucking and transportation terminals, light manufacturing and similar activities. The district should be oriented to major transportation facilities yet arranged to minimize adverse effects on residential development, therefore, some type of screening may be necessary. 
B.  Manufacturing and industrial district (M-2). The intent of the M-2 manufacturing and industrial district is to provide for heavy manufacturing and industrial uses, servicing vocational and employment needs of city residents. 
C.  Business park district (B-P). The intent of the B-P business park district is to provide for high quality settings and facilities for the development of a variety of compatible employment opportunities. These areas should be developed so as to recognize the impact on surrounding or adjacent development and contribute to the overall image of the community. Compatibility with adjacent land uses and zoning is required.  
Sec. 38.300.130. - Public lands and institutions district—Intent. 
The intent of the PLI public lands and institutions district is to provide for major public and quasi-public uses outside of other districts. Not all public and quasi-public uses need to be classified PLI. Some may fit within another district; however, larger areas will be designated PLI.  
DIVISION 38.310. - PERMITTED USES 
 
Sec. 38.310.010. - Interpretation of land use tables. 
A.  Uses in the various districts are depicted in Tables 38.310.030—38.310.040. Principal uses are indicated with a "P," conditional uses are indicated with a "C," special uses are indicated with a "S", accessory uses are indicated with an "A" and uses which are not permitted within the district are indicated by a "-." 
B.  Additional uses for wireless facilities are contained in sections 38.370.010 to 38.370.040. 
C.  The uses listed are deliberately broad and some are given special definitions in article 7 of this chapter. The intent of this method is to provide general guidance for uses while allowing the unique needs and circumstances of each proposal to be specifically addressed through the review process. Some uses are the subject of special regulations contained in division 38.360 of this article. 
D.  Clarification of permitted uses and special conditions: 
1.  If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
2.  Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
3.  If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
4.  Where a number with a "sf" reference appears below a P or C in the box, it means that the use is permitted or conditionally permitted up to the (maximum) listed square footage in gross building area. 
5.  If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box (e.g., P 2, 3 ), the use is allowed in the zone subject to different sets of limitations or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.  
Sec. 38.310.020. - Classification of uses; community development director and city commission authority. 
A.  When a use is not clearly defined or otherwise identified in the code so that it may be determined if it is allowed within a district the community development director must determine the appropriate classification of a particular use. In making this determination, the community development director must find: 
1.  That the use is the same as one or more uses permitted in the district wherein it is proposed to be located; or 
2.  That the use is so similar to one or more uses permitted in the district wherein it is proposed to be located as to be interpreted as the same, so long as: 
a.  The use and its operation are comparable with the uses permitted in the district wherein the use is proposed to be located, in terms of: 
i.  The amount, type, and pattern of vehicular traffic anticipated for the use, and 
ii.  The expected outdoor uses and activities associated with the use; 
b.  The use will not cause substantial injury to values of property in the neighborhood or district wherein it is proposed to be located; and 
c.  Neither the intent of this chapter nor the intent of the district will be abrogated by such classification. 
Persons objecting to a decision of the community development director regarding a classification of a use carry the burden of proof to establish error in the decision. 
B.  If a question arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use, the community development director may submit the question to the city commission to determine whether the particular use is the same or so similar as to be interpreted the same as a listed permitted or conditional use. In making such a determination, the city commission must find that the criteria set forth in either subsection A.1 or 2 of this section are met. 
C.  If a specific use is not listed and cannot be interpreted to be the same, or so similar as to be interpreted the same, as a listed accessory, principal or conditional use, the use must not be allowed. However, an amendment to the text of this chapter may be submitted for review and approval pursuant to the requirements of this chapter to allow such use as a listed principal, conditional or accessory use (as defined in section 38.700.020).  
Sec. 38.310.030. - Authorized uses—Residential zoning districts. 
Table 38.310.030.A 
Permitted general and group residential uses in residential zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards specific to the subject use in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 1 	RMH 
General residential 
Accessory dwelling units* - attached (38.360.040) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Accessory dwelling units* - detached (38.360.040) 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Apartments/apartment building* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Cottage housing (38.360.110)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Manufactured homes on permanent foundations(38.360.160)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Manufactured home communities* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 
Single-household dwelling (38.360.210) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Two-household dwelling (38.360.210) 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Three household dwelling or four-household dwelling (38.360.210) 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Townhouses* & rowhouses* (two attached units)(38.360.240) 	P 2 	P2 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 3 
Townhouses* & rowhouses* (five attached units or less) (38.360.240) 	— 	— 	— 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Townhouses* & rowhouses* (more than five attached units) (38.360.240) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Group residential 
Community residential facilities* with eight or fewer residents 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community residential facilities* serving nine or more residents 	— 	— 	— 	S 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Cooperative household* 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 
Family day care home* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Group day care home* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Group living (38.360.150)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Lodging houses* 	— 	— 	— 	S 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Transitional and emergency housing (38.360.135)* and related services 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
 
Notes: 
1.  The primary use of a lot, as measured by building area, permitted in the R-O district is determined by the underlying growth policy land use designation. Where the district lies over a residential growth policy designation the primary use shall be non-office uses; where the district lies over a non-residential designation the primary use shall be office and other non-residential uses. Primary use shall be measured by percentage of building floor area. 
2.  In the R-S, R-1, and RMH district townhomes are only allowed when utilized to satisfy the requirements of division 38.380, Affordable Housing. May only be utilized in developments subject to division 38.380 of this article. 
3.  In the R-3 district, townhouse groups must not exceed 120 feet in total width. 
Table 38.310.030.B 
Permitted accessory and non-residential uses in residential zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards specific to the subject use in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 1 	RMH 
Accessory uses 
Essential services Type I* 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Guest house* 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	— 
Home-based businesses (38.360.140) * 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 	A/S 
Other buildings and structures typically accessory to authorized uses 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Private or jointly owned recreational facilities 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Signs*, subject to article 5 of this chapter 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Temporary buildings and yards incidental to construction work 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Temporary sales and office buildings 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Non-residential uses 
Agricultural uses* on 2.5 acres or more (38.360.260) 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Agricultural uses* on less than 2.5 acres (38.360.260) 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Bed and breakfast* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Commercial stable (38.360.220) 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Community centers* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	C 
Day care centers* 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 
Essential services Type II* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Essential services Type III* 2 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Short Term Rental (Type 1)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Short Term Rental (Type 2)* 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Short Term Rental (Type 3)* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Golf courses 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Offices* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 3 	S 3 	P 	— 
Public and private parks 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Medical offices, clinics, and centers* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 3 	P 	— 
Recreational vehicle parks (38.360.200)* 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 
Restaurant 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 4 	— 	— 
Retail 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 4 	— 	— 
Uses approved as part of a PUD per division 38.380 of this article 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Veterinary uses 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  The primary use of a lot, as measured by building area, permitted in the R-O district is determined by the underlying growth policy land use designation. Where the district lies over a residential growth policy designation the primary use shall be non-office uses; where the district lies over a non-residential designation the primary use shall be office and other non-residential uses. Primary use shall be measured by percentage of building floor area. 
2.  Only allowed when service may not be provided from an alternative site or a less intensive installation or set of installations. 
3.  Only when in conjunction with dwellings. 
4.  Subject uses are limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area and only allowed on street corner sites within a mixed-use building featuring residential units next to and/or above subject uses. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 2, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 38.310.040. - Authorized uses—Commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts. 
Table 38.310.040.A 
Permitted general sales uses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
5. Where a number with a "sf" reference appears below a P or C in the box, it means that the use is permitted or conditionally permitted up to the (maximum) listed square footage in gross building area. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	Commercial 	Mixed Use 	Industrial 	PLI 
	B-1 1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 
(38.310.050) 	REMU 
(38.310.060) 	NEHMU 2 	BP 	M-1 	M-2 	
General sales 
Automobile fuel sales or repair (38.360.070)* 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Convenience uses 
(38.360.100)* 	— 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Heavy retail establishment (Retail, large scale - 38.360.150)* 	— 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Restaurants* 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
1,500sf 	— 	P 3 	P 3 	— 
Retail* 											
 • 0-5,000sf GFA 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4,5 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 C 7 	— 
 • 5,001-24,999sf GFA 	— 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4,5 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 C 7 	— 
 • 25,000sf-39,999sf GFA 	— 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	P 4 	— 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 	A 6 C 7 	A 6 C 7 	— 
 • Over 40,000sf GFA (Retail, large scale - 38.360.150)* 	— 	P 4 	P 4 	— 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Sales of alcohol for on-premises consumption (38.360.060) 	S 8 	S 8 	S 8 	S 8 	S 8,9 	S 8,9 	S 8 	— 	C 8,10 	C 8,10 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  In the B-1 district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Authorized uses in the NEHMU district include those uses allowed in the R-2 district (see table 38.310.030 for those not listed in this table). 
3.  Occupying not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of a building or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less, or occupying not more than 45 percent of the gross floor area of a food processing facility. 
4.  Excluding adult businesses as defined in section 38.700.020 of this chapter. 
5.  Special REMU district conditions based on the amount of on-site retail uses: 
a.  Retail uses greater than 5,000 square feet and less than or equal to 12,000 square feet are limited to no more than four structures per 100 acres of contiguous master planned development and subject to section 38.310.060.C. 
b.  Retail uses greater than 12,000 square feet and less than or equal to 25,000 square feet are limited to no more than two structures per 100 acres of contiguous master planned development and subject to section 38.310.060.C. 
6.  Retail sales of goods produced or warehoused on site and related products, not to exceed 20 percent of gross floor area or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
7.  Retail establishments as a primary use are conditionally permitted. 
8.  Also subject to chapter 4, article 2. 
9.  No gaming allowed. 
10.  Sales of alcohol for on-premises consumption in the M-1 and M-2 districts are permitted with the following conditions: 
a.  Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages are limited to those with state beer and wine licenses issued since 1997, prohibiting any form of gambling and occupying not more than 45 percent of the total building area of a food processing facility; and/or 
b.  Retail sales for on-premises consumption of alcohol produced on site, not to exceed 10,000 square feet or 50 percent of the facility, whichever is less. 
Table 38.310.040.B 
Permitted services and temporary lodging uses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
5. Where a number with a "sf" reference appears below a P or C in the box, it means that the use is permitted or conditionally permitted up to the (maximum) listed square footage in gross building area. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	Commercial 	Mixed Use 	Industrial 	PLI 
	B-1 1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 
(38.310.050) 	REMU 
(38.310.060) 	NEHMU 2 	BP 	M-1 	M-2 	
Personal and general service 
Animal shelters 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	S 	S 	— 
Automobile washing establishment* 	— 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Daycare—Family, group, or center* 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	S/A 	S/A 4 	C/A 4 	C/A 4 	C 
General service establishment* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	— 
Health and exercise establishments* 	P 
S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	— 
Heavy service establishment* 	— 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Medical and dental offices, clinics and centers* 	P 3 
S 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Mortuary 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Offices* 	P 3 
S 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 3 	P 	P 5 	P 	P 	— 
Personal and convenience services* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	A 	— 
Truck repair, washing, and fueling services 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	P 	— 
Temporary lodging 
Bed and breakfast* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Short Term Rental (Type 1)* 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Short Term Rental (Type 2)* 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Short Term Rental (Type 3)* 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Hotel or motel* 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
40,000sf 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  In the B-1 district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Authorized uses in the NEHMU district include those uses allowed in the R-2 district (see table 38.310.030 for those not listed in this table). 
3.  Only lobbies for the applicable use are allowed on designated Storefront block frontages as set forth in section 38.510.020. 
4.  If primarily offering services to a single business or group of businesses within the same building or building complex. 
5.  Professional and business offices only. 
Table 38.310.040.C 
Permitted residential uses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	Commercial 	Mixed Use 	Industrial 	PLI 
	B-1 1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 
(38.310.050) 	REMU 
(38.310.060) 	NEHMU 2 	BP 	M-1 	M-2 	
General residential 
Accessory dwelling unit (38.360.040) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Apartments* 3 	P 4 	P 4 	P 5 	P 5 	P 	P 	A 6 	— 	A 6 	A 6 	— 
Apartment buildings* 3 	— 	C 	P 	P 5 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Cottage housing* (38.360.110) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Single household dwelling (38.360.210) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Three household dwelling or four-household dwelling (38.360.210) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Townhouses* 3 & rowhouses* (38.360.240) 	— 	C 7 	P 7 	P 7 	— 	P 8 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Two-household dwelling (38.360.210) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Live-work units* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Ground floor residential 		C 	P 5 	P 5 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Group residences 
Community residential facilities with eight or fewer residents* 	P 4 	P 4, 5 	P 4, 5 	P 4, 5 	P 4, 5 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Community residential facilities serving nine or more residents* 	- 	C 	C 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Cooperative household* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Group living (38.360.150)* 	P 4 	P 4 	P 5 	P 4 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Lodging houses* 	— 	C 	C 5 	C 3 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Transitional and emergency housing and related services (38.360.135)* 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	S 
 
Notes: 
1.  In the B-1 district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Authorized uses in the NEHMU district include those uses allowed in the R-2 district (some of which aren't addressed in this table). 
3.  May be subject to the provisions of chapter 38, article 380. 
4.  When located on the second or subsequent floor, or basement as defined in section 38.700.030 of this chapter. Lobbies associated with residential uses are allowed on the ground floor. 
5.  Non-residential uses (except for lobbies associated with residential uses) are required on the ground floor to a minimum depth of 20 feet from front building façade on properties adjacent to designated storefront streets per section 38.500.010. 
6.  For the purpose of this section, accessory means less than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the building, and not located on the ground floor. 
7.  Five or more attached units. 
8.  Five or fewer attached units. 
Table 38.310.040.D 
Permitted industrial and wholesale uses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	Commercial 	Mixed Use 	Industrial 	PLI 
	B-1 1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 
(38.310.050) 	REMU 
(38.310.060) 	NEHMU 2 	BP 	M-1 	M-2 	
Industrial and Wholesale 
Junk salvage or automobile reduction/salvage yards 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 
Manufacturing, artisan* 	P 	P 	P 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Manufacturing (light)* 	— 	S 	S 	C 4 	P 5 	P 6 	P 	P 5 	P 5 	P 	— 
Manufacturing (moderate)* 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Manufacturing (heavy)* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	— 
Outside storage 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	A 	P 	P 	— 
Refuse and recycling containers 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	— 
Warehousing* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Warehousing, residential storage (mini warehousing) (38.360.180)* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  In the B-1 district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Authorized uses in the NEHMU district include those uses allowed in the R-2 district (some of which aren't addressed in this table). 
3.  For uses in the downtown core as described below, a high volume, pedestrian-oriented use adjoining the building's entrance on Main Street is required. The downtown core includes those properties along Main Street from Grand to Rouse Avenues and to the alleys one-half block north and south from Main Street. 
4.  Except on the ground floor in the downtown core (those properties along Main Street from Grand to Rouse Avenues and to the alleys one-half block north and south from Main Street). 
5.  Completely enclosed within a building. 
6.  Limited to 5,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
Additional uses for telecommunication facilities are provided for in division 38.370 of this article. 
Table 38.310.040.E 
Permitted public, regional, recreational, cultural and accessory uses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoning districts 
Table clarifications: 
1. Uses: P = Principal uses; C = Conditional uses; S = Special uses; A = Accessory uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. Where a code section is referenced after the use, then the use is subject to the additional standards in that code section. 
4. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then the use is subject to all applicable development conditions. 
5. Where a number with a "sf" reference appears below a P or C in the box, it means that the use is permitted or conditionally permitted up to the (maximum) listed square footage in gross building area. 
 
Uses 	Zoning Districts 
	Commercial 	Mixed Use 	Industrial 	PLI 
	B-1 1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 
(38.310.050) 	REMU 
(38.310.060) 	NEHMU 2 	BP 	M-1 	M-2 	
Public, educational, government and regional 
Business, trade, technical or vocational school 	— 	P 	P 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Cemeteries* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 
Essential services (38.360.140) 											
 • Type I 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
 • Type II 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
 • Type III 	C 4 	P 	P 	C 4 	C 	C 4 	P 
C 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Meeting hall 	- 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Production manufacturing and generation facilities (electric and gas) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	— 
Public and nonprofit, quasi-public institutions, e.g. universities, elementary junior and senior high schools and hospitals 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 
Public buildings and publicly owned land used for parks, playgrounds and open space 	P— 	P— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Solid waste transfer station 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 
Solid waste landfill 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 
Truck, bus and rail terminal facilities 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Recreational, cultural and entertainment 
Adult business (38.360.050)* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 
Amusement and recreational facilities 	— 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	P 	— 	P 	C 	— 
Arts and entertainment center* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
12,000sf 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Casinos 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 
Community centers (38.360.080)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Accessory and/or other uses 
Agricultural uses* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Home-based businesses 
(38.360.140)* 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	— 
Other buildings and structures (typically accessory to permitted uses) 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Temporary buildings and yards incidental to ongoing construction work 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	A 	A 	A 	A 	— 
Any use, except adult businesses and casinos, approved as part of a planned unit development subject to the provisions of division 38.430 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 5 	C 5 	C 5 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  In the B-1 district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Authorized uses in the NEHMU district include those uses allowed in the R-2 district (some of which aren't addressed in this table). 
3.  Only lobbies for the applicable use are allowed on designed Storefront block frontages as set forth in section 38.510.020. Otherwise, the applicable use is permitted when located on the second or subsequent floor, or basement, as defined in section 38.700.030 of this chapter. 
4.  Only allowed when service may not be provided from an alternative site or a less intensive installation or set of installations. 
5.  Also excludes retail, large scale uses. 
Additional uses for telecommunication facilities are provided for in division 38.370 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 2, 3-19-2018; Order No. 2018-01 , § 5, 4-18-2018; Ord. No. 2019 , § 1, 6-3-2019; Ord. No. 2029 , § 8, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.310.050. - Supplemental use provisions for the urban mixed-use zoning district. 
Mixed uses required and limited: 
A.  Development must include a mix of uses. 
B.  Uses must be grouped as commercial, industrial, office, institutional, and residential. A combination of at least two different groups of uses must be provided within each site plan. 
C.  No use group must exceed 70 percent of the total gross building floor area in the entire site development. Multiple buildings may be shown on a single site plan as allowed in division 38.230 of this chapter. For the purposes of calculating the percentage of a use within the site development the gross square foot floor area of building for each use must be utilized. Single use buildings are allowed provided the entire site meets the required use mix standard. 
D.  At least 70 percent of the ground level block frontages (see division 38.510) must be occupied by non-residential uses. To meet this requirement, the depth of non-residential floor area must be at least 20 feet deep. Ground level lobbies for residential uses on upper floors may qualify as a non-residential use for the purpose of this standard provided such lobby occupies no more than 50 feet of the block frontage. Structured parking is classified as a non-residential use. Structured parking at the ground level must include liner buildings of usable proportions along at least 40 percent of the building façades facing a street or greenway.  
Sec. 38.310.060. - Supplemental use provisions for the residential emphasis mixed-use zoning district. 
A.  Uses required and limited. 
1.  REMU districts are intended to be developed with a mix of uses that encourage a range of building types, scales, densities, and site configurations. 
2.  Developments are encouraged to include non-residential uses, especially commercial and neighborhood support services, mixed horizontally and/or vertically, to promote compact, walkable and sustainable neighborhoods. 
3.  Non-residential uses must not exceed 30 percent of the total gross building square footage of all uses within the master planned area unless otherwise allowed in this section, through a master site plan or planned unit development (PUD) review. 
4.  For the purposes of calculating the percentage of a use within the master planned area, the gross square foot floor area of building for each use must be utilized. 
5.  The specific method of tracking will be determined during the master site plan, PUD, or site plan review. 
6.  Home-based businesses are not considered non-residential uses and must not be limited by the provisions of the section. 
7.  Non-residential uses intended for public benefit and shared public amenities must not be limited by the provisions of this section. These uses include, but are not limited to, schools, parks, community centers, city operated services and structured parking facilities. 
B.  Development review applications. 
1.  To accomplish the intent of the district, the REMU district is anticipated to be located on sites five acres or larger. Development review applications for sites in the REMU district greater than, or equal to, five acres will first be subject to review as a master site plan per article 2 of this chapter; or as a PUD per division 38.430 of this chapter, as determined by the applicant. 
2.  Project applications for subsequent project phases in compliance with an approved master site plan or PUD may be reviewed as a site plan review or sketch plan review in accordance with division 38.230 of this chapter. 
3.  All development review applications for property in the REMU district smaller than five acres are subject to the standards in this article and may be subject to review as a master site plan per division 38.230 of this chapter upon a finding by the city that: 
a.  The development application is for a site considered a major infill site, having a significant impact on an existing neighborhood; or may create a center within an existing neighborhood; 
b.  The proposed development is located at an intersection deemed to have special significance; 
c.  The proposed development may have a significant impact on existing transportation and open space network, pedestrian and bicycle travel; and/or 
d.  The proposed development requires a multi-year approval and multiple phases for completion.  
DIVISION 38.320. - FORM AND INTENSITY STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 38.320.010. - Interpretation of tables. 
A.  The form and intensity standards tables within this division include the form and intensity requirements for development specific to individual zoning districts. The zoning districts are located on the vertical columns and the form/intensity elements being addressed are located on the horizontal row of these tables. Where a "-" is listed in a cell, it means that the use type or standard does not apply to the district. 
B.  Where a code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
C.  If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
D.  Division 38.350 provides clarification and exceptions to the form and intensity standards herein.  
Sec. 38.320.020. - Form and intensity standards elements. 
A.  Lot area and width. 
1.  All lots must have a minimum area as set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division and the more restrictive applies. These minimums assume a lack of development constraints. All newly created lots must have a minimum area adequate to provide for required setbacks and parking as set forth in the tables within this division Lots less than 3,000 square feet, or less than 25 feet wide may be limited in their ability to comply with other required standards of the municipal code. 
2.  All lots must have a minimum width as set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. These minimums assume a lack of development constraints. All lots must conform to development standards for provision of public and private utilities. 
3.  Lot area and width may be reduced to allow a density bonus through the PUD process. The amount of a bonus, methodology for calculating the bonus, and standards for allowing a bonus are described in section 38.430.090.E.2.b(6). 
B.  Minimum density. New residential development must provide a minimum net density in applicable zones, as set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. A minimum is required to support efficiency in use of land and provision of municipal services, and to advance the purposes and goals of this chapter and the adopted growth policy. Density may be achieved by averaging lot sizes over an entire development. 
C.  Lot coverage and floor area. 
1.  Maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings are set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. 
2.  Minimum floor area requirements for each dwelling in all districts are that area required by the city's adopted International Building Code. 
3.  Maximum floor area ratios (FAR) must not exceed the ratios set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. FAR refers to the total floor area of all buildings or structures (excluding basements) on a lot divided by the size of the lot. 
 
Figure 38.320.020.C
Clarification of floor area ratio and lot coverage. 
 
D.  Maximum building height for each district are set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. 
E.  Minimum setbacks. 
1.  Minimum setbacks for each district are set forth in the form and intensity standards tables within this division. 
2.  When a lot has one or more principal buildings which are oriented to place the functional rear of a building adjacent to a side lot line, a setback from the property line equal to that for a rear setback must be provided. 
3.  All setbacks are subject to the provisions of sections 38.340.060, 38.350.050, 38.410.100, 38.400.100 and 38.550.050. 
4.  Setbacks for accessory structures are set forth in section 38.360.030. 
5.  Easements for utilities or other special standards may require adjustments to minimum building setbacks. 
F.  All developments except single to four-household dwellings are subject to the block frontage standards of division 38.510, which provides standards for building placement and related block frontage provisions depending on the applicable block frontage designation. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 6, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.320.030. - Form and intensity standards—residential districts. 
Table 38.320.030.A 
Minimum and maximum lot area 
Table clarification: 
1. Where a code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
2. If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
 
Use Type/Standard 	Zoning District 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 	RMH 
Minimum lot area per dwelling (square feet) 1 (38.320.030.A) 
Single-household dwelling 	4,000 1 	4,000 1 	4,000 1 	4,000 1 	4,000 1 	3,000 1 	4,000 1 	3,000 1 
Single-household dwelling (only for dwellings to satisfy minimum requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 	2,700 
Two-household dwellings 	— 	— 	2,500 1 	2,500 1 	2,500 1 	2,500 	3,000 	— 
Two household dwellings (only for dwellings to satisfy minimum requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	— 	— 	2,500 	2,500 	2,500 	2,500 	2,500 	— 
Lot area per dwelling in three- or four-household dwelling configurations 	— 	— 	— 	3,000 	3,000 	None 	3,000 	— 
Lot area per dwelling in three- or four-household dwelling configurations (only for dwellings to satisfy minimum requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	— 	— 	— 	2,500 	2,500 	None 	2,500 	— 
Townhouses & rowhouses 	— 	— 	3,000 2 	3,000 3 	3,000 3 	None 	3,000 3 	— 
Townhouses & rowhouses (only for dwellings to satisfy minimum requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	2,500 3 	2,500 3 	2,500 3 	2,500 3 	2,500 3 	None 	2,500 3 	2,500 
Apartments—First dwelling 	— 	— 	— 	— 	5,000 	None 	5,000 	— 
Apartments—Each dwelling after the first 	— 	— 	— 	— 	1,200 	None 	1,200 	— 
Apartments—Each dwelling after the first (only for dwellings to satisfy minimum requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	900 	None 	900 	— 
Additional area required for an accessory dwelling unit 	1,000 4 	1,000 	1,000 	1,000 	1,000 	None 	1,000 	— 
All other uses 	5,000 1 	5,000 1 	5,000 1 	5,000 1 	5,000 1 	None 	5,000 1 	5,000 1 
Maximum lot area (net acres) (38.320.020.A) 
Residential use 	— 	— 	— 	2.5 5 	2.5 5 	2.5 5 	2.5 5 	— 
 
Notes: 
1.  In order to comply with the standards contained in this chapter, lot area in excess of the required minimum may be needed (for corner lots, parking, landscaping or large residential structures, for example), and may be necessary for property adjacent to watercourses, ridgelines, or other environmental features in order to provide an appropriate buildable area on the lot. 
2.  Per townhouse lot or rowhouse dwelling. 
3.  For townhouse or rowhouse clusters, the lot area per dwelling may be averaged within the cluster. 
4.  Extra lot size requirement does not apply when R-S lots are larger than 6,000 square feet. 
5.  Departures from the maximum lot size requirements may be allowed where the planned development fits into the context of the neighborhood and proposed pedestrian and vehicular circulation measures meet community objectives. 
Table 38.320.030.B 
Minimum lot width (feet) 
Table clarification: 
1. Where a code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
2. If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
 
Use Type/Standard 	Zoning District 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 	RMH 
Single-household dwelling 	50 	50/40 1 	50/40 1 	50/40 1 	50/35 1 	35/25 1,2 	50/40 1 	50/40 1 
Single-household dwelling (only for dwellings to satisfy requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter) 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 
Two household dwelling 	— 	— 	60/50 1 	60/40 1 	50/40 1 	50/40 1 	50/50 1 	— 
Accessory dwelling unit 3 	50 	40 	40 	40 	40 	None 4 	40 	— 
Accessory dwelling unit 3 on lots with Townhouses 	30 	30 	30 	Width of interior units 2 	Width of interior units 2 	Width of interior units 2 	Width of interior units 2 	— 
Dwellings in three- or four-household dwelling configurations 	- 	- 	— 	60 	60 	None 2,4 	60 	— 
Townhouses 	30 	30 	30 	Width of interior units ,2 	Width of interior units ,2 	Width of interior units ,2 	Width of interior units ,2 	— 
All other uses 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	None 2,4 	50 	50 
 
Notes: 
1.  When the lot is adjacent to an alley and vehicle access is taken only from that alley. 
2.  Lot width is subject to section 38.400.090. Lot widths of 25 feet or less may jeopardize compliance with standards for legal and physical access, street trees, on-street parking, garage design, drive access width and placement, and utilities. Home design and size will be restricted as a result. Mitigation measures may be required for placement and separation of public and private utilities. 
3.  Second dwellings in accessory buildings are subject to all restrictions in this chapter relating to accessory buildings. Lot area and width must be provided as if the dwelling were attached to the principal use. Dwellings to be developed under this option are subject to section 38.360.040. 
4.  Lot widths may be variable provided they are sized and shaped sufficient to accommodate permitted uses and conform to applicable design and density standards. 
 
Figure 38.320.030.1. 
Minimum setback to an individual, garage oriented to the street 
 
Table 38.320.030.C 
Density, building height, and setbacks 
Table clarification: 
1. Where a code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
2. If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
 
Use Type/Standard 	Zoning District 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 	RMH 
Density, floor area and lot coverage 
Density, minimum 
(dwellings per net acre) 
(38.320.020.B) 	2 	5 	5 	5 	8 	8 1 	6 	5 
Lot coverage, maximum 2 
(38.320.020.C.1) 	25% 	40% 3 	40% 3 	40% 3 	50% 3 	- 	— 	40% 3 
Floor area ratio, maximum 4 
(38.320.020.C.3) 	0.45:1 	0.5:1 	0.75:1 	1:1 	1.5:1 	— 	1.5:1 	— 
Maximum building height (feet) (38.320.020.E) 
Roof pitch in feet 	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-O 	RMH 
Less than 3:12 	24 	24 	24 	32 	34 	44 5 	34 	24 
3:12 or greater but less than 6:12 	30 	28 	28 	38 	38 	48 5 	38 	28 
6:12 or greater but less than 9:12 	34 	32 	32 	40 	42 	52 5 	42 	32 
Equal to or greater than 9:12 	38 	36 	36 	42 	44 	54 5 	44 	36 
Minimum setbacks (feet) (38.320.020.F) 
Front setback 	15 6 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 7 	15 	15 
Setback to an individual garage oriented to the street 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 	20 8 
Rear setback 	20 6 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 
Side setback 	5 6 	5 9 	5 9 	5 9 	5 9 	5 9 	5 9 	5 9 
 
Notes: 
1.  The minimum density in the R-5 zone is eight dwelling units per "gross" acre. 
2.  In all residential zoning districts for those lots used to satisfy the requirements of division 38.380, not more than 60 percent of the lot area can be covered by principal and accessory buildings. When a larger lot has a portion of its total dwellings subject to the requirements of division 38.380, either directly or inherited from a previous subdivision, the portion used for those dwellings may have up to 60 percent of the lot area covered by principal and accessory buildings. 
3.  The maximum lot coverage for townhouses and rowhouses: 
a.  R-1, R-2, R-3, and RMH districts: 50 percent. 
b.  R-4 and townhouses complying with affordable housing provisions of division 38.380 of this chapter: 85 percent. 
4.  Floor area ratio adjustments: 
a.  For townhouse developments, the floor area ratio standard applies to all townhouse lots. Designated common area specifically associated with the townhouses may be used as applicable site area in determining compliance with the floor area ratio requirement. 
b.  Dwellings used to satisfy requirements of division 38.380 of this chapter are allowed a 25 percent increase in allowable floor area ratio. 
5.  An area, not to exceed a total of ten percent of the building footprint, may extend above the maximum building height by up to 12 feet. Such elements may include stair or elevator penthouses, service elements, or habitable area and must be set back from the edge of the building by at least five feet (see Figure 38.320.030.1 below for an example) to reduce the visibility of such feature. 
 
Figure 38.320.030.2. 
Limited exceptions to height limits for elevator or stair penthouses or similar features are permitted provided they occupy no more than ten percent of building's footprint and are setback from the edge of the building by at least five feet to reduce their visibility from the ground level. 
 
6.  All barns, stables or permanent corrals must be set back not less than 100 feet from any residence or public road and not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
7.  Porches and covered entries in the R-5 district may project as allowed 38.350.050. 
8.  All vehicle entrances, oriented to the street, into garages shall be no closer than 20 feet to a property line, unless explicitly authorized otherwise under this chapter. 
9.  No side setback is required for the interior walls of townhouses. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 2, 6-3-2019; Ord. No. 2019 , § 2, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.320.040. - Form and intensity standards—Residential emphasis mixed-use zoning district. 
Table 38.320.040 
Table of Form and Intensity Standards—
Residential Emphasis Mixed-Use Zoning District 
Table clarification: 
1. Where a code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
2. If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
 
Standard 	Small-lot single-household 	Single-household 	Townhouse/rowhouse townhouse/rowhouse cluster 1 	Two to four household dwellings, group living, apartments 	Mixed use (residential over commercial) 	Non-residential 
Lot and Floor Area Standards 
Minimum lot area (square feet) 
(38.320.020.A) 	2,500 	4,000 2 	None 	Note 3 	None 	— 
Minimum lot width (feet) 
(38.320.020.A) 	25 	40 	15.5 	Note 3 	None 	— 
Maximum lot coverage 
(38.320.020.C.1) 	75% 	50% 	75% 	75% 4 	75% 4 	100% 5 
Maximum allowable floor area ratio 
(38.320.020.C.3) 	1.5:1 	1:1 	2.5:1 	4:1 	0.75:1 6 	Max: 0.5:1 6 
Minimum and Maximum Building Height (feet) (38.320.020.D) 
(where only one number is shown in the column, the number must represent the maximum height limit) 
Roof pitch: Less than 3:12 	35 	35 	35 	5 stories maximum 	2 stories minimum & 5 stories maximum 	15 feet minimum & 5 stories maximum 
Roof pitch: 3:12 or greater but less than 6:12 	38 	38 	38 			
Roof pitch: 6:12 or greater but less than 9:12 	40 	40 	42 			
Roof pitch: Equal to or greater than 9:12 	42 	42 	44 			
Minimum-Maximum Setbacks (feet) (38.320.020.E) 
(where only one number is shown in the column, there is no "maximum" setback) 
Front Setback (minimum and maximum) 	10-15 	10-15 	10-15 	10-15 	Note 7 	Note 8 
Setback to an individual garage oriented to the street 	20 11 	20 11 	20 11 	— 	— 	— 
Rear Setback 	10 	15 	10 	10 	— 	— 
Side Setback 	5 9 	5 9 	5 10 	5 	— 	— 
Garages and Special Parking Standards 
Residential garages 	Note 12 	Note 12 	Note 12 	Note 12 	Note 12 	— 
Special Parking Standards 	— 	— 	— 	Note 13 	Note 6,13,14 	Note 6,13,14 
 
Notes: 
1.  Supplemental townhouse/rowhouse cluster standards: 
a.  Portions of site development review applications within the REMU zone for attached multi-household developments should be urban in character and may be designed such that each dwelling unit has a ground level entry oriented to the public realm, and shares one or more walls with another dwelling unit. 
b.  Such units should be broadly consistent in scale and level of architectural detail, but must be designed to emphasize a distinction in individual dwelling units through form, massing, articulation, color and other architectural means. 
c.  Townhouse/rowhouse units may incorporate home-based businesses at the ground level with direct access from a public right-of-way or other accessible route. These uses are exempt from off-street parking requirements. 
d.  Developments incorporating townhouse/rowhouse units may include individual retail uses at the ground level no greater than 2,000 square feet in area, when located along the primary frontage. The first 2,000 square feet of any non-residential use in this development type is exempt from off-street parking requirements. Parking lots for such uses must not be permitted along primary street frontages. Apply standards of section 38.540.050.D for accessible parking spaces. 
2.  Additional area for accessory dwelling unit: 800 square feet minimum. 
3.  Apply standards of Table 38.320.030 (lot area standards), section 38.360.130, or if a structured internal parking facility is provided, then required lot area may be reduced by up to 50 percent. 
4.  Lot coverage may be up to 100 percent if a structured parking facility that accommodates all required parking is provided. 
5.  Lot coverage may be up to 100 percent if parking requirements are met by shared or off-site parking facilities, or if a structured parking facility that accommodates all required parking is provided. 
6.  Special parking standards. 
a.  Structured parking incentive. A floor area bonus of one square foot of non-residential up to a total of 50 percent of the gross building area of all uses may be granted for each square foot of structured parking area. 
b.  Parking for individual lots may be provided elsewhere within the district with a shared parking agreement, provided that the overall parking ratio for the district is comparable with documented parking ratios in developments of similar scale, intensity of use, population density, and scope. 
7.  Special setback standards for mixed-use: 
a.  No minimum setbacks are required for the mixed-use district. Easements for utilities or other special standards may require buildings to be placed back from lot lines. 
b.  Maximum setback. Buildings must be oriented to the adjacent street. At least 50 percent of the total building frontage must be placed within ten feet of any minimum required separation from the property line. 
8.  Special setback standards for non-residential uses: 
a.  Minimum setback. No minimum setback are required for non-residential uses. Easements for utilities or other special standards may require buildings to be placed back from lot lines. 
b.  Maximum setback. Buildings must be oriented to the primary street. At least 50 percent of the total building frontage must be placed within ten feet of any minimum required separation from the property line. 
c.  Special setback requirements. All setbacks associated with non-residential development must be subject to the provisions of section 38.550.050.B, additional screening requirements, and section 38.550.050.C (parking lot landscaping), when applicable. 
9.  Allow "zero-lot line" development through shared use easements or placement of buildings on or near one of the side lot lines. 
10.  Or zero feet for interior walls of townhouses. 
11.  All vehicle entrances oriented to the street into garages must be no closer than 20 feet to a property line, unless otherwise explicitly authorized under this chapter. 
12.  Special garage standards for single to four-household uses. To ensure that the subject housing types contribute to a community-oriented, pedestrian-friendly streetscape, they must comply with the following specific standards of this chapter: 
a.  Section 38.350.070, parking and garages for single to four-household residential uses. 
b.  Section 38.400.090.C.2.a, drive access requirements—residential. 
c.  Section 38.540.010.A.4, stacking of off-street parking spaces. 
d.  Section 38.540.010.A.5, no parking permitted in required front or side setbacks. 
e.  Section 38.540.010.A.6, parking permitted in rear setbacks. 
13.  Bicycle parking. Covered bicycle parking must be provided by all mixed use development. The covered spaces must be either ten bicycle parking spaces or one-half of the total minimum bicycle parking, whichever is less. 
14.  Mixed-use and non-residential developments are subject to block frontage standards of division 38.510.  
Sec. 38.320.050. - Form and intensity standards—Non-residential and other mixed-use districts. 
Table 38.320.050 
Table of Form and Intensity Standards—
Non-Residential and Other Mixed-Use Districts 
Table clarification: 
1. Where an code reference or link appears after the form and intensity topic, the use is subject to standards set forth in that section or chapter. 
2 If a number appears in the box, refer to the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table. If there are multiple numbers, then all development conditions apply. 
 
Standard 	Zones 
	Commercial Zoning Districts 	UMU 	Industrial Zoning Districts 	PLI 	NEHMU 
	B-1 	B-2 	B-2M 	B-3 		BP 	M-1 	M-2 		
Lot and floor area standards 
Minimum lot area (square feet) 
(38.320.020.A) 	5,000 	— 	- 	- 	— 	43,560 	7,500 	— 	— 	5,000 1 
Minimum lot width (feet) 
(38.320.020.A) 	50 	100 	— 	— 	— 	150 	75 	100 	— 	50 
Maximum lot coverage 
(38.320.020.C) 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 4 	60% 	100% 	100% 	- 	40%—100% 5 
Minimum floor area ratio 
(38.320.020.C) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	0.50 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Building height standards (feet) (38.320.020.E) 
Minimum building height 	— 	— 	— 	— 	22 6 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Maximum building height 			Variable 8 	55/70 9 	55 10 		45 	45 	— 	45 
Minimum floor to ceiling height 	13 	13 	13 	13 	13 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
 Roof pitch < 3:12 	34 	38 7 				38 7 				
 Roof pitch 3:12 or > 	38 	44 7 				44 7 				
Minimum setback (feet) (38.320.020.F) 
Front Setback 	Front setback provisions are set forth in the block frontage standards in division 38.510. 	25 11,17 	20 11 	20 11 	0 12 	20 11 
Setback to an individual garage oriented to the street 	— 	20 	20 	20 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	20 
Rear Setback 	10 	10 	10 13 	0 15 	0 	20 17 	3 	3 	0 12 	3 
Side Setback 	5 14 	5 14 	5 14 	0 15 	0 	15 17, 14 	3 14 	3 14 	0 12 	3 
Side or Rear Setback Adjacent to Alley 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 		5 
Parking & loading areas (feet) 	Note 15 	Note 15 								
 Front Setback 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 	Note 11 		
 Rear Setback 	10 16 	10 16 	5 16 	0 17 		- 	— 	— 		
 Side Setback 	8 16 	8 16 	5 16 	0 17 		- 	- 	- 		
Garages and special parking standards 
Residential Garages 	— 	Note 18 	Note 18 	Note 18 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Note 18 
Special Parking Standards 	Note 19, 20 	Note 19, 20 	Note 19, 20 	Note 20 	Note 19, 20 	Note 20 	Note 19,20 	Note 19,20 		Note 20 
 
Notes: 
1.  The lot area must provide all required setback areas and off-street parking and loading. Lot area per dwelling must not be less than 5,000 square feet per detached single-household dwelling and 3,000 square feet per attached dwelling. Lot area per each dwelling used to satisfy the requirements of division 38.380 must not be less than 2,700 square feet per detached single-household dwelling and 2,500 square feet per attached dwelling. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  In the UMU district, the footprint of individual buildings must not exceed 45,000 square feet. 
5.  The maximum lot coverage must be 40 percent for principally residential uses or 100 percent for principally non-residential uses. 
6.  Buildings within a development or each phase of a multi-phased development must have varying heights achieved through the use of multiple stories. 
7.  B-2 height exceptions: 
a.  Maximum height may be increased by up to a maximum of 50 percent when the zoning district is implementing a regional commercial and services growth policy land use designation. 
b.  Maximum height otherwise cumulatively allowed by this section may be increased by 30 percent through the approval of a conditional use permit, but only when the additional height is a specifically identified purpose of the review. 
8.  B-2M height limits: 
a.  For buildings designed for non-residential or mixed-use: Five stories or 60 feet (whichever is less), provided the top floor of five-story buildings within 30 feet of the front property line feature has a stepback of at least ten feet from the front face of the building. 
 
Figure 38.320.050.1. 
The top floor of five story buildings within 30 feet of a street property line must feature a ten-foot stepback along the front façade to reduce the perceived scale of the building. 
 
b.  For buildings designed for single purpose residential use: Four stories or 50 feet (whichever is less). 
c.  An area, not to exceed a total of ten percent of the floor area which is located at street level, may extend above the maximum building height by up to 12 feet. 
 
Figure 38.320.050.2. 
Limited exceptions to height limits for elevator or stair penthouses or similar features are permitted provided they occupy no more than ten percent of building's footprint and are set back from the edge of the building by at least five feet to reduce their visibility from the ground level. 
 
9.  Maximum building height in the B-3 district must be 55 feet in the district core area and 70 feet outside of the core area. 
10.  Maximum building height may be increased by up to but not more than an additional 25 feet when structured parking is provided per section 38.330.040.E.2, and when determined to be in compliance with the review criteria of 38.230.100. 
11.  Front setback provisions are set forth in the block frontage standards in division 38.510 and in 38.350.070. 
12.  In the PLI district, there is no setback requirement except when a lot is adjacent to another district. The setbacks then must be the same as those in the adjacent district. The setback requirements of RS must be interpreted as those of R-1. 
13.  The minimum rear setback is five feet for accessory buildings. 
14.  Zero lot lines are allowed per 38.350.050.B. 
15.  All vehicle entrances into garages must be no closer than 20 feet to a property line, unless explicitly authorized otherwise under this chapter. 
16.  Side and rear setbacks for parking may be allowed to be zero feet when coordinated parking arrangements between adjacent properties are provided. 
17.  Rear and side setbacks adjacent to alleys must be at least five feet. 
18.  Garage location standards: for single to four-household uses, see 38.350.070. 
19.  This chapter provides opportunities for parking requirements to be met by shared and off-site parking as allowed by division 38.540 of this chapter. 
20.  Non-residential and multi-household developments are subject to the block frontage standards of division 38.510. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 3, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.320.060. - Zone edge transitions. 
A.  Intent. To provide measures that help to provide a compatible transition between certain higher and lower intensity zoning districts. 
B.  Zone edge transition standards. The following standards are intended to supersede other form and intensity standards in this division. 
1.  Setback adjustments. 
a.  Minimum side and rear setbacks for development within BP, M-1, and M-2 districts where adjacent to a residential district: 15 feet. No additional setbacks required adjacent to alleys and streets. 
b.  Minimum side and rear setbacks for development within B-3 and UMU districts adjacent to a residential district: five feet. No additional setbacks are required adjacent to alleys and streets 
2.  Height/setback adjustments. 
a.  For development on sites in the B-3, B-2M, UMU, and R-5 districts that are adjacent to the RS, R-1, or R-2 district, the following standard applies: From a height of 38 feet at a ten foot setback from the applicable residential districts, buildings must step back at a 45 degree angle away from the applicable property line as shown in figure 38.320.060. No such 45 degree angle setback is required if separated by a street. 
 
Figure 38.320.060. 
45 degree angle stepback rule for certain zone edge development. 
 
b.  For development on sites in the B-3 district that border R-3 and R-4 districts, the following standard applies: From a height of 38 feet at a five foot setback from the applicable residential districts, buildings must step back at a 45 degree angle away from the applicable property line. 
c.  Permitted 45 degree angle stepback encroachments: 
(1)  Permitted horizontal encroachments include those elements and standards set forth in section 38.350.050.A. 
(2)  Permitted vertical encroachments include those elements and standards set forth in section 38.350.050.D.  
DIVISION 38.330. - ZONE SPECIFIC PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 38.330.010. - UMU district—Special standards. 
A.  A UMU district is anticipated to generally be not less than 20 acres in area. The city may approve a lesser area of not less than ten acres upon finding that a smaller area will still provide for adequate transition between adjacent districts, provide a reasonable community setting for the intensity of the district, and that a smaller area will not constitute spot zoning. 
B.  The district must be surrounded by perimeter streets unless precluded by topography. 
C.  Block frontages and building orientation. See division 38.510 for applicable standards for all development types. 
D.  Site planning and design element standards. See division 38.520 for applicable standards for all development types. 
E.  Building standards. 
1.  Building design. See division 38.520 for applicable standards for all development types. 
2.  Floor-to-floor heights and floor area of ground-floor space. 
a.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 13 feet. 
b.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must contain the following minimum floor area: 
(1)  At least 800 square feet or 25 percent of the lot area (whichever is greater) on lots with street frontage of less than 50 feet; or 
(2)  At least 20 percent of the lot area on lots with street frontage of 50 feet or more. 
3.  Street-level openings on parking structures must be limited to those necessary for retail store entrances, vehicle entrance and exit lanes, and pedestrian entrances to stairs and elevator lobbies. Parking structures adjacent to streets must have architectural detailing such as, but not limited to, standard size masonry units such as brick, divided openings to give the appearance of windows, and other techniques to provide an interesting and human-scaled appearance on the story adjacent to the sidewalk. 
F.  Special parking standards. 
1.  Maximum surface parking. 
a.  In order to achieve the intent of the district and achieve efficiency in the use of land, surface parking provided for the sole use of an individual development must not exceed 100 percent of the minimum parking requirement for the subject land use based upon the requirements of division 38.540 of this chapter. The UMU district may utilize the parking reductions authorized in section 38.540.050.2.c.1. All qualifying reductions must be included in determining the 100 percent requirement. 
b.  Exemptions to section 38.330.010.G.1.a, to allow unstructured surface parking up to 100 percent of the minimum parking requirement exclusive of reductions may be approved through the development review process for developments that provide shared parking to other development, valet parking spaces, parking for off-site users for which an hourly or other regular rent is paid, or similarly managed parking facilities. 
2.  Structured parking incentive. A floor area bonus of one square foot may be granted for each square foot of area of parking provided within a building. Additional height of building is allowed to accommodate this additional building area per Table 38.320.050. 
3.  Bicycle parking. Covered bicycle parking must be provided. The covered spaces must be at least one-half of the total minimum bicycle parking. The minimum number of covered spaces must be the greater of either ten bicycle parking spaces or five percent of motor vehicle parking provided on-site. 
G.  Lighting. All building entrances, pathways, and other pedestrian areas must be lit with pedestrian-scale lighting (e.g., wall mounted, sidewalk lamps, bollards, landscaping lighting, etc.). Alternative lighting meeting the intent of the design guidelines and other criteria of this chapter may be approved through site development review. 
H.  Public spaces. The UMU district is urban in nature. Public parks and recreational areas are likewise expected to be urban in nature. This will include elements such as plazas or other hardscapes, landscaping with planters, furniture, developed recreation facilities such as basketball and tennis courts or indoor recreation facilities, and will be more concentrated in size and development than anticipated in a less urban setting. The requirements of this section give direction in the development of park plans and the application of the standards of division 38.420 of this chapter. The parkland dedication requirements of division 38.420 of this chapter may be satisfied by a cumulative contribution of land and the value of on-site improvements to create spaces with the characteristics and functions described in this section. Development within the UMU district may also utilize any of the options of sections 38.420.030 and 38.420.100 to satisfy the requirements of section 38.420.020.A. The requirements of this section must prevail if these standards conflict with the application of the standards of article 4 of this chapter. 
1.  Public spaces must be designed to facilitate at least three of the following types of activities to encourage consistent human presence and activity. 
2.  Public spaces must be designed to: 
a.  Facilitate social interaction between and within groups; 
b.  Provide safe, pleasant, clean and convenient sitting spaces adaptable to changing weather conditions; 
c.  Be attractive to multiple age groups; 
d.  Provide for multiple types of activities without conflicting; 
e.  Support organized activities; 
f.  Be visually distinctive and interesting; 
g.  Interconnect with other public and private spaces; and 
h.  Prioritize use by persons. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 2, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.330.020. - REMU district—Special standards. 
A.  The special standards set forth in this section are minimum standards for a development review application. Standards not specifically addressed by this section are subject to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Street and circulation standards. 
1.  The policies and standards of the city's long-range transportation plan apply to REMU districts. New streets within REMU districts must be complete streets that accommodate pedestrians, bicycles, buses, automobiles and wintertime snow storage, and work in concert with internal property accesses and adjacent development to create a connected and vibrant public realm. REMU street standards also include the following stipulations: 
a.  Natural storm drainage systems are allowed within street rights-of-way. 
b.  Boulevard strips and medians may incorporate natural drainage technologies. 
c.  Buildings must be oriented with front facades facing the street as specified in the block frontage standards of division 38.510 of this chapter. 
d.  Shared drive accesses must be used to reduce the need for additional curb cuts, when feasible. 
e.  On-street parking should be maximized wherever feasible. 
2.  Front-loaded local streets. To ensure that front-loaded streets are community-oriented and pedestrian-friendly, adjacent buildings, garages and drive aisles must comply with the following specific standards of this chapter. 
a.  Section 38.350.070, parking and garages (for single to four-household dwellings). 
b.  Section 38.400.090.C.2.a, drive access requirements—Residential. 
c.  Division 38.510, block frontage standards (for all development except single to four-household dwellings) 
d.  Section 38.540.010.A.4, stacking of off-street parking spaces. 
e.  Section 38.540.010.A.5, no parking permitted in required front or side setbacks. 
f.  Section 38.540.010.A.6, parking permitted in rear setbacks. 
3.  Woonerfs. Woonerfs, or streets where pedestrians and cyclists have priority over motorists, are encouraged on private drive accesses or properties in the REMU district. Woonerfs may be permitted on public local streets or alleys through the subdivision variance or PUD process. 
4.  Alleys. Alleys are encouraged, but not required, in the REMU district. 
a.  Apply standards of section 38.400.060.B (street improvement standards—alleys) where applicable. 
C.  Site planning and design element standards. See division 38.520 for applicable standards for all development types, except single to four-household dwellings. See section 38.360.210 for applicable standards for single to four-household dwellings. 
D.  Open space standards. The REMU district is urban in nature. Public parks and recreational areas and publicly accessible private open spaces are likewise expected to be urban in nature. This may include elements such as plazas or other hardscaping, or landscaping with planters and furniture. Such areas may be more concentrated in size and development than anticipated in a less urban setting. Public spaces must be designed to facilitate distinct types of activities to encourage consistent human presence and activity. 
1.  Public parks and recreational areas. The requirements of this section must give direction in the development of park plans and the application of the standards of division 38.420 of this chapter. 
2.  Publicly accessible private open space in commercial developments. See section 38.520.060 of this chapter for the minimum amount and design of pedestrian-oriented open space. 
3.  Private residential open space. See section 38.520.060 of this chapter for the minimum amount and design of usable residential open space. 
E.  Building standards. 
1.  See division 38.520 for applicable standards for all development types, except single to four-household dwellings. 
2.  Parking structures must not have more than one two-way vehicle entrance or two one-way vehicle entrances facing any public way. Fifty percent of a parking structure's ground floor linear frontage along the primary street must be retail, commercial, office, civic, residential, or live/work. 
3.  Building encroachments are permitted in accordance with section 38.350.050, subject to any and all applicable International Building Codes. 
4.  All projects in the REMU district are exempt from the rear setback lot coverage requirements of section 38.360.030.I. 
F.  Landscape and planting standards. Developments are subject to the landscaping standards in division 38.550 of this chapter and the provisions herein. Table 38.330.020-1 lists the minimum number of points needed for landscape plan approval for development types within REMU districts. 
Table 38.330.020-1 
Special Landscape and Planting Standards 
Development type 	Lot with residential adjacency 	Lot without residential adjacency 
Residential: Small-lot single-household 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 
Residential: Single-household 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 
Residential: Townhouse 
2 to 4 attached units 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 
Residential: Townhouse or townhouse cluster 
5 or more attached units 	23 	23 
Residential: Two to four household dwellings 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 	N/A per section 38.550.020.B 
Residential: Apartments 
5 or more units 	23 	23 
Mixed use with residential 	15 	15 
Non-residential projects 	23 	15 
PUD 	23 	23 
 
G.  Lighting standards. See division 38.580 for applicable standards.  
Sec. 38.330.030. - PLI district—Applicability. 
To the maximum extent allowed by state law, all PLI development must be subject to review and approval as provided for by this chapter, based upon recommendations received from the applicable review bodies established by article 2 of this chapter as may be applicable, and must be required to comply with all applicable underlying zoning requirements, as well as any requirements for certificates of appropriateness as established in design objective plans or other overlay district regulations or guidelines.  
Sec. 38.330.040. - NEHMU District—Special standards and requirements. 
A.  The requirements for landscape buffering for residential adjacency required by division 38.550 of this chapter are not applicable in the northeast HMU. 
B.  All necessary screening or other buffering determined to be necessary between adjoining uses must be the responsibility of the use established last in time. 
C.  When a lot is adjacent to or across the street from a residential zoning district, the setback requirements must be the same as the adjoining zone and buildings must be screened with either a decorative fence or plantings. The provisions of R-S must be interpreted as those of R-1.  
DIVISION 38.340. - OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS  
Part 1. - Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District and Historic Preservation 
 
Sec. 38.340.010. - Intent and purpose. 
A.  All new construction, alterations to existing structures, movement of structures into or out of the neighborhood conservation overlay district, hereinafter referred to as the conservation district, or demolition of structures by any means or process will be subject to design review unless specifically exempted. The recommendations of the design review board or administrative design review staff must be given careful consideration in the final action of the review authority. 
B.  Sections 38.340.010 through 38.340.130 define and set forth standards which apply to the conservation district. 
C.  The intent and purpose of the conservation district designation is to stimulate the restoration and rehabilitation of structures, and all other elements contributing to the character and fabric of established residential neighborhoods and commercial or industrial areas. New construction will be invited and encouraged provided primary emphasis is given to the preservation of existing buildings and further provided the design of such new space enhances and contributes to the aesthetic character and function of the property and the surrounding neighborhood or area. Contemporary design will be encouraged, provided it is in keeping with the above-stated criteria, as an acknowledged fact of the continuing developmental pattern of a dynamic, changing community. 
D.  In view of the fact that most of the area included within the boundaries of the conservation district was developed and built out prior to the adoption of zoning and contemporary subdivision regulations, the construction, development pattern and range of uses is highly diverse and may not be in compliance with conventional regulatory requirements. This part 1 recognizes that this diversity is a contributing element of the historic character of these neighborhoods or areas. The provisions of this part 1 must be applied in a manner that will encourage the protection and enhancement of the many diverse features for future generations. 
E.  The conservation district boundary is largely coterminous with the area surveyed in the effort that led to the listing of nine historic districts and 40 additional landmark structures in the National Register of Historic Places, and includes the nine designated historic districts and 40 individual landmarks. The district boundary may be revised as additional cultural resource survey work is completed. This part 1 sets forth the means of protecting and enhancing the conservation district. 
F.  It is further the purpose of the conservation district designation to protect and enhance neighborhoods or areas of significant land planning or architectural character, historic landmarks or other built or natural features for the educational, cultural, economic benefit or enjoyment of citizens of the city. It will be the policy and responsibility of the administrative entities of this part 1 to: 
1.  Protect, preserve, enhance and regulate historically significant structures, archaeological or cultural sites, and areas that: 
a.  Are reminders of past eras, events or persons important in local, state or national history; 
b.  Provide significant examples of land planning or architectural styles, or are landmarks in the history of land planning and architecture; 
c.  Are unique or irreplaceable assets to the city and its neighborhoods; 
d.  Provide examples of physical surroundings in which past generations lived; or 
e.  Represent and express the unique characteristics of small agricultural-based, western city developmental patterns; 
2.  Enhance property values through the stabilization of neighborhoods and areas of the city, increase economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants, and promote tourist trade and interests; 
3.  Develop and maintain the appropriate environment for buildings, structures, sites and areas that reflect varied planning and architectural styles and distinguished phases of the city's history and prehistory; 
4.  Stimulate an enhancement of human life by developing educational and cultural dimensions, which foster the knowledge of the city's heritage, and cultivate civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; and 
5.  Seek to maintain and enhance the many private and public elements that are unique to the fabric, theme and character of each neighborhood and area, including, but not limited to: lighting, pathways, street trees, natural areas and other features that may, from time to time, be identified by the citizens and property owners' of neighborhoods, areas and subsections thereof. 
G.  It is further the purpose of this article to protect historic structures and sites as defined in article 7 of this chapter by requiring any person seeking to demolish or move a historic structure or site to comply with section 38.230.080 whether or not the structure is located within the NCOD.  
Sec. 38.340.020. - Design review board and administrative design review staff powers and duties within conservation districts. 
A.  The DRB and administrative design review staff will review and make recommendations to the review authority regarding development within the neighborhood conservation district in order to maintain the underlying and desirable characteristics of structures and areas within such districts, while recognizing the need for innovation and individual expression in the development of these districts. 
B.  In carrying out this mission, in addition to the duties established in division 38.200 of this chapter, the design review board and administrative design review staff must review any tax abatement or other incentive programs being considered by the city commission that are designed to stimulate preservation and rehabilitation of structures and properties, and to review any proposed action or development utilizing these abatement or incentive programs.  
Sec. 38.340.030. - Conservation district designation or recession. 
A site, structure, object, area or district may be designated or rescinded as a landmark, or added to or removed from the conservation district by the city commission upon recommendation of the Historic Preservation Advisory Board subject to the provisions of division 6, Historic Preservation Advisory Board of article 5, chapter 2, and division 38.260, Text and Map Amendments, of this chapter. Property owner concurrence is necessary for the designation or recision of landmark status.  
Sec. 38.340.040. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  A certificate of appropriateness is required before any and all alteration(s) other than those specifically exempted in subsection 1 of this section, or repair(s) as defined in section 38.700.160, are undertaken upon any structure in the conservation district. The review authority for certificates of appropriateness is established in division 38.200.010 of this chapter. Compliance with the terms of the final decision is required. The Montana Historical and Architectural Inventory Form must be reviewed and, if necessary, updated to reflect current conditions on the site, prior to the review of the proposal. Application procedures are as follows: 
1.  No building, demolition, conditional use, sign or moving permit may be issued within the conservation district until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the appropriate review authority, and until final action on the proposal has been taken. 
a.  Limited exceptions. The following construction located within the neighborhood conservation overlay district, within an established historic district, or at a site which is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Preservation, does not require a certificate of appropriateness if the project satisfies the following standards: 
(1)  Fences meeting all other provisions of this chapter (e.g. height limitations, street vision triangle, finished side out, etc. per section 38.350.060) which are built of wood, wrought-iron, or any other non-synthetic material and whose construction allows "transparency" as set forth in Chapter 3, Section F of the design guidelines referenced in section 38.340.050.D. Chain link fencing is not included in this exception. 
(2)  Basement egress windows whose window material and configuration is present elsewhere in the structure, and whose window wells are not on the front or corner-side setback elevation of the structure, and which do not establish or provide egress from an illegal dwelling unit. 
(3)  Accessory structures under 120 square feet as measured from the outer edge of the exterior walls, which meet the setback requirements, are not more than 14 feet to their highest point and which do not require a building permit. 
(4)  Alterations in roofing material, if installing wood shingle, slate, tile, or asphalt shingle material, and no changes are made to the roof shape, pitch or slope. 
(5)  Photovoltaic panels which are flush mounted to a roof. 
2.  Application, review and public notice procedures for proposals located within the conservation district are set forth in division 38.230, Plan Review, and division 38.220, Applications and Noticing, of this chapter. If demolition or movement of structures or sites subject to the conservation district requirements is proposed, the procedures in section 38.340.080 apply. 
3.  The architectural designs of individual affordable housing units used to satisfy the requirements of section 38.380.030 and are exempt from the review requirements of this part 1. This exemption does not extend to removal or alterations of existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 4, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.340.050. - Standards for certificates of appropriateness. 
A.  All work performed in completion of an approved certificate of appropriateness must be in conformance with the most recent edition of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings, published by U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Cultural Resource Stewardship and Partnerships, Heritage Preservation Services, Washington, D.C. (available for review at the community development department). 
B.  Architectural appearance design guidelines used to consider the appropriateness and compatibility of proposed alterations with original design features of subject structures or properties, and with neighboring structures and properties, must focus upon the following: 
1.  Height; 
2.  Proportions of doors and windows; 
3.  Relationship of building masses and spaces; 
4.  Roof shape; 
5.  Scale; 
6.  Directional expression, with regard to the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures; 
7.  Architectural details; 
8.  Concealment of non-period appurtenances, such as mechanical equipment; and 
9.  Materials and color schemes (any requirements or conditions imposed regarding color schemes must be limited to the prevention of nuisances upon abutting properties and prevention of degradation of features on the property in question. Color schemes may be considered as primary design elements if a deviation from the underlying zoning is requested). 
C.  Contemporary, non-period and innovative design of new structures and additions to existing structures is encouraged when such new construction or additions do not destroy significant historical, cultural or architectural structures or their components and when such design is compatible with the foregoing elements of the structure and surrounding structures. 
D.  When applying the standards of subsections A through C of this section, the review authority must be guided by the design guidelines for the neighborhood conservation overlay district. Application of the design guidelines may vary by property as explained in the introduction to the design guidelines. When reviewing a contemporary, non-period, or innovative design for new structures or additions to existing structures, the review authority must be guided by the design guidelines for the neighborhood conservation overlay district to determine whether the proposal is compatible with any existing or surrounding structures. 
E.  Conformance with other applicable development standards of this chapter. Development in the NCOD must comply with all other applicable development standards of this chapter. 
F.  Tax abatement certificate of appropriateness applications are also reviewed with the procedures and standards established in chapter 2, article 6, division 2.  
Sec. 38.340.060. - Application requirements for certificates of appropriateness in conservation districts. 
Applications for certificates of appropriateness must be made in conjunction with applications for site plan approval in accordance with division 38.230 of this chapter. Where development projects in the conservation district require only sketch plan review per division 38.230 of this chapter (i.e., single-household, two-household, three-household and four-household residential structures, each on individual lots; signs; fences; property alterations; and certain amendments to site plans), applications for certificates of appropriateness must be made on a form provided by the community development department, and must include the information and material set forth in division 38.220 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.340.070. - Deviations from underlying zoning requirements. 
A.  Because the development of much of historic Bozeman preceded zoning, subdivision and construction regulations, some buildings within the conservation district do not conform to contemporary zoning standards. In order to encourage restoration, rehabilitation and appropriate new construction activity that would contribute to the overall historic character of the community, deviations from underlying zoning requirements may be granted as described in division 38.250 of this chapter. The criteria for granting deviations from the underlying zoning requirements are: 
1.  Modifications must be more historically appropriate for the building and site in question and the adjacent properties, as determined by the standards in section 38.340.050, than would be achieved under a literal enforcement of this chapter; 
2.  Modifications will have minimal adverse effects on abutting properties or the permitted uses thereof; and 
3.  Modifications must assure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. Approvals may be conditioned to assure such protection, and such conditions may include a time period within which alterations will be completed; landscaping and maintenance thereof; architectural, site plan and landscape design modifications, or any other conditions in conformity with the intent and purpose set forth in this part 1. 
(Ord. No. 1994 , § 2, 3-31-2018)  
Sec. 38.340.080. - Review of demolition or movement of historic structures or sites. 
A.  The demolition or movement of any structure or site must be subject to the provisions of this article. This process applies to: 
1.  Historic properties and sites, as defined in article 7 of this chapter. 
2.  Non-historic properties per section 38.340.100. 
3.  Unsafe structures whether historic or non-historic per section 38.340.110. The provisions for unsafe structures take priority over other provisions for demolition. 
B.  An application to move or demolish a structure subject to this article must follow the applicable review procedures. 
C.  Optional provisional review of demolition. A property owner may request provisional review of the proposed demolition of a structure subject to this article prior to submittal of a certificate of appropriateness application for seeking demolition of the structure. The director of community development may establish criteria for the application for provisional review of demolition. Provisional review is advisory only and does not constitute approval to demolish a structure. Provisional review must consider: 
1.  The property's historic significance and a neighborhood's historical significance. 
2.  Whether the structure has no viable economic life remaining. "No viable economic life remaining" means the costs of repair and/or rehabilitation to bring the structure to a habitable condition as established by the applicable technical codes in article 10.02, exceed the costs of demolition and redevelopment to minimum standards with a building of the same type and scale. 
(Ord. No. 1994 , § 3, 3-31-2018)  
Sec. 38.340.090. - Demolition or movement of a historic structure or site. 
A.  Certificate of appropriateness (COA) for demolition and subsequent development. Approval of the proposed subsequent development is required for all historic structures proposed for demolition and for the proposed movement of any structure or site. 
B.  Public notice. Proposals for demolition of historic properties within the city limits require public notice. Notice of application(s) must be provided in accordance with division 38.220 of this chapter. 
C.  Criteria. The review authority must consider the following factors in evaluating applications for demolition or movement of a historic structure or site and subsequent redevelopment: 
1.  The property's historic significance. 
2.  Whether the structure has no viable economic life remaining. "No viable economic life remaining" means the costs of repair and/or rehabilitation to bring the structure to a habitable condition as established by the applicable technical codes in article 10.02, exceed the costs of demolition and redevelopment to minimum standards with a building of the same type and scale. 
3.  Whether the subsequent development complies with section 38.340.050. 
4.  Whether the subsequent development includes construction of new building(s) unless the existing character of the area does not include buildings. 
5.  Subsequent development requires a building permit and does not include proposals which leave the site without building(s) or structure(s). 
Notwithstanding the above, for projects proposing the removal of a historic structure, which do not qualify for sketch plan review pursuant to section 38.230.070, the review authority may determine the proposed subsequent site development is more appropriate for the site based on the criteria in section 38.230.100. 
D.  Review process. 
1.  Upon application for a COA for demolition and subsequent development the review authority may: 
a.  Grant preliminary or final approval of the demolition with standard contingencies and/or project specific conditions. 
b.  Deny the COA application. 
2.  COA approval. 
a.  Preliminary COA approval. After preliminary approval with contingencies or conditions requiring follow up work, the applicant may apply for final COA approval and must demonstrate compliance with development standards and completion of contingencies and conditions, including documentation. The review authority must approve the COA for demolition and subsequent development. 
b.  Final COA approval. If the submitted application materials demonstrate compliance with development standards and completion of contingencies and conditions, including documentation, the review authority must approve the COA for demolition and subsequent development. 
3.  If an application for demolition or moving is denied due to failure to meet section 38.340.090.C issuance of a demolition or moving permit must be stayed for a period of two years from the date of the denial in order to allow the applicant and city to explore alternatives to the demolition or move, including, but not limited to, the use of tax credits or adaptive reuse. The two-year stay may be terminated at any point in time if an alternate proposal is approved or if sufficient additional evidence is presented to otherwise satisfy the requirements of this section. 
a.  Early termination of two-year stay. An owner of property subject to a stay under this section may seek early termination of the stay if the owner demonstrates s/he has actively and in good faith sought alternatives to demolition. These alternatives may include but are not limited to: listing the property for sale as a historic property; actively seeking input from neighborhood groups and interested parties; exploring alternative funding sources for stabilization and/or reconstruction; and offering the property for relocation. 
b.  If, upon expiration of the two-year stay of demolition, no alternate proposals have been approved or sufficient evidence has not been presented to otherwise terminate the stay, an application for a demolition permit may be presented to the city pursuant to chapter 10, article 3 or 4 of this Code. If all requirements of the demolition permit are satisfied, including documentation of the structure to be moved or demolished and the review authority has approved the subsequent development and has issued a building permit for the subsequent development, a demolition permit pursuant to chapter 10, article 3 or 4 must be granted and no other proceedings under this chapter are required. 
c.  The two-year stay does not begin to run if denial of a COA to demolish a historic structure or site is based on the failure of the applicant to make a complete and adequate submittal or to propose a subsequent treatment which complies with the standards of this chapter. 
4.  Standard requirements. 
a.  Subsequent development of the site must receive zoning approval, building permit approval, and pay all related fees prior to issuance of a demolition permit. 
b.  Documentation of the structure must be completed and submitted to the historic preservation officer and deemed complete and adequate prior to issuance of a demolition permit per paragraph section 38.340.120. 
c.  The review authority may require a developer to enter into a development agreement with the city at the time of issuance of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing demolition of all or part of a historic structure in the neighborhood conservation overlay zoning district or in a designated historic district. The development agreement may provide for conditions of demolition, timing of reconstruction, and may require the developer to post a surety bond naming the city as a beneficiary for not more than ten percent of the costs of the overall reconstruction budget as a guarantee that construction of the replacement structure will commence promptly upon completion of the demolition. This requirement is in addition to any other requirement of this code.  
Sec. 38.340.100. - Demolition or movement of a non-historic structure or site in the NCOD. 
A.  Certificate of appropriateness (COA) for demolition and subsequent development. Required for all properties proposed for demolition or movement of any structure or site. Subsequent development does not include proposals which leave the site without building(s) or structure(s). 
B.  Public notice. Notice must be provided in accordance with division 38.220 of this chapter. 
C.  Criteria. 
1.  The applicable criteria are the COA criteria of section 38.340.050. 
2.  The subsequent development must include construction of new building(s) unless the immediately prior character of the area did not include buildings. 
D.  Review process. 
1.  Upon application for a COA for demolition and subsequent development the review authority may: 
a.  Grant preliminary or final approval of the demolition with standard contingencies and/or project specific conditions. 
b.  Deny the COA application. 
2.  COA approval. 
a.  Preliminary COA approval. After preliminary approval with contingencies or conditions requiring follow up work, the applicant may apply for final COA approval and must demonstrate compliance with development standards and completion of contingencies and conditions, including documentation. The review authority must approve the COA for demolition and subsequent development. 
b.  Final COA approval. If the submitted application materials demonstrate compliance with development standards and completion of contingencies and conditions, including documentation, the review authority must approve the COA for demolition and subsequent development. 
3.  Standard requirement. Subsequent treatment of the site must receive zoning approval prior to issuance of a demolition permit. Subsequent treatment may include replacement with a new building, integration of the area into a larger site which will support future development, or reclamation of the site to a safe, graded condition where storm-water runoff and weeds are controlled and landscaping is reestablished.  
Sec. 38.340.110. - Demolition or movement of an unsafe structure whether historic or non-historic. 
A.  Certificate of appropriateness (COA) for demolition and subsequent development. Upon application and the chief building official's determination that the property is unsafe, the review authority may approve demolition and subsequent development. Subsequent development for an unsafe structure may be its replacement with a new building, integration of the area into a larger site which will support future development, or reclamation of the site to a safe, graded condition where storm-water runoff and weeds are controlled. 
B.  Public notice. Notice must be provided in accordance with division 38.220 of this chapter. 
C.  The demolition of unsafe properties/structures may be subject to the public nuisance abatement provisions of chapter 16, article 2 of this code. Upon the chief building official's determination that the property is unsafe and declaration of a public nuisance if the property owner does not resolve the unsafe condition, the review authority must give final approval on a COA, which may be initiated by the city, and the demolition permit will be issued so the city may abate a nuisance. 
D.  The provisions of this section may be initiated by a land owner; or by the city in accordance with article 16.02.  
Sec. 38.340.120. - Documentation and administrative procedures. 
A.  Documentation. All structures or sites approved for demolition or moving must be fully documented. 
1.  The director of community development must establish by administrative order rules for documentation of non-historic and historic properties. This documentation must be created by a professional who satisfies professional qualification standards for History, Archeology or Architectural History, as established by the National Park Service and published in the Code of Federal Regulations, 36 CFR Part 61. 
2.  Documentation may be submitted as early in the process as the property owner desires to support the requested action, and to further the consideration and review of the request, but not later than prior to issuance of a building permit. 
B.  A building permit application, in accordance with applicable codes and requirements, must be submitted and approved before any demolition or construction is allowed. 
C.  All fees and charges applicable to review of the request for demolition and construction of the subsequent development (e.g. parkland, water rights, impact fees) must be paid prior to issuance of a building or demolition permit. 
1.  When required by the city, this must include a financial security in a form approved by the city attorney ensuring completion of the demolition and reclamation of the site to a safe condition. 
D.  In addition to the remedies in division 38.200 of this chapter, the owner of any structure or site that is demolished or moved contrary to the provisions of this section, and any contractor performing such work, may be required to reconstruct such structure or site in a design and manner identical to its condition prior to such illegal demolition or move, and in conformance with all applicable codes and regulations.  
Sec. 38.340.130. - Safe condition and good repair. 
Each property or structure located in the conservation district must be maintained in safe condition and good repair as required in sections 16.02.030 and 16.02.040. Nothing in this division 38.340 must be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any exterior feature of any historic structure which does not involve a building permit. Interior arrangements or alterations to the interior of a building must not be subject to this requirement.  
DIVISION 38.350. - GENERAL LAND USE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 38.350.010. - Area requirements for individual buildings—restrictions. 
No part of any setback, open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter may be included as part of a setback, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building except as provided in section 38.540.060.  
Sec. 38.350.020. - Setbacks and lots reduction prohibited. 
No setback or lot existing at the time of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of this chapter except as set forth herein. Setbacks or lots created after the effective date of said ordinance must meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.  
Sec. 38.350.030. - Use of lands; buildings and structures. 
A.  Only uses specifically identified by this chapter are to be built. No building, or structure or part thereof may be erected, altered or enlarged for a use, nor must any existing building, structure or part thereof, or land, be used for a purpose or in a manner that is not in conformity with the uses listed as authorized uses for the zone in which such buildings, structure or land is situated. In addition, any land, building or structure to be erected or used for a purpose listed as a conditional or special use in such zone must first receive final approval of a permit for the use. Existing nonconforming uses and structures must comply with division 38.270 of this chapter. 
B.  No building, or part thereof, or structure may be erected, nor may any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, or moved into any zone, nor may any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the setback regulations designed for the zone in which such building or open space is located, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
C.  Recreational vehicle parking on residential lot. No person may park or occupy any recreational vehicle or mobile home on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside of any approved manufactured home community or recreational vehicle park except that: 
1.  The parking of only one unoccupied recreational vehicle in any accessory individual garage, or in a rear setback in any district is permitted, provided no living quarters may be maintained or any business practiced in the recreational vehicle while such recreational vehicle is so parked or stored; and 
2.  In the event of hardship, temporary use permits may be granted for occupying such recreational vehicle or mobile home. 
D.  Municipal infrastructure requirements. 
1.  Whenever any building lots and/or building sites are created inside the city limits or existing lots are annexed, and prior to the issuance of any building permits on such lots or sites, municipal water distribution, municipal sanitary sewer collection, and streets must be provided to the site. Each building site must utilize and be connected to both the municipal water distribution and municipal sanitary sewer collection systems. Installation of improvements is subject to division 38.270 of this chapter. 
a.  Alternative. When, in the city's sole determination, it is in the city's long term best interests to allow a building lot or site to be created or developed without immediate access to either municipal water or municipal sewer the city may, at its sole discretion, make such allowance when all of the following have been met: 
(1)  The non-municipal system to service the lot or site must be designed, reviewed and constructed to meet city standards. Systems serving more than one lot or user must be central systems; 
(2)  The non-municipal system must be designed and constructed in a manner to allow connection to the municipal system components shown in applicable facility plans to serve the property at such time as it becomes available; 
(3)  The landowner must provide waivers of right to protest creation of special improvement districts or other financing methods to extend municipal water and sewer services. Such extensions or connections may require construction of system components that are not immediately adjacent to the building lot or site; 
(4)  The landowner must agree to connect to municipal water and sewer services and abandon and remove non-municipal services when so instructed by the city. Such agreement must be binding on all successors and run with the land; 
(5)  If the city takes responsibility to operate the non-municipal system it may impose a surcharge to cover extra operational expenses. City operation of the system is at the city's discretion; 
(6)  The requirement for future connection to the municipal water and/or sewer system, waivers and agreements, and other applicable materials must be either noted on the plat or final plan or a separate notice be recorded at the county clerk and recorder's office so that such notice will appear on a title report or abstract of the property; 
(7)  No non-municipal water or sewer systems must be constructed until all necessary approvals from the state department of environmental quality, City of Bozeman, county health department, and any other relevant agency have been received; and 
(8)  The use of municipal water or sewer systems is considered to be the best means to protect the public interest and welfare. The alternative for the use of non-municipal systems is intended to be used sparingly and in extraordinary circumstances. In order to protect the public interest, in approving a non-municipal system the city may impose such conditions of approval as it deems necessary. 
2.  These improvements must be designed, constructed and installed according to the standards and criteria as adopted and approved by the city prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
3.  When municipal water distribution and municipal sanitary sewer collection systems are being provided to serve a development proposal occurring under the provisions of division 38.430, planned unit development (PUD), the issuance of a building permit may be allowed prior to completion of the public infrastructure, provided the criteria of section 38.270.030 are met. 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D.3 of this section, the city may limit the scope, type and number of projects eligible for simultaneous construction consideration.  
Sec. 38.350.040. - Dwelling unit restrictions. 
A.  No use of unfinished structures. No cellar, garage, tent, tepee, yurt, basement with unfinished structure above, accessory building, or vehicle; or any manufactured home or recreational vehicle outside of an approved manufactured home community, recreational vehicle park, or approved individual lot in accordance with section 38.360.160 can at any time be used as a dwelling unit, unless approved for use as a temporary dwelling unit due to a demonstrated hardship. 
B.  Use of basements. The basement portion of a finished home must be properly damp-proofed and have nature lighting, heating, ventilation, and suitable fire protection and exits if used for living.  
Sec. 38.350.050. - Setback and height encroachments, limitations and exceptions. 
A.  Permitted encroachments into setbacks. The following are permitted encroachments into required setbacks, subject to any and all applicable International Building Code requirements and/or utility easements: 
1.  Architectural features which do not add usable area to a structure, such as chimneys, wing walls, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, awnings, window wells and steps, provided such architectural features do not extend more than five feet into any required front or rear setback; 
2.  Architectural features, which do not add usable area to a structure, such as chimneys, wing walls, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, awnings, window wells and steps, provided such architectural features do not extend more than two feet into any required side setback, except that eaves and gutters may extend two and one-half feet into any required side setback; 
3.  Terraces and patios, uncovered decks and stoops or similar features, provided that such features do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure nor more than five feet into any required front or rear setback or two feet into any required side setback; 
4.  Porches and entries on residential structures, except multi-household developments featuring more than four attached dwelling units, may project up to five feet into the front setback area except where front setback utility easements prevent such projects; 
5.  Fire escapes may be permitted in required side or rear setbacks only; 
6.  Wheelchair ramps may encroach into any required setback, but must not be located closer than three feet from any property line; 
7.  Flagpoles, ornamental features, trees, shrubs, walkways, and nameplate signs may be located within a required setback. Street vision triangle requirements apply; and 
8.  Essential services Type I and Type II may be located within a required setback when they are within a utility easement. 
 
Figure 38.350.050.A. 
Example of permitted encroachments. 
 
B.  Zero lot line conditions. In districts where zero side setbacks are not otherwise allowed, where an individual owns two or more adjoining lots, or where the owners of two or more adjoining lots make legal written agreement recorded at the county clerk and recorder, a zero lot line concept may be used for commercial, or single-household dwelling unit developments, or detached accessory structures. In all such cases in residential districts, a minimum eight-foot side setback must be maintained adjacent to the exterior side, or nonzero lot line side, of the structure. 
 
Figure 38.350.050.B. 
Zero lot line conditions. 
 
C.  Required setbacks from watercourses are set forth in section 38.410.100. 
D.  Height limitation exceptions. 
1.  Non-specific exemptions. No building, or part thereof, or structure must be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit herein designated for the district in which such building is located, except as is specified in division 38.250 of this chapter, or as specifically authorized as an approved condition of a planned unit development. Such approved conditions must include the recommendations of the city fire marshal. 
2.  Specific exemptions. 
a.  Height limitations do not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public and private utility facilities; parapet walls extending no more than four feet above the limiting height of the building except as hereinafter provided: amateur radio antennae; solar energy collectors and equipment used for the mounting or operation of such collectors; and building mounted horizontal and vertical axis wind energy collectors under 15 feet in height from the building mounting surface, and equipment used for the mounting or operation of such collectors. 
b.  Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other permitted public and semi-public buildings may exceed height limitations otherwise established by this chapter, provided that: 
(1)  The portion of the building that exceeds the height limit must be limited to 10 percent of the total building footprint; and 
(2)  That for each one foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear setbacks must be increased in width or depth by an additional one foot over the side and rear setbacks required in the district. 
c.  Elevator and stair penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery lofts are exempt from height limitations otherwise established in this chapter, provided that no linear dimension of any such structure exceed 50 percent of the corresponding street frontage line. 
d.  Towers and monuments, cooling towers, gas holders or other structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height, and grain elevators and silos are exempt from this chapter, provided that any structure above the height otherwise permitted in the district must occupy no more than 25 percent of the area of the lot and must be at least 25 feet from every lot line. 
e.  Height restrictions for wireless facilities are governed by division 38.370 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , §§ 5, 6, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.350.060. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.  Location and height. Except as provided in section 38.400.100, fences, walls and hedges in any district may be located on lot lines, provided such fences, walls and hedges comply with the following height requirements: 
1.  Do not exceed six feet in height in any required rear or required side setback. Fences exceeding six feet in height must be subject to the minimum setback requirements of the district in which such fences are located. Decorative post caps may exceed the height limit by no more than one additional foot. Fences in excess of six feet in height require a building permit before installation may commence. Fences may not exceed eight feet in height. 
a.  A gate may be provided which defines an entrance point. The gate may have a defining structure so long as the defining structure is not more than one foot wide on either side of the gate. Gate structure heights may not exceed twice the allowed fence height. 
2.  Do not exceed four feet in height in any required front lot line setback or any portion of a required wider front lot line that is forward of the rear edge of the building façade nearest the front lot line setback. Decorative post caps may exceed the height limit by no more than one additional foot. 
3.  Fences used in an agricultural pursuit to retain stock animals or for public safety must be excepted. 
4.  The height of fences located in the B-3 district must meet the requirements of this section for any provided, not required, setbacks. 
B.  Relation to linear parks. Fences located in the rear or side setback of properties adjoining any city linear park must have a maximum height of four feet. 
C.  Construction and maintenance. Every fence or wall must be constructed in a substantial, workman-like manner and of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence or wall is proposed to be used. Every fence or wall must be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and must not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair, damage or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence or wall which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect is a public nuisance and the building official must commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. 
D.  Barbed wire and electric fences. 
1.  No barbed wire or similar sharp fencing or electric fences is permitted, except in R-S districts; except that barbed wire or other similar sharp fencing materials may be used on the top of security fences in M-1 and M-2 districts. 
2.  When electrically charged fences are used in an R-S district, such fences must be posted with warning signs at intervals not to exceed 150 feet where such fences are adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
E.  Measuring fence and wall height. In case of a fence erected on top of a retaining wall, the height must be measured from the grade of the high side of the wall. 
F.  "Finished" side out. Any fence or wall constructed so as to have only one elevation "finished," which must be defined as not having its supporting members significantly visible, must be erected such that the finished elevation of the fence is exposed to the adjacent property. 
G.  Fencing of utilities and outdoor storage areas. 
1.  All utility substations, wells, storage facilities or other utilities must be screened from view by a wall, fence, hedge or landscape screen. 
2.  All storage for commercial operations must be conducted within a completed enclosed building or within an area completely enclosed, except for access points, by a wall, fence, hedge or landscape screen at least six feet in height. 
 
Figure 38.350.060. 
Fences. 
 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 7, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.350.070. - Parking and garages for single to four-household residential uses. 
A.  Applicability. The following standards apply to all residential development, except multi-household developments featuring more than four attached dwelling units. 
B.  General requirements. 
1.  Surface parking may be allowed within the front setback when located in front of a parking space that meets setback provisions of division 38.320. 
2.  Surface parking may be allowed in the rear setback. 
3.  See section 38.400.090 for drive access requirements. 
C.  Residential garage setback standards. 
1.  Individual garages are subject to setback standards in Tables 38.320.030—38.320.040. 
2.  All garages facing the street must be at least four feet behind the front façade of the structure. Garage entrances may also be tucked under the second floor to help meet this requirement. 
D.  Residential garage width standards. 
1.  Where a garage door or doors facing the street occupy more than ten feet of the façade's width, the total width of the garage door or doors must comprise no more than 50 percent of the width of the ground level façade facing the street. 
2.  There is no restriction on the number of individual garage doors facing the street, only the proportion of the façade associated with a garage door or doors exceeding ten feet in total width. 
E.  Individual garages facing the street are not permitted in the B-3 district when an alley is adjacent to the property.  
DIVISION 38.360. - INDEX OF SUPPLEMENTAL USE CRITERIA 
 
Sec. 38.360.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to further describe the standards and conditions under which certain uses may be permitted as principal, special, or conditional uses in specific districts.  
Sec. 38.360.020. - Applicability. 
All uses listed in this section are subject to the specific standards described for each use, in addition to all other applicable standards.  
Sec. 38.360.030. - Accessory buildings, uses and equipment. 
A.  An accessory building is an integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the principal building by a common wall for not less than five feet horizontally and eight feet vertically. 
 
Figure 38.360.030.A. 
Accessory building example. 
 
B.  Accessory buildings, uses or equipment may not be stored or constructed between the front lot line and front façade of the building. On a corner lot with two streets, the accessory building must be placed behind both front façades of the primary structure. For lots with three or more frontages, alternate locations may be allowed. The review authority shall consider the predominant placement of accessory structures in the site vicinity, the consistency of the proposal with the established and/or desired character of the surrounding area, and the visual impact of the structure given its proposed placement. 
C.  Accessory buildings and garages may not be located within a utility easement without written approval of the easement holder. 
D.  Accessory buildings in any business or industrial district may be located only to the rear of the front line of the principal building. 
E.  No accessory building may exceed the footprint of the principal building unless such accessory building has been otherwise approved per this chapter. 
F.  Accessory buildings with less than five feet separation between walls or with any connecting elements will be considered a single structure for determination of maximum size allowed. 
G.  Accessory building height and setback limitations in residential zoning districts: 
1.  Accessory buildings may not exceed the height of the principal building unless such accessory building has been otherwise approved per this chapter; and 
2.  From a height of 15 feet at the minimum side setback as set forth in division 38.320, buildings must step back at a 45 degree angle away from the side property line as shown in figure 38.360.030.G below, except zero lot line situations meeting the standards of section 38.350.050.B: 
 
Figure 38.360.030.G. 
Angled setback plane for accessory buildings alongside setbacks. 
 
Permitted setback plane encroachments: 
a.  Permitted horizontal encroachments include those elements and standards set forth in section 38.350.050.A. 
b.  Permitted vertical encroachments include those elements and standards set forth in section 38.350.050.D. 
H.  Mechanical equipment screening. 
1.  Rooftop mechanical equipment must be screened. Screening must be incorporated into the roof form when possible. The requirement for screening of rooftop mechanical equipment does not apply to solar or wind energy collection devices. 
2.  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment must be screened from public rights-of-way with walls, fencing or evergreen plant materials. Mechanical equipment may not encroach into required setbacks. 
I.  Detached structures setback requirements. 
1.  Accessory structures less than or equal to 120 square feet in footprint may not be located in any front, side, or corner-side setback and must maintain a minimum setback of three feet from the property lines in the rear setback. 
2.  Accessory structures greater than 120 square feet but less than or equal to 600 square feet in footprint may not be located in any front, side, or corner-side setback. The accessory structure must be set back a minimum of either: 
a.  Six feet, or 
b.  When parking is provided between the structure and the rear property line, 20 feet except when required parking spaces need a greater setback for back-up maneuverability. 
See the following examples: 
Alley Right-of-Way Width 	Setback for Garage without Stacked Parking 	Setback for a Garage with Stacked Parking Off of an Alley 
30 feet 	6 feet 	20 feet 
20 feet 	6 feet 	24 feet 
16 feet 	8 feet 	28 feet 
14 feet 	10 feet 	30 feet 
 
3.  Accessory structures greater than 600 square feet may not be located in any required front or side setback, or in a rear setback when no alley is present. Adequate back-up maneuverability for required parking spaces must be provided. 
4.  Accessory structures greater than 600 square feet may be located in required rear setbacks when an alley is present and must provide adequate backup maneuverability for required parking spaces. 
 
Figure 38.360.030.I.1. 
Detached structure setback requirements. 
 
 
Figure 38.360.030.I.2. 
Garage setback requirements. 
 
J.  Structures may occupy no more than 40 percent of the area of the lot located to the rear of the principal building. 
 
Figure 38.360.030.J. 
Accessory structures are limited to a maximum of 40% of the lot area between the principal building and the rear lot line. 
 
K.  All structures located within the neighborhood conservation district require a certificate of appropriateness unless exempted in division 38.340 of this article. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 8, 4-18-2018; Ord. No. 2014 , § 7, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.360.040. - ADU use table in residential zoning districts. 
Table 38.360.040 
ADU use table in residential zoning districts 
Table clarification: 
1. Uses: P = Permitted; S = Special uses; — = Uses which are not permitted. 
2. If a * appears after the use, then the use is defined in article 7. 
3. If a number appears in the box, then the use may be allowed subject to development condition(s) described in the footnotes immediately following the table. 
 
	Zoning districts 
	R-S 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	RMH 	REMU 
Detached ADU 2 & 3 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 
Attached ADU 2, 3 & 4 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 
Owner occupied 	Yes 1 	Yes 1 	Not required 	Not required 	Not required 	Not required 	— 	Not required 
 
The following ADU standards apply to all zoning districts: 
Occupancy limit 	2 persons 
Deviations 	No 
# of ADU per lot 	One 
Location 	ADU's are permitted above accessory buildings and on the ground floor. Ground floor ADUs require alley access. 
Parking requirement 	In addition to the parking required for the principal residence, one paved off-street parking space is required for the exclusive use of the ADU. The parking provided must be located on the lot and may not utilize the on-street parking provisions of division 38.540 of this chapter. 
Unit size 	In no case may an ADU be larger than 600 square feet or have more than a single bedroom. The method of calculating the maximum ADU square footage will be "living area" defined as "all floor area exclusive of areas with a sloped ceiling less than three feet in height, stairwells, and exterior decks." Bedrooms, living rooms, kitchens, casework, interior walls, hallways, closets, bathrooms, and any other living space must be included in the maximum square footage calculation. 
Design requirements 	Detached ADUs, including second story additions on detached garages may be approved only if found compatible and consistent with the existing character and fabric of the neighborhood. The review authority must consider placement and size of windows, decks, balconies, fencing, landscape screening, and height and massing of the structure to minimize impacts to adjacent properties. 
Height limit 	Notwithstanding the limitations in section 38.360.030.G, a detached ADU may exceed the height of the principal building but may not exceed 22 feet in height. 
Garage conversions 	Garages may not be converted for use as ADUs unless all required parking for all uses on the lot is otherwise provided prior to conversion. However, ADUs may be placed above garages except where otherwise noted. 
Minimum standards or "no guarantee" 	A permit for an ADU will not be granted unless the lot has been configured to accept an ADU with adequate lot area, utility services, and compliance with setbacks and height standards. 
 
Notes: 
1.  R-S and R-1 occupancy. The detached dwelling unit within which the ADU is located, or the ADU itself, is actually and physically occupied as a principal residence by at least one owner of record who possesses at least an estate for life or a 50 percent fee simple ownership interest. No more than one of the dwellings, either the principal dwelling or the accessory dwelling, may be rented by non-owners at the same time. The city may require a guarantee of compliance with the requirements of this section, including but not limited to a binding deed restriction or covenant enforcing the single rental restriction as allowed in 38.270.080.B, as a condition of approval. 
2.  Any ADU created within an accessory building is subject to the limitations of 38.360.030. 
3.  An accessory dwelling unit may not be approved on a reduced size lot created to meet the minimum affordable housing requirements of chapter 38, division 380. 
4.  Location. The ADU may be a part of the principal dwelling unit, provided the ADU is clearly incidental to the principal dwelling unit and meets all of the following criteria: 
a.  Lot area per Table 38.320.030 is provided. 
b.  The ADU does not exceed one-third of the total area of the principal structure. 
c.  If the entrance for the ADU is separate from the entrance of the principal structure, the entrance must be on a façade different than that of the main entry. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 8, 6-3-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014 , § 8, adopted June 3, 2019, repealed the former § 38.360.040, and enacted a new § 38.360.040 as set out herein. The former § 38.360.040 pertained to accessory dwelling units (ADU) and derived from Ord. No. 1994, § 3, adopted March 31, 2018 and Order No. 2018-01, § 1, adopted April 18, 2018.  
Sec. 38.360.050. - Adult businesses. 
A.  In addition to the requirements for all development established in this chapter, the following requirements apply to all adult businesses: 
1.  An adult business must be separated by at least a 500-foot radius from any other adult use, residence, residential district, school, place of worship, public park or any youth-oriented establishment. Subsequent establishment of one of the above-listed uses within the required separation radius does not compel the relocation of an adult business.  
Sec. 38.360.060. - Alcohol sales for on-premises consumption. 
A.  Alcohol sales for on-premises consumption, on either a temporary or permanent basis, may not be conducted on the same lot or premises where an adult business or the sale of auto retail fuel is permitted. 
B.  Pursuant to section 4.02.020, the restrictions in MCA 16-3-306(1) do not apply to: 
1.  In zoning districts authorized to serve on premise alcohol, a restaurant if the restaurant serves alcohol on premises only pursuant to a state issued restaurant beer and wine license or to a person operating a temporary event using a catering endorsement; or 
2.  Restaurants located within the B-2M and B-3 zoning districts if the restaurant serves alcohol on premise only pursuant to a state issued beer license with wine amendment as long as such restaurant complies with the following requirements and provides the city an annual certification with its business license application of such compliance: 
a.  All alcohol is sold for on premises consumption only; 
b.  The restaurant must have individually priced meals prepared and served for on-site dining; 
c.  Must have a dining room, kitchen and necessary employees for preparing food on the premises; 
d.  The restaurant must serves an evening meal at least four days a week for at least two hours a day between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. and if food is served beyond these hours may only sell alcohol between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; 
e.  Gambling or gaming is prohibited; 
f.  Alcohol must be stored on premises; and 
g.  Must prevent self-service of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 1999 , § 2, 4-16-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1999 , adopted May 16, 2018, states "Section 16-3-306(4), MCA recognizes the City's authority to supplant the provisions of 16-3-306(1), MCA. The City Commission hereby supplants such restrictions as provided for in Sections 1 and 2 of this Ordinance."  
Sec. 38.360.070. - Automobile repair and/or fuel sales. 
A.  In addition to applicable project design standards in article 5 of this chapter and the requirements for all convenience uses in section 38.360.100 and elsewhere in this chapter, the following requirements apply to all service station and automobile uses as listed in this section. Compliance with all criteria listed in this section does not necessarily guarantee approval by the city. 
1.  Gas pump and pump island canopies must be located not closer than ten feet to any side or rear property line. Design of the canopy must architecturally match the design of the main building. All canopies must be connected to the roof of the main structure unless otherwise approved. All lighting must meet the lighting standards of this chapter. The maximum height of the canopy must not exceed 18 feet. All signs must conform to the sign regulations of division 38.560 of this chapter; 
2.  All on-site activities, except those normally performed at the fuel pumps, must be performed within a completely enclosed building; 
3.  Where towing service is to be provided, a parking bay for the towing vehicle must be provided. Vehicles that are either under repair or vehicles that have been repaired may be stored on a temporary basis, not to exceed seven days, and designated parking bays must be provided for each vehicle awaiting repairs. Vehicle storage areas are subject to the same screening requirements as parking lots; 
4.  All structures approved under these standards must be of a design character that is appropriate to the area in which they are to be constructed. Color renderings of buildings must accompany each application and construction must be in conformity thereto. Architectural detailing must be consistent on all four sides of the building; 
5.  Parking space for each service stall in the station must be provided. Pump islands must not be considered as service bays. Standing areas at pump islands and interior circulation areas must not be used as parking areas in calculating required parking spaces; 
6.  No outside storage of, and no sale, lease or rental of trailers, trucks or similar equipment is permitted except as may be specifically allowed in that zone; 
7.  Automotive repair facilities. 
a.  All repairs or painting must be performed within a building; 
b.  No site plan will be approved which exposes unassembled vehicles, auto repair activities or auto parts to any street or residential district; 
c.  Any facility must be designed to contain and minimize noise and odors; and 
d.  All facilities must have a water quality facility (oil/water separator) as part of the water quality design for stormwater runoff, and must conform to section 38.410.080.  
Sec. 38.360.080. - Community center. 
A.  Within residential districts, there must be public street access onto an arterial or collector standard street within 600 feet of the entrance to a community center site. 
B.  Community centers located within residential districts must, when any individual structure exceeds 5,000 square feet in gross floor area or exceeds the district's allowed maximum height, provide a 20 foot landscaped setback between the building and adjacent residential uses. A structure separated from the adjacent residential uses by a parking lot, public street, watercourse, public open space, or similar separation is exempt from the additional setback width requirement. 
C.  Each community center site with more than 40 parking spaces must provide a minimum of two ingress/egress points which comply with section 38.400.090.  
Sec. 38.360.090. - Condominiums. 
A.  Unit ownership act. Condominium developments must comply with all provisions of the Unit Ownership Act, MCA 70-23-101 et seq., and all regulations adopted to implement to Act. 
B.  Condominium association. A condominium association must be established for each condominium development. The developer must prepare bylaws for the condominium association, as well as covenants, conditions and restrictions for the condominium development, in compliance with division 38.220 of this chapter. The bylaws, covenants, conditions and restrictions must be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to the granting of plan approval or approval for condominiumization of existing development. 
C.  Internal circulation in a condominium development must be designed in accordance with division 38.540 of this chapter, and must, when deemed necessary by the city engineer, comply with section 38.400.020. 
D.  Condominiums may be subject to chapter 38, division 380.  
Sec. 38.360.100. - Convenience uses and drive-through/drive-in restaurants. 
A.  In addition to applicable building design standards in division 38.530 of this chapter, the following supplemental architectural guidelines must apply: 
1.  All convenience uses must be designed with an architectural and design character that is appropriate for and compatible with the area; 
2.  Standardized corporate identification themes integrated into the architectural design is considered sign area and is subject to the requirements of division 38.560. Excessive use of such themes may be grounds for denial of the project; 
3.  When located in shopping centers, the architectural character of the building must be integrated with the design theme of the center through the use of the same building materials, shapes and details. The effect of color in creating a design character that is appropriate for and compatible with the area will be considered. All parking, circulation, drive aisles, setbacks and signage must be integrated with the entire design theme of the project; 
4.  The elevation design of the building must provide design character and detailing on all four sides; and 
5.  Screening of drive-through areas may be required to control glare affecting public right-of-way or adjacent properties. 
B.  Noise from drive-through speakers must not be audible from adjacent residential districts.  
Sec. 38.360.110. - Cottage housing subdivisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to achieve the goals and objectives of the land use and housing chapters of Bozeman's growth policy and the goals of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, division 38.380. Cottage housing enables higher density development by allowing smaller lots, smaller home sizes, and clustered home sites, which are subject to design standards. This housing development option encourages more efficient use of land and energy. 
2.  Cottage housing development regulations are designed to: 
a.  Provide opportunities for creative, diverse and high quality infill and greenfield development compatible with existing neighborhoods; 
b.  Support development of diverse housing in accordance with the growth policy; 
c.  Increase the variety of housing types available within the community; 
d.  Support the creation of neighborhoods with a mix of housing opportunities for mixed incomes; and 
e.  Provide opportunities for small, detached cottages within existing neighborhoods. 
B.  Goals. 
1.  Increase housing supply and the choice of housing styles available in the community as encouraged by the growth policy; 
2.  Provide for development of housing that responds to changing demographics and smaller-sized households; 
3.  Support the efficient use of land and higher density infill in developed areas; 
4.  Promote housing affordability and greater choice by encouraging smaller and more diverse home sizes; 
5.  Promote high-quality housing design to minimize impacts of more dense development on adjacent properties; 
6.  Allow flexibility in site and design standards while promoting infill projects compatible with existing single-household developments; 
7.  Ensure cottage housing contributes to the overall character of residential areas; 
8.  Provide for centrally located and functional common open space that fosters a sense of community; 
9.  Provide for semi-private areas around individual cottages to enable diversity in landscape design and foster a sense of ownership; 
10.  Minimize visual impacts of parking areas; and 
11.  Provide opportunities for creative, diverse and high quality developments compatible with existing neighborhoods. 
C.  Affordable housing applicability. The requirements of division 38.380, unless specifically modified in this article, apply to all cottage housing subdivisions regardless of the number of cottages proposed to be included in the development. Notwithstanding the provisions of division 38.380, a cottage housing subdivision must provide at least one lower-priced home, or three moderate-priced homes. A cottage housing subdivision may have more affordable homes than the required minimum. 
D.  Cottage housing subdivisions. 
1.  Cottage housing developments involve the subdivision of a parcel of land, referred to herein as the primary lot, into: a) dependent lots for individual dwellings; and b) a private common area for the common use of the owners of the dependent lots. 
2.  The review procedures for cottage housing subdivisions are as follows: 
a.  For the creation of five or fewer lots, the provisions for approval of a first minor subdivision apply; 
b.  For the creation of six or more lots, the provisions for approval of a major subdivision apply; 
c.  A cottage housing subdivision is exempt from subdivision review pursuant to section 38.240.310 if; 
(1)  The primary lot was previously reviewed as part of a subdivision; 
(2)  All public street, water, sewer, and stormwater infrastructure (excluding individual services to proposed lots and internal main extensions) is installed; and 
(3)  All park requirements applicable to the proposed density of dwellings have been satisfied. 
d.  Cottage housing subdivisions meeting the requirements of section 38.360.110.D.2.c must: 
(1)  Include notice to the public equal to that required for a site plan in Table 38.220.420; and 
(2)  The subdivision application is subject to review for acceptability and adequacy pursuant to section 38.230.090. 
3.  Requirements and restrictions. 
a.  The development as a whole must meet the development standards of this chapter applicable at the time the subdivision application is deemed adequate. 
b.  The primary lot must meet the size, length, width, frontage, and similar development standards of this chapter. 
c.  Homes on dependent lots do not need to meet the lot size, lot coverage, lot configuration, or setback requirements (except watercourse and overlay district) in this chapter except as shown in table 38.360.110.G-1. Private open space for each cottage must be provided on the same lot as the cottage it serves and any structure must be within the boundary of the dependent lot. 
d.  Lot subdivisions and subsequent platting actions, additions or modifications to the structure(s) may not create or increase any nonconformity of the primary lot. 
e.  Notes on the conditions of approval page of the plat must include the restrictions applicable to the dependent lots including but not limited to: 
(1)  The dependent lot is not a buildable lot independent of the primary lot and associated cottage housing development; 
(2)  Additional development of the dependent lots may be limited as a result of the application of development standards applicable to the primary lot; 
(3)  Any and all restrictions that apply to the common open areas; and 
(4)  Permitted cottage square footages. 
f.  A cottage housing subdivision may use the concurrent construction provisions of section 38.270.030.D without the requirement of a planned unit development. 
g.  Reciprocal joint use and maintenance agreements, for each dependent lot within the primary lot, must be executed for access, use and maintenance of common garage or parking areas, common open area and other similar features, and recorded with the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder's Office along with the final plat. 
h.  A cottage housing subdivision must include establishment of a property owner's association which meets the requirements of sections 38.220.310 and 38.220.320. The property owner's association must hold title to and maintain all common areas. 
i.  Separation or use of a dependent lot in a manner contrary to the approved cottage housing subdivision is a material modification of the project and subject to section 38.100.070. 
j.  If a subdivision exemption is used to create a cottage housing subdivision, installation of all required water and sewer mains and services, parking areas, and similar features must be completed and accepted by the city prior to recording of the subdivision exemption; or the developer may enter into an improvements agreement to secure the same work. 
k.  The following modifications require compliance with section 38.100.070: 
(1)  Increasing the number of cottages; 
(2)  Altering the character of the development by relocating common spaces, adding or removing common buildings, or changing the design of more than 20 percent of the cottages; 
(3)  Increasing the floor area in one building by more than ten percent; 
(4)  Changing access points to the primary lot; 
(5)  Moving buildings around on the site; 
(6)  Reducing the area of common open spaces by more than two percent; or 
(7)  Diminishing the effectiveness of perimeter buffers. 
E.  Density standards. 
1.  The following density standards apply to cottage housing subdivisions and replace those listed in sections 38.320.020 and 38.320.030. A "cluster" refers to a group of cottages oriented toward a common open area. 
a.  Up to two cottages may be built for each non-cottage single-household dwelling allowed under the zoning applied to the property. 
b.  Existing single-household dwellings on the primary lot will count towards total units. If the existing dwelling exceeds the maximum allowed gross floor area of a cottage it counts as two cottages in determining maximum allowed density. 
c.  Minimum units per cottage cluster: four. 
d.  Maximum units per cottage cluster: 12. 
e.  Maximum units per cottage housing development: 24. 
f.  Accessory dwelling units are not allowed within a cottage development. 
g.  When cottage housing units meet the definition of affordable housing under division 38.380 the maximum units under (d) and (e) do not apply. Every unit in the proposed development would have to be affordable in order to exceed the maximum. 
2.  Existing dwellings. An existing detached single-household dwelling that is incorporated into a cottage housing subdivision as a residence and which exceeds the standards of this section may remain and will be counted as one or more of the allowed units. However, the extent of the noncompliance may not be increased unless the proposed change is determined by the review authority to be consistent in character, scale and design with the cottage housing development. Repair, maintenance and reconstruction of a nonconforming dwelling are regulated by division 38.280. An existing dwelling may be replaced with cottage units consistent with this section. 
F.  Departures from the design standards in this section. 
1.  An applicant may request departures from the provisions of paragraphs G-I of this section. Departures must be consistent with the purpose, intent and requirements of this section. 
2.  The applicant must describe each requested departure, and document in writing how the departure is consistent with the purpose, intent and requirements of this section. 
3.  A departure must not exceed ten percent of any numeric standard. A departure may not alter procedural requirements. A departure may only apply to the application of standards internal to the primary lot and not to standards applicable to the separation or interaction of cottage housing to an adjacent parcel. 
4.  The review authority may approve a departure after documenting in writing that the departure is consistent with the intent, purpose and requirements of this chapter; and do not threaten the public health, safety, or welfare. 
G.  Design standards. The cottage housing option minimizes the required sizes of side, rear, and front setbacks on dependent lots. As a result, small lots are ultimately shaped by building configuration. Designers should consider how the arrangement of interior space affects exterior massing and how the configuration of building elements responds to adjacent buildings. Design strategies incorporating neighborhood context include considerations of: building height transitions, arrangement of buildings and open space, landscape elements, vehicular drive aisles and pedestrian paths, and architectural details and scaling devices that break down the massing of the development. With reduced setback requirements and small lot areas, providing access to air, light, and ventilation is more challenging than with typical single dwelling designs. Architects and builders must use the following design standards to take full advantage of the unique design opportunities presented to them to create livable environments. 
These design standards: 
1.  Ensure that cottage designs are based on a coherent architectural concept; 
2.  Ensure that the overall sizes of cottages are smaller and cause less visual impact than standard sized single-household dwellings; 
3.  Ensure that cottages contribute positively to the architectural character of the neighborhood; 
4.  Provide flexibility in design and contrast among individual cottages while assuring attention to design features and character; and 
5.  Provide variety in cottage housing developments through a mixture of building sizes and footprints. 
The following table establishes specific performance standards for development of cottages and cottage housing. All cottage development must be evaluated against the standards of this table. 
Table 38.360.130.G-1 
Standard 	Requirement 
Minimum number of cottages with less than 1,000 square feet gross floor area 	25% of total cottages 
Maximum number of cottage exceeding 1,200 square feet gross floor area 	25% of total cottages 
Maximum gross floor area per cottage 	1,500 square feet 
Maximum cottage footprint 	1,000 square feet (includes attached garages) 
Maximum size of 2 nd floor 	100% of gross floor area of 1 st floor 
Minimum floor area per cottage 	Minimum livability standards as defined by Chapter 3 of the International Residential Code 
Minimum common open space per cottage (See subsection H below for more information) 	400 square feet 
Minimum private open space per cottage (See subsection F.10 below for more information) 	200 square feet 
Maximum height for cottages 	25 feet for two stories and 18 feet for single story cottages 
Maximum dormer size 	Dormers greater than 40% of sidewall width in aggregate will be considered a floor 
Setbacks (to exterior property lines of primary lot) 	See 38.320.020 or 38.320.030 as applicable; except that porches and steps may encroach up to five feet into a required front setback 
Maximum height for accessory structures and community buildings 	18 feet 
Minimum distance between detached structures (including accessory structures) 	Seven feet with allowed eave protrusion into the required distance of up to 18 inches 
Lot coverage 	Allowed lot coverage within individual dependent lots - 100% so long as all other standards are met allowed lot coverage within primary lot - As otherwise restricted in this section 
 
6.  Cottage size. Areas within a cottage which do not count toward the gross floor area or footprint calculations: 
a.  Interior spaces with a finished ceiling height of six feet or less, such as in a second floor area under the slope of the roof; 
b.  Unheated storage space located under the ground floor of the cottage; 
c.  Attached unenclosed porches; 
d.  Detached garages; 
e.  Carports; or 
f.  Architectural projections (i.e., bay windows, fireplaces or utility closets) no greater than 12 inches in depth and four feet in width. 
7.  Documentation of approved cottage size. The total approved square footage of a cottage must not be increased from its approved size by more than two percent. A note must be placed on the conditions of approval sheet of the final plat stating this limitation for each dependent lot and noting the approved size of the cottage for that dependent lot. 
8.  Roofs. A gable, hipped, or other sloped roof form is required. Non-sloped roofs may be considered as a departure. Dormers are allowed. 
9.  Orientation of cottages. 
a.  Each cottage must be oriented toward a common open space, and not less than 60 percent of the units must abut the common open space; 
b.  Dependent lots in a cottage housing development are not required to abut a public street. Lots not abutting a public street must provide legal and physical access from a public street to the dependent lot.; 
c.  Each cottage abutting a public street (not including alleys) must have a secondary entrance, porch, bay window, or other architectural enhancement oriented to the public street. 
d.  Cottages must be arranged around the common open space. The cottage's main entries may be either off the common open space or from the public street. 
10.  Private open space. The private open space required in Table 38.360.110.G-1 must be provided contiguous to each cottage and be contained within the boundary of the dependent lot for the exclusive use of the cottage residents. Orientation of private open spaces toward the common open space is required unless applicant demonstrates that an alternative location provides a superior outcome for both the individual cottage and cottage housing subdivision. The area of an unenclosed porch may be included in the required private open space. Private open space must have no dimension less than ten feet. 
11.  Basements. Cottages may have basements. In areas where groundwater is determined to be at a depth of less than nine feet no basement is allowed. 
12.  Cottages located facing a public street. Cottages located facing a public street must provide: 
a.  A covered entry feature (with a minimum dimension of six feet by six feet) visible from the street; 
b.  At least two architectural details visible from the street, such as: 
(1)  Decorative lighting; 
(2)  Decorative trim; 
(3)  Special door details; 
(4)  Trellis or decorative building element; 
(5)  Bay window; or 
(6)  Alternative design treatments, which may be considered by the review authority on a case-by-case basis. 
13.  Character and diversity. Cottages and accessory buildings within a cluster must be designed within the same family of architectural styles. 
a.  Examples of unifying architectural elements include: 
(1)  Similar building/roof form and pitch; 
(2)  Similar siding materials; 
(3)  Similar porch detailing; and 
(4)  Similar window trim. 
b.  Variety in building and site design. Cottage housing developments must avoid the repetitive use of the same combination of building size, styles, features, and site design elements within an entire cottage housing subdivision and between adjacent dwellings. Dwellings with the same combination of features and treatments may not be located adjacent to each other. 
c.  Porches. Porches must create a visual and physical connectivity to the common open space and to other cottages. Cottage porches must: 
(1)  Be unenclosed, covered; 
(2)  Surround or enclose the primary entrance to the cottage; 
(3)  Be oriented toward a common open space or a public street; and 
(4)  Have at least 80 square feet in area with no horizontal dimension shorter than six feet. 
d.  Façade transparency. Transparent windows and/or doors are required on the façades of cottages facing a street and common open space. The area of the windows and doors must be at least ten percent of the area of the façade on which they are located. 
14.  Fence design standards. The standards of this paragraph are in addition to the standards of section 38.350.060. 
a.  Fencing and screening. The intent of internal decorative fencing and screening is to delineate private yards and to screen parking structures, community assets and cottage walls. A cottage housing development must internally be an open community sharing common areas; 
b.  Decorative fencing may be used for delineating private yards; 
c.  Fencing or shrubbery may be used to screen parking areas, community assets, and cottage walls; 
d.  Dependent lot fencing and shrubbery may not exceed 36 inches in height, except directly adjacent to a parking area. 
H.  Community assets. 
1.  Common open space. Setbacks and common areas serve a dual function, and therefore deserve particular attention. They act both as habitable outdoor space for owners and as shared areas within the proposed development and the neighborhood. The setback is a visual amenity to the development, neighborhood, and passers-by. Additionally, it serves as a semi-transparent bridge between the private interior of the home and common areas. Landscaping should be visually interesting, sustainable, and relatively easy to maintain. The minimum common open space requirements set forth in this section are intended to provide a sense of openness, visual relief, and community. Common open spaces provide many of the functions of required rear and front setbacks in sections 38.320.020 and 38.320.030. Common open space must provide a centrally located, focal area for the cottage housing subdivision. 
a.  The total common open space must be at least 1,600 square feet, regardless of the number of units in the cluster; 
b.  The required common open space may be divided into no more than two separate areas per cluster; 
c.  To be included as part of the common open space requirement, a common area must have minimum dimensions of 20 feet on all sides; 
d.  At least two sides of each common open space must have cottages along the perimeter; 
e.  Common open space must comply with the term's definition in section 38.700.040. However, the building footprints of community buildings, excluding garages, are counted towards the common open space requirements. 
f.  Landscaping requirements: 
(1)  All common open spaces must have landscaping as defined in section 38.700.110 except those portions developed for play structures, common structures, gardens or similar uses. 
(2)  All cottage housing developments must be designed to have a minimum of 160 square feet of tree canopy cover per dwelling at maturity of the species selected for the landscaping. 
(3)  The provisions of section 38.550.060 do not apply to cottage housing subdivisions. 
2.  Community buildings. 
a.  Community buildings are permitted in cottage housing developments. 
b.  Community buildings must be clearly incidental in use and size to cottages. 
c.  Design must be similar to and compatible with the design of the cottages. 
d.  Other shared facilities could include tool sheds, gazebos, workshops, or similar common elements. 
3.  Storage. 
a.  Storage closets for each cottage may be included as part of community buildings or added to garages. 
b.  Storage for gardening supplies or similar shared items may be included as part of a community building. 
I.  Access and parking. 
1.  Purpose. The intent of these access and parking standards is to minimize the visual impact of vehicles and parking areas for residents of the cottage housing development and adjacent properties and to provide for adequate off-street parking for cottage housing. 
2.  Off-street parking. 
a.  No off-street parking space is required to be enclosed. 
b.  Garages may not exceed 125 percent of the minimum width or area required by Table 38.540.020 for a single vehicle. 
c.  Guest parking may be clustered with resident parking. Guest parking must be clearly identified as reserved for visitors. 
d.  At least one stall of each parking type must meet the accessibility standards of the building code. 
e.  Enclosed garages may not be located on the façade of the cottage with the primary entrance. Carports or unenclosed parking adjacent to a cottage may be on the façade with the primary entrance. 
3.  Parking design. The intent of these parking design standards is to create unobtrusive parking, by screening parking structures and spaces from surrounding properties, including screening by architectural design and/or vegetation, and by minimizing the number of contiguous parking spaces. 
a.  Shared detached garage structures may not exceed four garage doors per building and a total footprint of 1,200 square feet. 
b.  Parking must be separated from the common open space, adjacent properties, and public streets by landscaping and/or architectural screening. Solid board fencing is not allowed as an architectural screen. Exception: One parking structure may be adjacent to the common open area, if the garage includes architectural features to make it look consistent with the cottages and community buildings. 
c.  Parking, including garages, must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a public street. 
d.  The parking layout must be designed to minimize walking distance to cottages. 
e.  A sloped roof is required for all parking structures. 
f.  The design of garages and carports, including roof lines, must be similar to and compatible with that of the cottages within the cottage housing development. 
g.  Parking may be located between or adjacent to cottages or common garages, if it is located toward the rear of the structure and is served by an alley or driveway. 
h.  Parking stalls, circulation areas, and related spaces must comply with division 38.540. If there is a conflict between division 38.540 and this paragraph, the provisions of this paragraph apply. 
4.  Walkways. 
a.  A system of interior paved walkways must connect all cottages with each other, the parking area, and the sidewalks abutting any public streets bordering the cottage housing development. 
b.  Interior walkways must be a minimum of five feet and a maximum of eight feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 1994 , §§ 5, 6, 3-31-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.120. - Essential services. 
A.  In recognition of Section 69-4-201, MCA, city ordinances cannot conflict with the National Electric Safety Code (NESC). 
B.  In recognition of Section 69-3-102, MCA, vesting control over fees, charges, and tariffs for public utilities in the public service commission, the city does not determine the costs charged to customers for services. 
C.  Essential services of Types I, II, or III operable prior to September 3, 1991, must be considered to have developed under an approved plan, and must be reviewed under section 38.230.160. Reuse, change in use or further development of sites developed prior to September 10, 2014 (Ordinance No. 1893).  
Sec. 38.360.130. - Group living. 
A.  Applicability. All group living uses (as defined in section 38.700.080) except for health care facilities and community residential facilities with eight or fewer residents are subject to the standards of this section. 
B.  Density. 
1.  The density of residents in a group living use is limited to generally approximate and correspond with the density limits that apply to other types of housing in residential zoning districts. Limiting density addresses areas of legitimate public concern and the purposes of zoning as established by the state legislature and adopted locally in section 38.100.040. 
2.  For the purpose of these regulations, "residents" include all people living at the site, including children; except that people who provide support services, building maintenance, care, and supervision, are not considered residents. 
3.  Group living use requires the following area of land within the site for each resident. 
District Name 	Minimum Area Required per Resident in Square Feet 
REMU, R-4, and R-O 	602 
RS and R-1 	1,000 
R-2, R-3, R-5, RMH 	750 
 
3.  C. On-site service and facilities. In any R district other than REMU, on-site services and facilities may be provided only to residents of the group living use. 
D.  Group living is not a substitute for a hotel, motel, or other transitory service facility. Therefore, duration of terms of occupancy for residents is 30 days or greater. 
E.  On-site open space for group living uses is required per section 38.520.060. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 9, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.360.135. - Transitional and emergency housing. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of transitional and emergency housing and related services to ensure compatibility of uses and to promote public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to all transitional and emergency housing and related services as defined in section 38.700.180. 
C.  Required standards. All applicable development standards of this chapter apply unless noted in this subsection C. In addition, the following standards must be met in order for a special use permit to be granted for the use: 
1.  Transitional and emergency housing may be provided in: 
a.  A shared structure on any level where residential use is allowed; 
b.  A mixed-use structure on any level where residential use is allowed; 
c.  Detached ground-level units only if the units include individual bathrooms. 
2.  The structure must be on a permanent foundation. 
3.  The tract or parcel of land on which the use is proposed must be under single ownership, or the application for the use must be filed jointly by all of the owners of the property to be included in the development. 
4.  On-site facilities and related services are provided only for the residents of the transitional and emergency housing unless the provision of such services to non-residents is permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
5.  This use is exempt from parkland dedication requirements. Open-space requirements per section 38.520.060 apply. 
6.  A management plan from the applicant addressing the following factors: 
a.  Provision for continuous on-site management from an employee or volunteer during all hours of operation. 
b.  Staff training. 
c.  Intake screening of clients to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility. 
d.  Client code of conduct. 
e.  Provision of on-site storage for clients' belongings. 
f.  Security measures to be adopted. 
D.  Additional criteria. The review authority may, in its sole discretion, apply additional criteria the review authority deems necessary to mitigate impact(s) of the proposed use as a condition of approving a special use permit, including but not limited to: 
1.  The site where such use is proposed is within ¼ mile of a sheltered public transit stop. 
2.  Limitation on the maximum occupancy and/or number of beds provided by the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 3, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.140. - Home-based businesses. 
A.  Generally. A home-based business is a use that is considered accessory to a dwelling unit. Buildings combining live/work arrangements located in districts where both the residential and non-residential uses to be combined are authorized are not subject to the requirements of this section. 
B.  Home-based business as accessory use. 
1.  The use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and must not change the character of the dwelling or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a part. The home-based business must not be conducted in an accessory structure, and must comply with the standards of subsection C of this section. 
2.  Purpose. It is in the intent of this section to eliminate as accessory home-based businesses for all uses except those that conform to the standards set forth in this section. In general, an accessory home-based business is a use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence with the exception of permitted signage as allowed by division 38.560 of this chapter. The standards for home-based businesses included in this section are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood. A clearly accessory or incidental status in relation to the residential use of the main building is the criteria for determining whether a proposed accessory use qualifies as an of-right home-based business. 
3.  Necessary conditions for accessory use. Accessory home-based businesses are permitted accessory uses in residential districts only so long as all the following conditions are observed: 
a.  Such home-based business must be conducted by resident occupants in their residence with not more than one on-premises halftime nonresident employee; 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the gross area of all structures may be used for such purpose; 
c.  No use may require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure; 
d.  No home-based business may cause an increase in the use of any one or more utilities (water, sewer, garbage, etc.) so that the combined total use for dwelling and home-based business purposes exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood; 
e.  There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home-based business; 
f.  The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more than one additional vehicle at a time. Depending on the individual circumstances of each application, an additional off-street parking space may be required; and 
g.  No use must create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential occupancy in the district in question under normal circumstances where no home-based business exists. 
4.  Notice of intent to operate an accessory home-based business. Any individual applying for a business license, with the intent of operating the business from such person's home, must acknowledge by signature such person's understanding of the requirements and conditions of this chapter. 
C.  Home-based business as special use. 
1.  Purpose. The use must be secondary to the use of the lot for residential purposes and must not be incompatible with the character of the zoning district thereof or adversely affect the principal uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a part. When a home-based business has been established through the SUP process, it means that the owner, lessee or other persons who have a legal right to the use of the dwelling also have the right to conduct the home-based business whether in the principal or an accessory structure. The home-based business must comply with the standards of subsection C.3 of this section. 
2.  Special use. It is the intent of this section to provide, through the special use process established in division 38.230 of this chapter, opportunities for home-based businesses which are more intensive in nature than those which would be allowed as an accessory use. In general, a home-based business approved through the special use process is an accessory use which complies with the requirements of this chapter and is subordinate to the primary use of the particular lot for residential purposes. The standards for home-based businesses included in this section are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood. A secondary, but not incidental, status in relation to the residential use of the main building is the criteria for determining whether a proposed use may, under certain circumstances, qualify as a home-based business which may be approved by the special use process. Special uses start from the presumption that they are incompatible with the zoning district but may under specific and limited conditions become compatible. Unless such conditions are found, there is no right to the practice of a home-based business which does not comply with the terms of an accessory home-based business as listed in this section. 
3.  Necessary conditions for special use. Home-based businesses permitted through the special use permit process are allowed in residential districts only so long as all the following conditions are observed: 
a.  Such home-based business must be conducted by resident occupants with not more than one on-premises halftime nonresident employee; 
b.  No more than 30 percent of the gross area of all structures may be used for such purpose; 
c.  No use may require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure beyond that allowed in a residential use; 
d.  No home based business may cause an increase in the use of any one or more utilities operated by the city so that the combined total use for dwelling and home-based business purposes exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood; 
e.  There may be no outside storage of any kind related to the home-based business; 
f.  No use may create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that allowed by this chapter; 
g.  Home-based businesses by special use permit may only be allowed on lots occupied by single-household detached dwellings; 
h.  Such special use must be subject to all conditions set forth in this chapter, except the provisions of section 38.550.060, Landscape Performance Standards; and 
i.  All permits required by the city, including, but not limited to, building permits and business licenses, must be received prior to establishing the home-based business. 
4.  Home-based business allowed through a special use permit. Any individual seeking to operate a home-based business greater in scope than that allowed by an accessory home-based business, must make application for a special use permit under the terms of division 38.230 of this chapter. The community development director must determine if a home-based business requires a special use permit. 
D.  Complaints. Complaints by citizens of the city may be cause for termination of the home-based business. Final administrative actions in relation to complaints are subject to appeal per article 2 of this chapter. 
E.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted as home-based businesses: adult businesses; auto repair, minor or major; carpentry work; dance instruction; dental offices; medical offices; medical marijuana not meeting the exclusion in section 38.360.170.A.3; mobile oil and lube services; painting of vehicles, trailers or boats; private schools with organized classes; radio or television repair; and upholstering. 
F.  Appeal to city commission. Any person may appeal the community development director's action relating to a home-based business as provided for by article 2 of this chapter. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 10, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.150. - Large-scale retail, size limitations and design and site development guidelines and requirements. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to establish general development standards for large scale retail developments. These standards are intended and designed to ensure compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight, deterioration and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents living within the city. 
2.  These standards are also intended to supplement applicable project design standards of article 5 of this chapter and be used as guidelines for evaluating the quality and design of proposed large scale retail developments. The particulars of any large scale retail development will be evaluated against their respective standards contained in this division 38.360. It is expected that the quality and design of large scale retail developments, while not necessarily complying with the exact standards of this division, will meet or exceed the intent behind these standards. 
3.  Applicability. All uses listed in this division 38.360 must comply with the specific standards described for each use, in addition to all other applicable standards which may apply. 
B.  Design and site development guidelines for certain retail developments. 
1.  Retail development consisting of a single-tenant building greater than 40,000 square feet must comply with the design and site development criteria and development standards contained in subsections B.2 and 3 of this section. These guidelines must be applied as part of the review and approval process for use permits and detailed applications. If there is any conflict between the project design standards in article 5 of this chapter and the guidelines herein, the more restrictive provision must apply. The guidelines in this section must not be applied to any development or portion of a development that is covered by an approved use permit as of March 21, 2003, unless modifications to the use permit are proposed by the applicant. 
2.  Design criteria and development standards. In addition to all other applicable review procedures and design criteria, all development governed by this section must exceed the site, building, and landscaping design standards of divisions 38.520—38.530 and 38.550, regardless of location or zoning district. Said design standards must be exceeded through design practices such as additional architectural detailing, exceptional landscape design, improved public spaces, use of renewable energy and/or recycled construction materials, and provisions for alternative modes of transportation. The review authority must determine whether established design standards have been exceeded based on a recommendation from the design review board. 
3.  Adaptability for reuse/compartmentalization. The building design must include specific elements for adaptation for multi-tenant reuse. Such elements may include but are not limited to compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, heating, ventilation and air conditioning. The building design must also allow for: 
a.  The interior subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies; 
b.  Façades that readily adapt to multiple entrances and adapt to entrances on all but one side of the building; 
c.  Parking lot schemes that are shared by establishments or are linked by safe and functional pedestrian connections; 
d.  Landscaping schemes that complement the multiple entrance design; and 
e.  Other elements of design which facilitate the multi-tenant reuse of the building and site. 
4.  Appeals. Appeals may be taken as provided for in division 38.250 of this chapter. 
C.  Additional criteria and site development guidelines for certain retail developments. 
1.  Applications for large scale retail development must include a renewal plan that will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with the sound needs of the municipality as a whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure in the event of closure or relocation by the original occupant. Such plan will be approved if the review authority finds that: 
a.  The plan conforms to the city's growth policy and the requirements of this chapter or parts thereof for the municipality as a whole; 
b.  A sound and adequate plan exists for said redevelopment; 
c.  The plan affords maximum opportunity for rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure by both private enterprise and the city; and 
d.  The renewal plan provides a maintenance plan for normal repairs and upkeep of property, including but not limited to building, parking lot and surfacing, landscaping, signage and elimination of legible impressions, images, or remnants of signs remaining on a building or sign surface after the use for which the sign was permitted ceases to operate. 
2.  The city may enter into an agreement with the owner of the real property and undertake activities, including the acquisition, removal or demolition of structures, improvements or personal property located on the real property, to prepare the property for redevelopment. A development agreement entered into in accordance with this section must contain provisions obligating the owner to redevelop the real property for a specified use consistent with the provisions of this chapter and offering recourse to the city if the redevelopment is not completed as determined by the city.  
Sec. 38.360.160. - Manufactured homes on individual lots. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to allow manufactured homes, as defined in section 38.700.120 of this chapter, in specified zoning districts in which similar single-household dwellings constructed on the site are permitted subject to requirements and procedures set forth herein to ensure acceptable similarity in exterior appearances between such manufactured homes and dwellings that have been or might be constructed under these and other regulations on adjacent lots in the same district or area. It is the intent of this section to permit only those manufactured homes certified as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
B.  Application, material to be supplied. One copy of the application for the proposed manufactured home on the individual building lot must be submitted to the building department in conjunction with the application for a building permit for the building foundation. The application must include all information deemed necessary by the community development director to make determinations as to conformity with subsection C of this section, and it must include a minimum of color photographs of all sides of the manufactured home; the nearest existing residences or other grounds or buildings on each side of the proposed site; existing residences or grounds fronting upon the same street as the proposed site and opposite thereto, and those within 150 feet of each corner of the proposed site. As a minimum requirement, it must also include a description of siding and roofing material in sufficient detail as to make possible determination as to its appearance and durability. 
C.  Standards for determination of acceptable similarity in exterior appearance and construction. The following standards must be used in determinations of acceptable similarity in appearance and construction between manufactured homes with permanent foundations and residences constructed near the site to ensure that such manufactured homes will be compatible in appearance with site built housing that has been or may be constructed in adjacent or nearby locations: 
1.  The roofing material must be shake, tile, composition shingle, or other materials commonly found on conventionally built homes in the surrounding areas. 
2.  The exterior covering material must be similar or closely compatible to that found on conventionally built residential structures in the surrounding area. Reflection from such exterior must not be greater than from siding coated with clean, white, glossy, exterior enamel. 
3.  The exterior covering material must extend below the top of the foundation. 
4.  A solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation must be used. 
5.  The exterior covering and roofing materials of additions or accessory buildings must be compatible with the materials on the manufactured home. 
6.  The manufactured home must be located on the lot so that the home presents a primary entrance to the principal street frontage. Such primary entrance may be established by the presence of porches, overhanging gables, and similar architectural features consistent with the character of site built homes in the near vicinity. 
7.  Manufactured homes may be approved for location on individual building lots only if they have been certified as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  
Sec. 38.360.170. - Medical marijuana. 
A.  Any activity involving medical marijuana must meet all requirements of state law including, but not limited to, the standards of title 50, chapter 46, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 50-46-101 et seq.), and limits on possession, clean air, etc., and any applicable administrative rules established by the state. Should such rules or laws change, any medical marijuana facility must immediately begin any required process to come into compliance with the new rules. This includes submittal for review of applications to the city as they may relate to zoning, business licensing, or other municipal programs. Compliance with city zoning regulations does not shield any person, corporation, or other legal entity from the requirements of, or enforcement by, other governing entities, or from civil liabilities. 
1.  Unless specifically exempted, any person or existing or proposed entity intending to conduct activities which meet the definitions of "agriculture," "manufacturing," "office" or "retail" as established in division 38.700 of this chapter which is for the purpose of growing, processing, distribution, and/or any other activity related to medical marijuana must, in addition to this section, comply with all other provisions of this Code, and must not be located within 400 linear feet of the exterior property line of: 
a.  All schools or facilities, where students are regularly present, owned or operated by Bozeman School District 7 whether located inside or outside the city limits; or 
b.  All private schools, not including home schools, where students are regularly present, whether located inside or outside the city limits, which provide instruction in the class range from kindergarten to 12th grade and which are either subject to MCA 20-5-109, or listed as a kindergarten provider by the county superintendent of schools. 
c.  For purposes of this section, specified distances will be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures from the property line of a school as stated in subsections 1.a and b of this section, regardless of whether those schools are located within the jurisdictional limits of the city, to the property line of the business providing medical marijuana. 
2.  Any activities meeting the definitions of "agriculture," "manufacturing," "office" or "retail" as established in article 7 of this chapter which is for the purpose of growing, processing, distribution, and/or any other activity related to medical marijuana may not be located in the R-4 and R-5 districts, or on properties adjacent to Main Street within the core area of the B-3 district as defined in section 38.300.110.D. 
3.  The requirements of subsections 1 and 2 of this section do not apply to: 
a.  An individual registered qualifying patient who possesses marijuana in accordance with the limits and requirements of title 50, chapter 46, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 50-46-101 et seq.) solely for that qualifying patient's own use; or 
b.  To a caregiver providing care to not more than two qualifying patients who reside within the same dwelling as the caregiver. The caregiver and qualifying patients must maintain appropriate state agency qualification at all times when medical marijuana is present. 
4.  Establishing a medical marijuana facility may result in a change in the designation of building code occupancy type. A change in use or occupancy type may require physical modifications to the structure, which must be approved by the building division prior to any construction as required by section 38.200.100. 
5.  Air discharge control. Any medical marijuana growing or processing operation that contains 24 or more marijuana plants at any one time must provide a forced air vent discharge point that is: 
a.  Located no closer than 30 feet from an adjacent property line or a residence; or 
b.  Provides a mechanical filtration system to control discharges of particulates and odors. The ventilation filtration system must be designed by a mechanical engineer licensed to practice in the state such that odors and particulates may not be detected by unaided human observation at the property boundary, and noise produced by the system must be controlled and minimized. 
6.  Any person making application for a zoning approval for a medical marijuana business must provide evidence of DPHHS approval as a caregiver at the time of application and must maintain such DPHHS approval at all times. Failure to maintain approval immediately suspends zoning approval to operate a medical marijuana business in the city. 
7.  These regulations are for review of applications to the city and do not restrict property owners' from establishing more stringent standards for their properties. 
(Ord. No. 1994 , § 7, 3-31-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.180. - Mini warehouses. 
A.  Minimum site size must be one acre. 
B.  On-site circulation, drives and parking. 
1.  Each mini warehouse site must provide a minimum of two exits; 
2.  All one-way drive aisles must provide for one ten-foot parking lane and one 12-foot travel lane. Traffic direction and parking must be designated by signing or painting; 
3.  All two-way drive aisles must provide for one ten-foot parking lane and two ten-foot travel lanes; and 
4.  The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway does not serve storage cubicles. 
 
Figure 38.360.180. 
Mini warehouses. 
  
Sec. 38.360.190. - Outdoor sales and display. 
A.  Merchandise which is offered for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user may be displayed beyond the confines of a building in any commercial district, but the area occupied by such outdoor display must not constitute a greater number of square feet than ten percent of the ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as automobiles and garden supplies. In such cases, the maximum area for outdoor sales and display must not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area. 
B.  Outdoor sales and display areas must not be located in any required setback and are also subject to section 38.320.110. 
 
Figure 38.360.190. 
Outdoor sales and display. 
  
Sec. 38.360.200. - Recreational vehicle park and overnight campground. 
A.  Recreational vehicle parks and overnight campgrounds are included in the state classification of land subdivisions by rent or lease. Therefore, applicants for such developments must apply for and be reviewed under both site plan and subdivision procedures unless exempted by section 38.240.200. 
1.  Recreational vehicle parks must be screened from view of any adjacent residential development. 
2.  Internal circulation roads must be paved with a concrete or asphaltic concrete surface. 
3.  Individual recreational vehicle parking pads must be plainly marked and maintained with a dust free surface. 
4.  Individual recreational vehicle parking pads must be set back at least 30 feet from the perimeter of the park and 30 feet from any public street right-of-way. 
5.  Approved trash disposal, bathroom and laundry facilities, including facilities for the handicapped, must be provided for use of overnight campers. 
6.  Recreational vehicle spaces must be separated by no less than 15 feet and must be no less than 1,500 square feet in area. 
 
Figure 38.360.200. 
Recreational vehicle park and overnight campground. 
  
Sec. 38.360.210. - Single, two, three, and four-household dwellings. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  To enhance the character of the street. 
2.  To maintain "eyes on the street" for safety to pedestrians and to create a more welcoming and interesting streetscape. 
3.  To de-emphasize garages and drive aisles as major visual elements along the street. 
4.  To provide usable setback space for residents. 
B.  Entries. 
1.  Clear and obvious pedestrian access between the sidewalk and a building entry that faces the street is required for new dwellings (the driveway may be used to help meet this requirement). 
2.  All new dwellings must provide a covered pedestrian entry with minimum weather protection of three feet by three feet. 
C.  Residential garages. 
1.  Where lots abut an alley, it may be necessary to take access from alley to meet another standard in the municipal code. 
2.  See section 38.350.070 for garage location and design standards. 
D.  Driveway access standards. See section 38.400.090. 
E.  Minimum useable open space for alley-loaded lots. All new alley-loaded dwelling units must provide a contiguous open space within the side or rear yard with a minimum dimension of 15 feet on all sides. The open space(s) must be equivalent to ten percent (minimum) of the lot size (excluding area within an adjacent alley or right-of-way). For example, a 6,000 square foot lot would require a contiguous open space of at least 600 square feet, or 20 feet by 30 feet in area. Drive aisles do not count in the calculations for usable open space. Additions must not create or increase any nonconformity with this standard. 
 
Figure 38.360.210.E. 
Examples of how to meet open space requirements for alley-loaded lots. 
 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 11, 4-18-2018; Ord. No. 2014 , § 9, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.360.220. - Stable, commercial. 
A.  The minimum property size must be ten acres. 
B.  Structures or facilities used for stabling, storing, showing or training of animals must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent privately owned property. Dwelling units, accessory structures incidental to dwelling units and irrigated pasturage may occur within the 100-foot setback area, subject to the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
C.  There must be at least a 20-foot setback adjacent to any street. 
D.  Shows or other activities which would generate more traffic than is normal to a residential area are prohibited, unless the proposed site has direct access from an arterial street as set forth in the city growth policy. Permission for such shows and activities must be obtained from the city. Notification must be provided in a letter that explains the nature and duration of the activity, and accommodations for spectators, traffic control and additional parking for cars and trailers. This letter must be submitted to the community development department at least one month prior to the date of the show or activity. 
E.  All pasture and animal storage areas must be enclosed with fences or walls of a minimum of four feet six inches in height. The design of these enclosures must be shown on drawings submitted with the conditional use permit application. 
F.  All laws applicable to public health and appropriate care of animals must be complied with for the entire period of operation of the stable. 
G.  All activity and pasture areas that are not grassed must be treated for dust control. 
H.  Adequate parking for daily activities must be shown on the site plan and improved to city parking standards. Additional parking must be provided for shows or other special events. Amounts and required improvements to temporary parking must be determined through a special temporary use permit if such temporary parking was not shown and approved through the original approval. 
 
Figure 38.360.220. 
Stable, commercial. 
  
Sec. 38.360.230. - Tennis and racquet club. 
A.  The use will be compatible with any adjacent neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the same due to: 
1.  Increased automobile traffic; 
2.  Noise generated from within the site. 
B.  Perimeter fencing of the site may be required. Fencing of outdoor courts must not exceed 16 feet in height, and fencing may be required to be opaque by the review authority. 
C.  When the club is located within a residential zoning district, shows, tournaments or other activity which would generate more traffic than is normal to a residential area are prohibited, unless access is provided from an arterial street as set forth in the city's long range transportation plan. If access is not provided from an arterial street, permission for such shows and activities must be obtained from the city through the special temporary use process. 
D.  There must be a landscaped 50-foot buffer strip adjacent to any residential zoning district, or as otherwise determined by the ADR or DRB. 
E.  Hours of operation may be controlled by the review authority.  
Sec. 38.360.240. - Townhouse and rowhouse dwellings. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  To enhance the character of the street. 
2.  To maintain "eyes on the street" for safety to pedestrians and to create a more welcoming and interesting streetscape. 
3.  To de-emphasize garages and drive aisles as major visual elements along the street. 
4.  To provide usable open space for residents. 
5.  To reduce the apparent bulk and scale of large townhouse/rowhouse buildings. 
6.  To promote architectural variety that adds visual interest to the neighborhood. 
B.  Parking and garage access. 
1.  Setbacks. See division 38.320 for minimum building and garage setbacks for the applicable district. 
2.  For buildings with less than five attached units, see section 38.350.070 for parking and garage standards. 
3.  Buildings with five or more attached units are subject to the landscaped block frontage standards as set forth in section 38.510.030.C. This includes standards for entrances, façade transparency, weather protection, parking, landscaping, and sidewalk widths. 
4.  Individual garages facing the street are not allowed in the B-3 district when an alley is adjacent to the property. 
5.  See section 38.400.090.C. for driveway standards. 
C.  For rowhouses where the primary pedestrian access to the dwelling is from an alley or private internal vehicular access, buildings must emphasize individual pedestrian entrances over individual garages by using both of the following measures: 
1.  Enhance entries with a trellis, small porch, or other architectural feature that provides cover for a person entering the unit and a transitional space between outside and inside the dwelling. 
2.  Provide a planted area in front of each pedestrian entry of at least 20 square feet in area, with no dimension less than four feet. 
Alternative designs will be considered, provided they meet the intent of the standards. 
 
Figure 38.360.240.C. 
Good and bad examples of garage/entry configurations. The left example features a landscaped area and a trellis to highlight the entry. In the middle image, the balconies and landscaped areas deemphasize the garage. In the right image, the lack of landscaping near the entries would not be allowed (where this is the primary pedestrian entry to the unit). 
 
D.  Internal drive aisle standards. 
1.  Must meet minimum widths of any city adopted International Fire Code. 
2.  Minimum building separation along uncovered internal drive aisles must be 24 feet. The purpose is to provide adequate vehicular turning radius, allow for landscaping elements on at least one side, and to provide adequate light and air on both sides of the dwelling units and drive aisles, which often function as usable open space for residents. 
3.  Upper level building projections over drive aisles are limited to three feet, and must comply with provisions in subsection D.2 of this section. 
E.  Usable open space. Townhouse and rowhouse dwellings must provide open space at least equal to ten percent of the building living space, not counting automobile storage. The required open space may be provided by one or more of the following ways: 
1.  Usable private open space directly adjacent and accessible to dwelling units. Such space must have minimum dimensions of at least 12 feet on all sides and be configured to accommodate human activity such as outdoor eating, gardening, toddler play, etc. Front setbacks may be used to meet this standard, provided they are defined with a fence meeting the standards of section 38.350.060. 
2.  Balconies, roof decks and/or front porches. 
 
Figure 38.360.240.E.2.a. 
Usable open space examples for townhouses/rowhouses. 
 
 
Figure 38.360.240.E.2.b. 
Usable open space examples for townhouses/rowhouses. 
 
F.  Building design. 
1.  Townhouse/rowhouse articulation. Townhouse and rowhouse buildings must comply with residential building articulation standards as set forth in section 38.530.040.C except that the articulation intervals must be no wider than the width of units in the building. Thus, if individual units are 15 feet wide, the building must include at least three articulation features for all façades facing a street, common or other shared open space, and common parking areas at intervals no greater than 15 feet. 
2.  Repetition with variety. [see figures 38.360.240.F.1 and 2] Townhouse and rowhouse developments must employ one or more of the following "repetition with variety" guidelines: 
a.  Reversing the elevation of two out of four dwellings. 
b.  Providing different building elevations by changing the roofline, articulation, windows, and/or building modulation patterns. 
c.  Adding a different dwelling design or different scale of the same design, such as adding a one-story version of the basic dwelling design where two-stories are typical (or a two-story design where three stories are typical). 
d.  Other design treatments that add variety or provide special visual interest. While the variable use of color on buildings can be effective in reducing the perceived scale of the building and adding visual interest, color changes alone are not sufficient to meet the intent of the standards. 
 
Figure 38.360.240.F.1. 
Acceptable townhouse configuration employing the repetition with variety concept. 
 
 
Figure 38.360.240.F.2. 
Acceptable townhouse/rowhouse buildings integrating the "repetition with variety" guidelines. The internal units in the left image each have distinct, but identical windows and roof forms. The outside unit is differentiated through the use of building materials, window design, unit size, and façade detailing. The internal and external units in the right example include reverse elevations. 
 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 12, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.250. - Short term rentals. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of short term rentals in certain zoning districts within the city in order to preserve neighborhood character while encouraging economic activity and diversity, and to promote public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this article apply only to short term rentals as defined herein. 
2.  This article does not apply to any rental of a dwelling unit which is governed and defined by The Montana Residential Landlord and Tenant Act of 1977 (Landlord Tenant Act). This article applies only to transient occupancy of a short term rental as defined herein. 
3.  A lower-priced or moderate-priced home subject to and defined by chapter 38, article 380, or a dwelling that received financial support from the city, including but not limited to down payment assistance, impact fee payment, or other financial subsidy, may not be used as a short term rental until such time as the lien instrument against the property in favor of the city securing the amount of such subsidy has been released and the release recorded with the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder's Office. 
C.  Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
1.  Hosting platform means a person or entity that provides a means through which an owner may advertise and offer for rent a short term rental to the general public. 
2.  Owner includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, or lessee with exclusive possession under a valid long-term lease or rental agreement. 
3.  Owner-occupied means the owner occupies the dwelling as his or her principal residence for more than 50 percent of the calendar year. 
4.  Operation of or operating a short term rental means the short term rental has been rented by or on behalf of the owner to the general public for compensation for transient occupancy. "Operation of" or "operating" a short term rental does not include mere advertisement of or offering to rent short term rental(s). 
5.  Responsible person means the person responsible for addressing all maintenance, nuisance, and safety concerns related to a short term rental. 
6.  Short term rental is defined in article 7 of this chapter. 
7.  Transient occupancy of a short term rental means occupancy which has the following characteristics: 
a.  The period of occupancy is less than 28 consecutive days, and 
b.  The renter has a principal residence other than the short term rental, and 
c.  The short term rental is furnished with personal property necessary to make the unit ready for immediate occupancy by the renter. 
D.  Short term rental classifications. Short terms rentals are classified as: 
1.  Type-1: A short term rental of one or more bedrooms in an owner-occupied dwelling while the owner is occupying the same dwelling unit for the entire rental period. 
2.  Type-2: 
a.  A short term rental of an owner-occupied dwelling if the owner is not occupying the dwelling during the entire rental period. 
b.  A short term rental of a permitted accessory dwelling unit (ADU) whether or not the ADU's owner is present in the primary dwelling unit during the rental period. 
c.  A short term rental of one dwelling unit within a duplex whether or not the duplex's owner is present in the duplex's other dwelling unit during the rental period. 
3.  Type-3: A short term rental that is not owner-occupied. 
E.  Where allowed. An owner may operate a short term rental in all zoning districts where such use is authorized in Chapter 38, articles 8-11 and 14 subject to the requirements of this article. 
F.  Compliance with laws. 
1.  In addition to the provisions of this article, the short term rental owner must comply with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to city parking regulations, including time limitations and ADA parking restrictions; lodging facility use tax and accommodations sales tax regulations; health department permitting requirements; the Americans with Disabilities Act; fair housing laws; building codes and fire codes, and the non-discrimination provisions in chapter 24, article 10. Loss of any required permit or license will result in revocation of the short term rental registration in accordance with subsection J of this section. 
2.  Compliance with all applicable laws and regulations is the sole responsibility of the owner and city approval of an application for short term rental registration in no way waives or transfers to the city such responsibility. In addition, the owner is solely responsible for verifying the use of a property as a short term rental is compatible with insurance and mortgage contracts, home owners' association covenants, rental agreements and any other contracts which govern the use of the property. 
G.  Administration. The director will collect all registration fees and will issue registrations and renewals thereof in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this article and has the power to: 
1.  Make rules. The director will promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this article. All rules are subject to city commission review and modification. 
2.  Adopt forms. The director will adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein. 
3.  Obtain approvals. The director will submit all applications to interested city officials for their approval as to compliance by the applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing. 
4.  Investigate. The director will investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a short term rental registration as prescribed herein. 
5.  Examine records. The director may examine the books and records of any applicant when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article. 
6.  Give notice. The director shall notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of the application and will, upon the director's refusal of any registration, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
7.  Record keeping. The director will maintain at all times a record of registered short term rentals, including the full name of each registrant, the address at which such short term rental is operated, the date of issuance, the fee paid therefor, the telephone and address of the applicant, and the time such registration will continue in force. 
H.  Registration. The following requirements apply to all short term rentals unless otherwise noted. 
1.  General. It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city a short term rental without having first registered the short term rental with the department of community development. A separate registration shall be required for each short term rental. 
2.  Application; submittal materials. The applicant must complete and submit an application for a short term rental registration to the department of community development using a form provided by the city. The form will include an acknowledgement and agreement the short term rental meets and will continue to meet the definition of short term rental classification (Type-1, Type-2, or Type-3) during the registration term. Before the application will be accepted by the director, the applicant must provide: 
a.  The name, telephone number, address, and email address of all property owners and of the responsible person, if different. If the property owner is a business, the name(s) and contact information of all business owners must be provided. 
b.  The Montana Department of Revenue tax registration number for the short term rental. 
c.  A sketch plan with a description of the short term rental, including street address, number of bedrooms, and number of off-street parking spaces available for guests' use. 
d.  Certification the short term rental meets and will continue to meet the definition of short term rental classification (Type-1, Type-2, or Type-3) during the registration term. 
e.  For Type-2 and Type-3 short term rentals, certification the applicant has read and understood the standards in subsection I of this section and the property applied for meets the standards. 
f.  For Type-2 short term rentals in residential zoning districts, certification that residents adjacent to the proposed short term rental have been provided written notice in accordance with subsection 6 of this section. 
g.  The registration fee and fire inspection fee. 
3.  Safety inspections. 
a.  Initial inspection. Prior to issuance of a short term rental registration, an inspection by the city fire department must be completed and signed off by a city fire inspector, or by an NFPA-certified fire inspector using an inspection form approved by the city fire marshal. A fire inspection checklist form will be provided to the applicant with the application materials. If a short term rental registration lapses for any period of time, upon reapplication for registration an inspection must be completed and signed off as described in this subsection before the short term rental registration will issue. 
b.  Re-inspection. If re-inspection or multiple visits by a fire inspector are required before the inspection form may be signed, additional inspection fees will apply. 
c.  Subsequent inspections; self-certification. The city fire marshal may require a repeat inspection on a periodic basis, and at any time upon complaint or evidence of noncompliance. Applications for annual renewal of registration will include a self-certification by the applicant that they continue to comply with the fire inspection checklist. By applying for renewal of registration, the applicant will acknowledge and agree that the city may randomly select a certain percentage, not to exceed ten percent, of the renewal applications for a full inspection as described in subsection (a). If selected, the registration renewal will be conditioned on completion of the fire inspection and payment of the fire inspection fee. The owner of a short term rental selected for a full inspection will be allowed to continue to operate the short term rental pending completion of the inspection, provided all other renewal requirements have been met. 
4.  Safety hazards. The short term rental owner acknowledges that the city, or any authorized representative thereof, have the right to suspend operation of any short term rental when the city determines the rental is causing or contributing to an imminent public health or safety hazard. 
5.  Fees. Short term rental registration and inspection fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
6.  Additional notice requirements for registrations and registration renewals of Type-2 short term rentals in residential zoning districts. The applicant for a Type-2 short term rental registration in a residential zoning district included in section 38.310.030 must give notice on a form provided by the city to each residence adjacent, including those residences adjacent across a public right-of-way and properties connected to the applicant's property by property corners. The notice must include a description of the proposed use and the name, address, telephone number and email address (if any) of the responsible person. 
7.  Issuance of registration. Once the applicant submits the completed application form, all required submittal materials, and registration and inspection fees, the director will review the application form and submittal materials and determine whether the short term rental meets all city requirements for registration. The city will issue the short term rental registration when: 
a.  The director determines the short term rental meets all city requirements for registration; and 
b.  The applicant has provided either a signed pre-operational inspection report from the health department indicating the short term rental may operate as a public accommodation or a valid and current public accommodation license issued by the state of Montana department of health and human services pursuant to Title 50, Chapter 51, MCA. 
8.  Listing of registration. The short term rental registration form will require the applicant to agree to inclusion in an online listing of short term rentals registered with the city. 
9.  Display of short term rental registration number. The owner must include the short term rental registration number in all listings of the short term rental on any hosting platform and print advertising. 
10.  Change in ownership. A short term rental registration does not run with the land, and a change in ownership of the short term rental terminates the registration. The new owner wishing to continue operation of the property as a short term rental must apply for registration following the process described in this section. 
11.  Expiration. Registrations issued pursuant to this article are valid for one year from the month in which such registration is issued and will expire automatically unless renewed in accordance with this section. 
12.  Renewal. The registrant may apply to renew the registration annually using a form provided by the city. It is the registrant's responsibility to renew the registration on time even if a courtesy reminder is not received by the registrant. 
I.  Short term rental standards. The following requirements apply only to Type-2 and Type-3 short term rentals unless otherwise noted. 
1.  Short term rental agreement; written rules for guests. The short term rental owner must enter into a written rental agreement with the guest for each stay in the short term rental. 
a.  The guest must be provided with a written list of rules applicable to the short term rental with the rental agreement, and the rental agreement must include a written acknowledgement by the renters of their agreement to comply with such rules. 
b.  The list of rules must include those rules required by this article to be included. 
c.  The list of rules must be prominently displayed within the short term rental. 
2.  Responsible person. The applicant must designate a person responsible for addressing all maintenance, nuisance, and safety concerns related to a short term rental. The responsible person must be available to take and respond to reports of concerns and complaints 24 hours per day, 7 days per week during the registration term. The name and contact information for the responsible person must be included in the list of rules. 
3.  Maximum occupancy for Type-2 and Type-3 short term rentals. The maximum occupancy of a Type-2 or Type-3 short term rental is two persons per bedroom plus two additional persons, except that this number may be reduced by the city based on available parking spaces. The maximum occupancy will be noted on the short term rental registration and must be included in the list of short term rental rules. 
4.  Maximum number of bedrooms that may be rented in a Type-1 short term rental; maximum occupancy. The owner of a Type-1 short term rental may rent or offer for rent up to two bedrooms in the dwelling, except that in a two-bedroom dwelling, only one bedroom may be rented or offered for rent. No other area of the dwelling may be rented or offered for rent. The maximum occupancy of a Type-1 short term rental is two persons per bedroom. 
5.  Trash removal. The responsible person must ensure proper disposal of solid waste pursuant to local and state rules, regulations and laws. The schedule for trash and recycling collection and instructions for proper disposal must be included within the short term rental rules. 
6.  Signage. Exterior signs identifying the unit as a short term rental are prohibited on short term rentals. During a rental period, there must be a sign posted inside the front door of the short term rental showing the locations of all fire extinguishers in the unit, the gas shut-off valve, and fire exits. 
7.  Noise and nuisance. 
a.  The owner of the short term rental must ensure that use of the short term rental by guests is in compliance with the noise provisions of chapter 16, article 6 and all nuisance provisions of the Bozeman Municipal Code. 
b.  A prohibition against making loud noise in such a manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity must be included in the short term rental rules. 
c.  All outdoor activities producing noise discernible from a neighboring property shall cease by 10:00 p.m. This requirement must be included in the short term rental rules. 
J.  Violations; enforcement. 
1.  Registration suspension or revocation. The director may suspend or revoke a short term rental registration when the registrant commits one or more of the following acts or omissions: 
a.  Failure to comply with any provision of this article; 
b.  Operating or allowing the operation of the short term rental in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals, or interfere with the rights of abutting property owners; 
c.  Cancellation of the health department's public accommodation license, tax authority registration, or any other required permit; or 
d.  The securing of the registration by fraud or misrepresentation, to specifically include false or incorrect information on the registration application. 
2.  Procedure. Should the director decide to suspend or revoke a registration, the registrant will be given notice and an opportunity to respond following the procedures in this subsection, except that should the director determine the short term rental or its operation present a safety hazard or require immediate remedy, the director may order operation of the short term rental to cease immediately. 
a.  The registrant will be notified in writing by the director at least seven days prior to the action contemplated and the reasons therefore. 
b.  Upon receipt of the notice, the registrant may request a meeting with the director. Such request must be in writing and must be received by the director within seven days of the registrant's receipt of the notice. Failure on the part of the registrant to request in writing a meeting and within the specified time period shall be a waiver of the registrant's right to a meeting. 
c.  If a meeting is requested by the registrant, the director will set a time, date and place and will so notify the registrant, in writing. 
d.  When a meeting is conducted, the city will present the evidence supporting the contemplated action. The director may request evidence be presented by other parties. The registrant may present evidence. The director will take all evidence admitted under advisement and once a decision has been made the director will notify the registrant of the findings and decision in writing. 
3.  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director will have the right to appeal to the city commission by following the procedures in section 38.250.030. 
4.  Unpaid fee constitutes debt. The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required hereunder, constitutes a debt due the city. 
5.  Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. In addition to suspension or revocation under subsection A of this section, a knowing violation of this article constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as described in section 38.200.160. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 13, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.360.260. - Agricultural uses in residential suburban. 
Agricultural use standards per two and one-half acres: one horse or one cow; two sheep or two goats; ten rabbits; 36 fowl (chickens, pheasants, pigeons, etc.) or six larger fowl (ducks, geese, turkeys, etc.). For larger parcels the review authority may determine that a larger number of livestock is consistent with the requirements of this section.  
DIVISION 38.370. - WIRELESS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 38.370.010. - Intent, purpose and applicability. 
A.  It is the duty of the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the city has the authority to regulate the placement, construction and modification of wireless facilities in the advancement of that duty. 
B.  The city commission finds that: 
1.  The aesthetic character of the city is a matter of substantial economic importance and general concern to the citizens of the city, as described in the city's adopted growth policy, and is an important part of the public welfare; 
2.  Wireless facilities are often visually obtrusive due to their necessary height, support equipment and interruption of the viewscape, and can have substantial negative impacts on the character of the city and its surrounding viewsheds; 
3.  The impacts of wireless facilities can be reduced by establishing standards for location, structural integrity, compatibility and collocation; 
4.  To reduce visual and other impacts on the community the city desires to promote collocation, use of stealth installations of wireless facilities and the use of smaller less intrusive facilities to minimize the need to construct new large scale wireless facilities; 
5.  The city desires to provide clear and consistent regulations for review of proposed wireless facilities; 
6.  The city desires to support the ability of telecommunication service providers to deliver such services to the community consistent with other community objectives; 
7.  The construction of new large scale wireless facilities is the action of last resort to provide for wireless communication services and should only be undertaken when alternatives are not available; 
8.  It is necessary to determine the locations and circumstances most appropriate for placement of wireless facilities to serve the community; 
9.  Consistent with applicable law, the city desires to minimize the adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through careful siting, design, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging screening; 
10.  The city seeks to protect against potential health and safety hazards to citizens and prevent damage to adjacent properties; 
11.  The city intends to exercise its authority with respect to the regulation of the placement, construction and modification of wireless facilities, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law; 
12.  The city recognizes the need to respond to the policies in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and has constructed its regulations in a manner that does not unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless service, and that does not prohibit or has the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service in the city; 
13.  The city recognizes that the Federal Communication Commission exercises certain sole authority in the licensing and other regulation of wireless services; 
14.  The adequate review of a telecommunications application may require expertise not typically possessed by city staff which would require the city to obtain qualified outside expertise to properly evaluate an application; and 
15.  Outside review would generate additional costs to the public to preserve the public interest these costs must be mitigated and should properly be mitigated by those causing such additional costs. 
C.  General application. All uses listed in this division 38.370 are subject to the specific standards described for each use, in addition to all other applicable standards which may apply, and are limited to those districts specified. The provisions of this division 38.370 apply to development and modification of large scale wireless facilities, micro-scale wireless facilities, non-broadcast telecommunication facilities and small scale wireless facilities. These and other terms are defined in article 7 of this chapter. 
1.  The provisions of this division 38.370 only apply to facilities which meet the definition of a wireless facility or that are otherwise specifically brought under the authority of this division 38.370.  
Sec. 38.370.020. - Special submittal requirements. 
In addition to the materials required by division 38.220 of this chapter for site plans, conditional use permits, and planned unit developments, the materials required by section 38.220.170 must be submitted.  
Sec. 38.370.030. - Uses within districts and required review procedures. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to describe the procedures under which certain uses may be permitted as principal or conditional uses in specific districts. Unless specifically exempted by this division 38.370, all other standards and procedures of this chapter must apply. 
1.  The Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.) may require subdivision review when land interests are created by rent or lease. Depending on how the ownership and use of land for a facility subject to this division 38.370 is established, subdivision review may be required in addition to site plan review. 
B.  No wireless facility may be permitted except in accordance with the development review processes indicated in Table 38.370.030 in subsection B.1 of this section, based on the applicable zoning district and scope of the proposed facility. Principal uses are indicated with a "P", conditional uses are indicated with a "C", accessory uses are indicated with an "A", planned unit development is indicated with a "PUD", and uses which are not permitted within the district are indicated by a "-". All applications are subject to the review processes, submittal requirements and other requirements of articles 38.230, 38.430 and 38.220 of this chapter as may be applicable. 
1.  Review procedures. 
Table 38.370.030 
Zoning District 	Large scale 	Small scale 	Micro scale 	Non-broadcast 
PLI 	P 	P 	A 	P 
M-2 	P 	P 	A 	P 
M-1 	P 	P 	A 	P 
B-P 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
B-3 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
B-2 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
B-2M 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
B-1 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
UMU 	C 	P/C 1 	A 	P 
REMU 	PUD 	P/C 1 	A 	C 
NEHMU 	P 	P 	A 	P 
R-O 	PUD 	C 	P 	C 
R-5 	PUD 	C 	P 	C 
R-4 	PUD 	C 	P 	C 
R-3 	PUD 	C 	P 	C 
R-2 	PUD 	C 	P 	- 
R-1 	PUD 	C 	P 	- 
R-S 	PUD 	C 	P 	C 
 
Note: 
1.  Conditional use review is required when the proposed facility exceeds the height limitation of the district. 
2.  Collocation upon a previously approved wireless facility, when such additional facilities were contemplated as part of the original review, must be reviewed as a sketch plan in all zones. 
3.  A wireless facility may be permitted as an accessory use in any non-residential district when: 
a.  It is for the exclusive use of a single on-site business when the business has otherwise been approved under division 38.230 or 38.430 of this chapter, rather than offered to additional parties; 
b.  It is in compliance with the maximum building height limitations of the zoning district; 
c.  It complies with all setback and other zoning requirements; and 
d.  Has eight or less square feet of total antenna surface area. 
4.  Installations located within the neighborhood conservation overlay district must be reviewed against the criteria of division 38.340 of this chapter as applicable, and a certificate of appropriateness is required before issuance of a building permit. 
5.  Prior to submitting an application for a large scale or small scale wireless facility, the applicant must request in writing a pre-application conference with the community development department. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to acquaint the participants with the applicable requirements of this division 38.370, as well as with any preliminary concerns the department may have. 
6.  The applicant's written request for a preapplication conference must include the following information with regard to the proposed facility: 
a.  Location; 
b.  Overall height; 
c.  Number of antennas proposed, including those of other providers to be collocated; 
d.  Type of wireless communication services to be provided; and 
e.  Coordination of ground equipment shelters. 
7.  Adequate review of applications may require the city to retain consultants or other third party assistance to review an application. In such event the applicant must reimburse the city for the actual costs incurred prior to issuance of a building permit. 
8.  The provisions of division 38.280 of this chapter must apply for all nonconforming facilities subject to this division 38.370.  
Sec. 38.370.040. - Standards. 
A.  Safety. All wireless facilities subject to this division 38.370 must meet the following standards: 
1.  The structural design for all wireless facilities greater than ten feet in height or which have more than four square feet of total antenna area must be certified by a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in the state. A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any facility subject to this division 38.370. 
2.  All wireless facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FCC, FAA and any other agency with the authority to regulate wireless facilities. If such standards are changed, the owner must modify the installation to comply with the new standards within six months of the effective date of the new standards or regulations unless a different implementation schedule is required by the issuing agency. 
3.  Wireless facilities with a base located at grade must be enclosed within a secure fence not less than six feet in height, or the tower itself must be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
B.  Aesthetics. 
1.  All wireless facilities. 
a.  The provisions of section 38.370.040.B may be waived by the review authority as determined by division 38.220 of this chapter where it has been demonstrated that the waiver will result in superior compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
b.  All installations must be as visually unobtrusive as is feasible. Facilities and equipment mounted on existing structures must be visually incorporated into the structure or background by the use of architectural elements, color, screening or other methods. 
c.  No lighted signage is permitted. 
d.  All structures must be constructed in conformance with the standards of the city's adopted International Building Code. 
e.  In addition to landscaping required by division 38.550, visual screening of ground mounted equipment must be provided in all residential areas and where a facility is located within a non-residential area which is visible, from a viewpoint five feet above grade, from a residential area. Screening must provide an opaque screen within 18 months of establishment and be a minimum of four feet in height. The screening may be of landscape materials or a fence which otherwise complies with this chapter. The site must comply with the landscaping provisions of article 5 of this chapter. 
f.  Exterior façade materials and the character of equipment shelters used in residential areas must be of materials commonly used in the immediate area. The architectural design of the exterior of the shelter must be compatible with surrounding residential structures. The intent of the requirements of this subsection B.1.f may be met by providing opaque fencing or other visual screening compatible with the neighborhood, in compliance with all other sections of this chapter, which will obscure the entire equipment shelter. The screening must be in place prior to the commencement of operations of the facility. 
2.  Preferences. In order to justify the construction of a wireless structure, the applicant must demonstrate that higher ranking alternatives in the following hierarchy, beginning with subsection 2.a.(1) of this section, do not constitute feasible alternatives. The order of preference, from most preferred to least preferred and based on technical feasibility, for new wireless facilities is: 
a.  Facility size. 
(1)  Micro-scale wireless facilities or collocation on existing large scale wireless facilities; 
(2)  Small scale wireless facilities; 
(3)  Large scale wireless facilities 50 feet or less in height; and 
(4)  Large scale wireless facilities in excess of 50 feet in height. 
b.  A facility meeting the definition of stealth, as defined in section 38.700.170 of this chapter, is always preferred over a facility of the same scope which does not meet the definition of stealth. Stealth facilities may be required in historic districts and under other circumstances. 
c.  As appropriate, the following evidence may also be submitted to demonstrate compliance with this section: 
(1)  That no existing wireless communications facility within the search area meets the applicant's radio frequency engineering or height requirements; 
(2)  That no structure within the search area has sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antennas; or 
(3)  That there are other verifiable limiting factors that render collocated or other more preferred options unsuitable or unreasonable. 
d.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed structures are generally preferred over monopoles. 
3.  Special standards. The following special standards apply as shown in Table 38.370.040: 
a.  Stealth installation is required; 
b.  Wireless facilities are exempt from the height limitations of section 38.350.050, but are subject to the height limitations of section 38.370.040; 
c.  The height limitation of the district may be exceeded by the least amount necessary to provide services, but only when service may not otherwise be provided by a less intensive facility or an alternative site; and 
d.  Only allowed when service may not be provided from an alternative site or a less intensive installation or set of installations. 
Table 38.370.040 
Zoning District 	Large-scale 	Small-scale 	Micro-scale 	Non-broadcast 
PLI 	b 	b 	b 	- 
M-2 	b 	b 	b 	- 
M-1 	b 	b 	b 	- 
B-P 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
B-3 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
B-2 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
B-2M 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
B-1 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
UMU 	c 	a, c 	b 	- 
REMU 	d 	a, c 	b 	- 
NEHMU 	b 	b 	b 	- 
R-O 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-5 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-4 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-3 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-2 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-1 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
R-S 	d 	a, c 	a, b 	- 
 
4.  Stealth. 
a.  Installations located within the conservation overlay district must be stealth facilities. 
b.  A stealth wireless facility may exceed the height limitations of the district by ten feet. 
5.  Small scale wireless facilities. All small scale wireless facilities established in the neighborhood conservation district must be installed in such a way as to maintain the historic or architectural character of the host site. All sites must maintain the least possible visual obtrusiveness. 
6.  Large scale wireless facilities. No large scale wireless facility will be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that the proposed facility cannot be accommodated on an existing structure or by placement of a smaller facility. In order to justify the construction of a large-scale wireless facility, the applicant must demonstrate that higher ranking alternatives in the hierarchy, beginning with section 38.370.040.B.2.a.(1), do not constitute feasible alternatives. Such demonstration must be made by submission of a statement of position, qualifications and experience by a licensed radio frequency engineer; and must address the required findings of this section. 
a.  If collocation is feasible, the owner of the large scale wireless facility must certify in writing, prior to final permit approval, that the owner will accept for collocation any FCC-licensed or licensing exempt wireless communication provider using compatible technology at reasonable and customary rates and terms up to the structural capacity to accommodate additional antennas. Collocation may be denied based on verifiable and substantial expectations of interference from additional users. Later failure to comply with the requirements supporting collocation may result in the revocation of city approvals or other penalties stipulated by the municipal code as the requirements of the title will have been violated. 
b.  The city must find the proposed guarantee, assurances or provisions for the perpetual maintenance and for removal of an abandoned large scale wireless facility to be adequate. 
c.  A large scale wireless facility must not either: 
(1)  Exceed 190 feet in height; or 
(2)  When located east of the alignment of Church Avenue/Sourdough Road and west of the extended alignment of Bozeman Trail Road/Arnica Drive; 
(a)  Exceed 100 feet in height when its base elevation is greater than 4,800; 
(b)  Exceed 40 feet in height when its base elevation is above 4,850; 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections B.6.c.(2)(a) and (b) of this section, these restrictions must not apply for those areas lying east of the extended alignment of Bozeman Trail Road/Arnica Drive and south of Interstate 90. 
d.  Where multiple service providers will be utilizing the same ground area and/or support structure, a single structure must be provided to house all ground based equipment. 
e.  Special setbacks for large scale wireless facilities must be provided and/or a design for internal structural collapse to avoid damage or injury to adjoining property or users must be provided. 
(1)  Residential district setbacks for a large scale wireless facility must be 100 percent of facility height, which may be reduced to no less than 50 percent upon the provision and approval of an engineered design, stamped by a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in the state, establishing a smaller collapse area. 
(2)  A large scale wireless facility in non-residential zones must provide a minimum setback from the property lines of 75 percent of facility height, which may be reduced to no less than 30 percent of facility height upon the provision and approval of an engineered design, stamped by a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in the state, establishing a smaller collapse area. Large scale wireless facilities located within non-residential zones, but adjacent to a residential zone or residentially developed areas, must maintain a minimum setback from residential zoning or property boundaries of at least 50 percent of facility height. All installations must maintain the minimum zoning district setbacks, including special setbacks for applicable block frontage in division 38.510 of this chapter. 
f.  New large scale wireless facilities greater than 50 feet in height must be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and antennas for at least two additional users. A new large scale wireless facility may meet this requirement by correctly sizing the foundation and other structural elements to allow the future addition of height to the structure to accommodate additional users rather than immediately constructing the entire large scale wireless facility. This requirement may be waived by the governing body upon a showing of fact to overcome the presumption that multiple transmitters are desirable on the proposed facility. 
g.  All large scale wireless facilities 50 feet or greater in height, regardless of the zoning district in which the structure is located, must be located at least one mile, measured in a straight line, from any other large scale wireless facility that is 50 feet or greater in height. An exception to this requirement may be granted by the approval body when it is found and factually supported in the written record that the criteria of subsection B.6.i of this section are met and a critical need exists for the proposed location, or that a closer placement is desirable to advance the intent of this chapter. 
h.  A large scale wireless facility greater than 50 feet in height must only be approved when the applicant can demonstrate in writing that no existing or approved micro-scale, small scale or large scale wireless facility within the required separation distance of the proposed site can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
i.  In addition to the other review criteria of this chapter, affirmative findings for at least one of the following items must be made in order for the conditions necessary for approval to exist: 
(1)  No existing or proposed structures located within the geographic area are adequate to support the proposed antennas are required to meet the applicant's engineering and service requirements; 
(2)  Existing or approved structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering and service requirements and a combination of smaller scale facilities will not provide for adequate service delivery; 
(3)  Existing or approved structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment and cannot be reinforced to provide sufficient structural strength; 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antennas would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing or approved antenna support structures, or the antenna on the existing or approved antenna support structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(5)  Property owners' or owners of existing or approved wireless facilities or locations for smaller scale installations are unwilling to accommodate the applicant's needs; or 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other factual and verifiable limiting factors that render existing or approved wireless facilities unsuitable. 
j.  Height and number of users. A large scale wireless facility may be reviewed as a multiple phase project and be constructed over time as provided for in section 38.370.040.B. Prior to the approval of a final site plan, or a building permit if it is a latter phase of a phased project, an applicant must provide: 
(1)  For the first 70 feet of tower height, for an applicant who is not a wireless service provider, a copy of an executed lease from a wireless service provider of not less than 12 months duration; 
(2)  For a height of greater than 70 feet and not more than 110 feet of structure height, one additional executed lease; 
(3)  For a height greater than 110 feet, a second additional executed lease; 
(4)  Leases may be redacted to remove proprietary information but must identify the parties. 
7.  Non-broadcast. A non-broadcast telecommunication facility located within a B-1, B-2, B-2M or B-3 district, a mixed-use district, the neighborhood conservation overlay district or a residential zoning district must be enclosed within a structure. The structure must be of materials and architectural character compatible with the adjacent properties. The facility must comply with all applicable side, front and rear setback setbacks. 
C.  Administrative. 
1.  An inventory of existing sites utilized by the applicant must be provided. The inventory must note the feasibility of accommodating other users. The city may share this information with other applicants or interested parties to encourage collocation. 
2.  The public land and agencies exemption from full compliance with zoning in MCA 76-2-402 does not apply to private entities utilizing publicly owned lands. 
3.  Any antennas or antenna support structures not utilized for the provision of wireless services for a continuous period of six months will be considered abandoned. All facilities must be removed within six months of the cessation of operations. If a facility is not removed within six months the city may remove the facility at the facility or landowner's expense. Where multiple users share a facility, the non-operational antennas and associated ground-mounted equipment may be removed, but any common equipment may be retained until all users have terminated the utilization of the site. 
4.  Any emergency power supply or other equipment installed at the facility must comply with section 38.520.070. 
5.  No facilities which require employees to be present on a routine basis may be established in residential areas, with the exception of periodic maintenance activities, unless the zone allows offices as a permitted or conditional use and appropriate review has been completed. 
6.  Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter is grounds for facilities to be removed by action of the city at the facility or landowner's expense. 
7.  Any modifications to existing wireless sites shall only occur in compliance with the review procedures required in section 38.370.030. 
8.  Denial of an application must be made only after the review body has determined that specific criteria of this chapter cannot be met. Said determination must be made in writing and must include the reasons for the denial and the evidence which supports those reasons. Public opposition alone is not sufficient to deny the application. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 14, 4-18-2018)  
DIVISION 38.380. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
Part 1. - Findings and Purpose 
 
Sec. 38.380.010. - Legislative findings. 
The city commission hereby finds: 
A.  The Bozeman Community Plan establishes a goal to encourage an adequate supply of affordable housing and land for affordable housing in Bozeman. A lack of affordable housing affects the ability of many residents to find housing which is adequate for their basic housing needs. A lack of adequate housing affects health, social stability, and other issues which can have negative and intergenerational effects. To fulfill this goal, the community plan establishes an objective to promote the development of a variety of housing types, designs, and costs to meet the wide range of needs of Bozeman residents. 
B.  The Affordable Housing Action Plan: 2012—2016 (Action Plan) analyzed housing needs and existing market conditions and determined housing affordability has become an acute problem as demonstrated by the number of households paying over 30 percent of their incomes for housing. A 2015 update to the city's housing needs analysis (Action Plan Update) concluded that the group of homebuyers with significant affordability gaps have incomes at or below 80 percent of the area medium income and are in need of subsidies and/or below-market home prices. The Action Plan Update also determined that buying opportunities are increasingly scarce for homebuyers with incomes between 60 percent and 100 percent of AMI, and that housing and land prices have increased faster than incomes for many of Bozeman's residents. 
C.  Since the adoption of the Bozeman Community Plan and the Action Plan, the median sales price of housing has continued to climb. According to the Action Plan Update, as of the end of November 2014, the median home price was $287,000.00. 
D.  The Action Plan Update states that the number of detached homes priced below $250,000.00, a rough indicator of housing affordability for a family of three at 100 percent of AMI, has fallen from 48.4 percent of the market in 2012 to just 18.6 percent in 2014. 
E.  There is a critical shortage of for-sale housing affordable to Bozeman households with incomes at and below the area median income, as currently calculated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. As a result, some residents pay excessive amounts of income for housing, reducing the amounts available for other necessities and a decent and adequate standard of living. 
F.  Limited housing opportunities within the city requires households to seek housing outside of the city limits which has a negative impact on transportation infrastructure by adding unnecessary trips to the network. Increased driving distance to affordable housing also negatively impacts air and water quality. To maintain a sufficient resident workforce in all fields of employment, and to ensure the public safety and general welfare of the residents of the city of Bozeman, affordable housing needs must be addressed. 
G.  The city can achieve its goals of providing more affordable housing and its goal of achieving an economically balanced community only if part of the new housing built is affordable to households with low and moderate incomes. 
H.  The inclusionary housing regulations codified in this ordinance will substantially advance the city's legitimate interest in assuring that additional housing is built in the city that is affordable to residents, including low- and moderate-income households and dispersed throughout the city in order to encourage economic integration of the city's residents. 
I.  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the city's self-governing powers and the city's independent general police power to protect public health, safety, and welfare. Requiring affordable housing within certain developments is consistent with the community's housing goals of protecting the public welfare by fostering an adequate supply of housing for persons at all economic levels and maintaining both economic diversity and geographically dispersed affordable housing. 
J.  Requiring developers of newly created market-rate housing to provide some housing affordable to low and moderate-income households is reasonably related to the impacts of their projects because: 
1.  Rising land prices are a key factor in preventing development of new affordable housing. New market-rate housing construction in Bozeman has generally created strong and increasing demand for a finite stock of unbuilt land within the city, and thus continues to drive up the price of remaining land. New development without affordable units reduces the amount of land development opportunities available for the construction of affordable housing. 
2.  New residents of market-rate housing place demands on services provided by both public and private sectors, creating a demand for new employees. Some of these public and private sector employees needed to meet the needs of the new residents earn incomes only adequate to pay for affordable housing. Because affordable housing is in short supply in the city, such employees may be forced to live in less than adequate housing within the city, pay a disproportionate share of their incomes to live in adequate housing in the city, or commute ever increasing distances to their jobs from housing located outside the city. These circumstances harm the city's ability to attain employment and housing goals articulated in the community plan and place strains on the city's ability to accept and service new market-rate housing development.  
Sec. 38.380.020. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that the affordable housing needs of the residents of Bozeman are addressed. In addition, the purpose of this article is to ensure that quality housing is dispersed throughout Bozeman's neighborhoods for households of a variety of income levels including low- and moderate-income residents to meet the goals of the community plan and the action plan by encouraging a mix of housing types throughout the city and integrating affordable housing so as to not concentrate affordable housing in a particular area. 
In addition, the ordinance is intended to alleviate the impacts that would result from the use of available residential land solely for the benefit of households that are able to afford market-rate housing and to mitigate the service burden imposed by households in new market-rate residential developments by making additional affordable housing available for service employees. The ordinance is also intended to mitigate environmental and other impacts that accompany new residential development by reducing traffic, transit and related air quality impacts, promoting jobs/housing balance and reducing the demands placed on transportation infrastructure. 
The ordinance provides residential developers with a menu of options from which to select alternatives to the construction of inclusionary units on the same site as market-rate residential developments, and provides procedural adjustments and subsidies for housing developers to ensure houses are constructed and sold in a manner that furthers the city's affordable housing goals. 
Finally, the ordinance provides procedural adjustments and subsidies for housing developers who are not legally required to comply with the requirements for construction of inclusionary housing, but nevertheless choose to construct affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 1, 1-14-2019)  
Part 2. - Applicability and Definitions 
 
Sec. 38.380.030. - Applicability. 
A.  This article applies to: 
1.  Subdivisions and site plans which propose ten or more market-rate homes, to be created through development, new construction, substantial improvement or reuse. 
2.  Annexations where the net developable area of the annexing parcel when considering the applicable zoning could result in ten or more dwellings. In such a case, the annexation agreement shall require the provision of affordable housing pursuant to this article. 
3.  Developments seeking to use procedural adjustments and subsidies to develop affordable housing. 
B.  Contiguous tracts under common ownership and control. A developer may not avoid the requirements for construction of affordable homes by submitting piecemeal applications for development. At the time of the initial application for approval of a subdivision or site plan, the developer shall identify all contiguous property under common ownership and control in the affordable housing plan required by section 38.380.100. 
C.  Development applications approved prior to the effective date of this article. A site plan or subdivision having received sufficiency approval as of the effective date of this article or a preliminary site plan or preliminary plat granted approval prior to the effective date of this article may apply for one or more of the procedural adjustments and subsidies described herein. Only that portion of the amended preliminary plat or site plan pertaining to the request for approval of one or more procedural adjustments and subsidies will be subject to review. The requirements of section 38.19.130 for the amendment of plans will not apply. 
D.  Newly proposed residential developments which include affordable housing in excess of this article's requirements for building affordable homes are eligible for procedural adjustments and subsidies as provided in section 38.380.130. Such request shall require the preliminary plat or site plan to evidence compliance with all other requirements of this article. 
E.  Exemptions. Developments comprised exclusively of rental housing units are exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 2, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 38.380.040. - Definitions. 
A.  Affordable housing or affordable home. A dwelling for purchase by an owner-occupant that requires no more than 33 percent of a household's income for housing payments and meets the definition of a lower-priced home or moderate-priced home. For purposes of 38.380, "affordable housing" or "affordable home" does not include condominium units. 
B.  Area median income or AMI. As calculated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), AMI is the median income for a family of four within a specific geographical area, such as Gallatin County. For each such region, HUD adjusts this AMI calculation for households of different sizes and updates the calculations annually based on estimated changes in area incomes. For purposes of this article, the city hereby adopts HUD's AMI calculations as an equitable and reasonable method to determine affordability, based on percentages of AMI specified in this article. 
C.  Common ownership or control. "Common ownership or control" refers to property owned or controlled by the same person, persons, or entity, or by separate entities in which any shareholder, partner, member, or family member of an investor of the entity owns ten percent (10%) or more of the interest in the property. 
D.  Developer. For purposes of this article, a developer is the person or legal entity, or their successor(s) in interest who: (a) submits an affordable housing plan for a subject property along with other submissions required for land use approvals, zoning, or permit reviews by the city, and/or (b) is the owner of property subject to this article during the development phase or a successor in title, such as a builder, obligated to implement the affordable housing plan required by this article with respect to one or more lots or parcels of land and/or (c) receives incentives for the production of affordable housing. 
E.  Liquid Assets. Assets such as cash, stocks, bonds or similar that can readily be converted to cash with no significant loss in value, but excluding long retirement assets such as IRA accounts, 401K accounts, pension funds, etc. Explicitly excluding retirement 
F.  Lower-priced home. Newly created dwelling for purchase, priced at a price affordable to a buyer-household with an income at 70 percent of area median income (AMI) as determined by the city in accordance with section 38.380.070 of this article. 
G.  Market-rate home. Any dwelling for purchase subject to this article which is not an affordable home. The number of market-rate homes in a development is used to determine the required number of affordable homes, as described in this article. For the purposes of 38.380, "market rate home" does not include condominium units. 
H.  Moderate-priced home. Newly created dwelling for purchase, priced at a price affordable to a buyer-household with an income from 70.1 percent to a maximum of 90 percent of AMI as determined by the city in accordance with section 38.380.070 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 3, 1-14-2019)  
Part 3. - Requirements 
 
Sec. 38.380.050. - Requirement to build and sell affordable homes. 
All development subject to this article must include affordable homes.  
Sec. 38.380.060. - Number of affordable homes required. 
The number of affordable homes a developer is required to build is a percentage of the total market-rate homes proposed in the development plan. 
A.  The developer may: 
1.  Build and sell lower-priced homes to qualified buyers. Ten percent of the total dwellings constructed within the subdivision or site plan must be lower-priced homes, as defined in 38.380.040.F; or 
2.  Build and sell moderate-priced homes to qualified buyers. Thirty percent of the total dwellings proposed must be moderate-priced homes as defined in 38.380.040.H; or 
3.  Build and sell a mix of both types of affordable homes. If a developer proposes a mix of both lower-priced and moderate-priced homes, the developer starts with the ten percent calculation for lower-priced homes. For each lower-priced home eliminated from the resulting number, the developer may substitute three moderate-priced homes. 
The distribution of homes between the two categories of affordable homes will be identified in the affordable housing plan required by section 38.380.100. 
B.  Fractions. If the calculation of the required number of affordable homes results in a fraction of a home, this obligation will be satisfied by payment of a fee-in-lieu pursuant to section 38.380.140 or by providing an additional moderate-priced home. 
C.  Calculating number of affordable homes in phased developments. It is anticipated that in developments being built in phases, the number of market-rate homes may not be certain at the time the developer submits the affordable housing plan pursuant to section 38.380.100. In such cases, the developer must estimate the number of market-rate homes and number of affordable homes required for all phases. If the number of homes in the first phase of such development is certain at the time of the city's approval of the affordable housing plan, a separate affordable homes pricing and delivery schedule for that phase shall be incorporated in the affordable housing plan at the time of development or construction of each subsequent phase. As the number of homes in future phases becomes certain, the affordable housing plan shall provide for subsequent affordable homes pricing and delivery schedules for future phases of the development, consistent with the affordable housing plan and section 38.380.070.B. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 4, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 38.380.070. - Pricing of affordable homes. 
A.  The city will calculate on an annual basis the maximum sales price a developer may charge for each category of affordable home required by this article as follows: 
1.  Lower-priced homes. The sales price for lower-priced homes affordable to buyer-households with incomes at or below 80 percent of AMI will be calculated based on a household income of 70 percent of AMI. 
2.  Moderate-priced homes. The sales price for moderate-priced homes affordable to buyer-households with incomes from 81 percent to 100 percent of AMI will be calculated based on a household income of 90 percent of AMI. 
B.  Affordable home sales price schedule. 
1.  The city will annually publish a schedule of sales prices for low-priced homes and moderate-priced homes within 30 calendar days of the HUD's annual publication of updated AMI calculations. The sales price schedule will be effective on the date of publication by the city. The new sales price schedule will apply to applications for building permits received after the effective date of the new sales price schedule. A developer may request that a new sales price schedule apply to the sale of an affordable home approved under a previous sales price schedule. 
2.  The city, at the city's sole discretion, may recalculate the sales price schedule if prevailing mortgage interest rates have adjusted by 50 basis points or more over the assumption used for the previous schedule. 
3.  Considerations. The following factors will be considered by the city in calculating the sales price schedule. The Director of community development may make de minimis exceptions to application of these factors: 
a.  AMI for the Bozeman area; 
b.  Gross monthly income will be calculated as the appropriate HUD AMI calculations income divided by 12; 
c.  The maximum monthly payment will be 33 percent of gross monthly income. The maximum monthly payment will include costs directly applicable to a mortgage such as payment of principal, interest, as well as assumptions for typical costs of taxes, public assessments, property insurance premiums, mortgage insurance premiums (assuming the higher of either government or private mortgage insurance), and homeowner association fees; 
d.  The interest rate will be determined by the city by a survey of at least three local mortgage lenders, averaging their current rates for loans for homes with price ranges within the low-priced homes range and the moderate-priced homes range; 
e.  The financing will be a conventional or government-insured fixed-rate loan with a term of 15 to 30 years; and 
f.  A borrower will typically contribute $1,000.00 toward the purchase price. 
C.  Household occupancy assumptions. To determine the maximum sales prices of affordable homes with different numbers of bedrooms, the city will base its calculation on the AMIs for households of different sizes, as follows: 
1.  Zero bedroom or studio unit - AMI for a one-person household; 
2.  One bedroom unit - AMI for a two-person household; 
3.  Two bedroom unit - AMI for a three-person household; and 
4.  Three bedroom unit or larger - AMI for a four-person household. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 5, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 38.380.080. - Timing of delivery of affordable homes. 
Required affordable homes must be provided in accordance with the following: 
A.  In each development in which more than one affordable home is required to be sold, the affordable housing plan shall specify that affordable homes are to be sold concurrently and in proportion to the sale of unimproved lots or market-rate homes. Such timing of compliance will be represented in an affordable homes pricing and delivery schedule as described in section 38.380.100. 
B.  A developer may build and sell affordable homes earlier than required in an affordable housing plan.  
Sec. 38.380.090. - Minimum design and construction standards for affordable homes. 
A.  Required number of bedrooms in affordable homes. In each development subject to the requirements of this article, affordable homes shall represent a mix of bedrooms per unit as similar as possible (given rounding of numbers) to the mix of bedrooms per unit of the market-rate homes in the development. 
B.  Standards for design and construction. The city shall define reasonable standards for the design and construction of affordable homes to ensure livability and compatibility with nearby market-rate homes in the development. Affordable homes may have different interior finishes and features than other dwellings within the development, as long as the finishes and features are functionally equivalent and of good quality. Finishes include, but are not limited to, design and materials, the provision of appliances, cabinets, and floor treatment. Features include, but are not limited to, the numbers of bathrooms, garages and parking areas, mechanical equipment and hookups, and green building features. 
C.  Amenities. Affordable homes shall have the same amenities as the market-rate homes in the development, including the same access to and enjoyment of common open space and facilities in the development.  
Sec. 38.380.100. - Submission of affordable housing plan; approval. 
A.  Affordable housing plan. The applicant for any development seeking to utilize the incentives to create affordable housing or subject to the requirements of this article must submit an affordable housing plan in a form provided by or approved by the city that describes how the requirements of this article will be satisfied. When approved by the city, the affordable housing plan must be incorporated by reference in the recorded subdivision plat, site plan or annexation agreement. The applicant will provide only one affordable housing plan to meet the requirements of this article. 
B.  Affordable housing plan as binding agreement. An affordable housing plan approved by the city will be considered a binding contract between the developer and the developer's successors in interest to the lot or dwelling. Such plan will be included in a separate recorded written agreement between the developer and the city, or incorporated into another recorded document wherein the developer is required to implement the affordable housing plan. 
C.  Contents of affordable housing plan. The affordable housing plan submitted by the developer must include, at a minimum: 
1.  Number of affordable homes proposed in each affordable home category; 
2.  The number of bedrooms in each affordable home; 
3.  Number of market-rate homes in the development; 
4.  The number of bedrooms in each market-rate home; 
5.  Location of affordable homes in the development (lots in the plat or units within a site plan); 
6.  Timing of delivery of the affordable homes in relation to the market-rate homes in the development; 
7.  Marketing plan describing how affordable homes will be offered to the public; 
8.  Plan for construction of affordable homes in phased developments. It is anticipated that in developments being built in phases, the number of market-rate homes may not be certain at the time the developer submits the affordable housing plan. In such cases, the developer must estimate the number of market-rate homes and number of affordable homes for each phase. If the number of homes in the first phase of such development is certain at the time of the city's approval of the affordable housing plan, a separate affordable homes pricing and delivery schedule for that phase shall be incorporated in the affordable housing plan at the time of development or construction of each subsequent phase. As the number of homes in future phases becomes certain, the affordable housing plan shall provide for subsequent affordable homes pricing and delivery schedules for future phases of the development, consistent with the affordable housing plan; and 
9.  A description of the procedural adjustments and subsidies requested in the affordable housing plan. 
10.  Any other information that is reasonably necessary to evaluate the compliance of the affordable housing plan with the requirements of this article. 
D.  Pricing and delivery schedules in affordable housing plans. The affordable homes pricing and delivery schedule shall be in the form of a chart that contains the numbers of required affordable homes by bedroom count and affordable home category, and shall indicate the current affordable home prices as calculated by the city. 
E.  Approval of affordable housing plan. The affordable housing plan will be reviewed as part of the initial application approval process for the type of development proposed. A condition shall be attached to the approval of any subdivision plat or site plan to require recordation of the affordable housing plan or other separate agreement obligating the developer to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 6, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 38.380.110. - Marketing, sales and occupancy of affordable homes. 
Developers subject to this article shall market and sell affordable homes in accordance with provisions described in the city's published instructions for preparing affordable housing plans. These provisions will address factors such as waiting list management, marketing materials, responsibilities for marketing affordable homes, actions to be taken in the event of inability to identify qualified buyers, procedures for certification of buyer eligibility, purchase contracts, and full disclosures to buyers of their obligations and rights under this article. If after 120 calendar days of marketing efforts on the part of the developer of an affordable home in compliance with the city's published instructions the developer has not executed a purchase contract with a qualified buyer, the developer may enter into a purchase contract with a buyer at a sales price that shall not be subject to the maximum sales prices established pursuant to section 38.380.070. In such a case, upon closing of the sale the developer must pay the city the difference between the sales price and the price of the affordable home as set out in the approved affordable housing plan in accordance with section 38.380.180.B.  
Sec. 38.380.120. - Recording requirements upon sale of affordable home. 
The developer, or the city or its agent if the city is involved in the sale of an affordable home shall cause to be recorded in the offices of the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder, simultaneously with the recording of the deed of conveyance, a restrictive covenant, deed of trust or other legal instrument, approved as to form by the Bozeman City Attorney that fulfills the resale and recapture requirements described in section 38.380.160.  
Part 4. - Incentives 
 
Sec. 38.380.130. - Procedural adjustments and subsidies available for affordable housing. 
Developers may apply for procedural adjustments and subsidies in conjunction with a development application by submitting an affordable housing plan pursuant to section 38.380.100. 
Procedural adjustments and subsidies 	Description 	Lower-priced Homes 1 	Moderate-priced homes 
Impact fee subsidy 	Full or partial subsidization of impact fees, paid from municipal funds if such funds are available; such subsidization must be secured with a lien instrument due upon sale, transfer or non-rate/term refinance of the home. 	X 	
Down payment assistance 	Subject to the availability of funds, the city will provide on a first-come first-served basis, down payment assistance not to exceed $10,000.00 per home benefiting households. Down-payment assistance will only be provided directly to the qualifying homebuyer. This assistance shall be secured with a lien instrument due upon sale, transfer or non-rate/term refinance of the home. 	X 	
Reduced minimum lot sizes 	A subdivision satisfying the requirements of this article 38.380 through the construction of affordable homes (not by cash in lieu or land donation) may use any of the minimum lot area, lot width, and floor area reductions as described in article 38.320, Form and Intensity Standards, for lots for qualifying homes. 	X 	X 
Concurrent infrastructure housing construction 	Concurrent construction of infrastructure and housing development at the installation of gravel-base roads, provided the developer has provided assurance through a performance bond, letter of credit or other financial security acceptable to the City Attorney ensuring the completion of infrastructure and meets all applicable criteria in 38.270.030.D. 	X 	
Reduced parking requirements 	Reduced parking requirement of two spaces per three-bedroom dwelling. 	X 	
1  The procedural adjustments and subsidies in this column may also be requested for moderate-priced homes with a sales price affordable to a buyer-household with an income from 70.1 percent to a maximum of 80 percent of AMI as determined by the city in accordance with section 38.380.070 of this article. 
 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 7, 1-14-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012 , § 7, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, amended the title of § 38.380.130 to read as herein set out. The former § 38.380.130 title pertained to incentives available for affordable housing.  
Part 5. - Alternative Means of Compliance 
 
Sec. 38.380.140. - Alternative means of compliance; payments of fees-in-lieu. 
A.  Alternatives to building lower-priced homes. The city may authorize a developer otherwise required to provide affordable homes within a development to provide an alternative means of compliance of equal value to the affordable homes otherwise required to be constructed pursuant to this article. 
B.  Allowable alternative means of compliance. If approved by the city, a developer may satisfy the affordable housing requirements of this article by providing (i) a cash or in-kind payment in lieu or (ii) a donation of land. 
1.  Payment of cash in lieu. Payment shall be made to the city of a payment of cash-in-lieu per a fee schedule adopted annually by the city commission. For each required affordable home not built, the cash-in-lieu amount will be the difference between the sales price of a lower-priced home according to the then-current schedule of affordable home prices and the average of the median sales price of homes within the city with the same number of bedrooms over the two years prior to the adoption of the schedule. Cash-in-lieu payments shall be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling or building in the development subject to this article. 
2.  Donation of land. Credits for donation of house lots or multi-family parcels. The city may accept donations to a city-designated community housing nonprofit entity of: (a) ready-to-build house lots; or (b) parcels of land suitable for construction of affordable multifamily housing. Restrictions on the donated lots or parcels will run with the land. Such donations, if approved, will provide credits against this article's requirements for building lower-priced homes. The credits will be determined as follows: 
a.  House lots. The value of the lot or lots, as determined by a professional appraisal paid for by the developer, will be divided by the city's then-current average of cash-in-lieu payments for homes of different sizes. The product of that division to two decimal points will constitute the credit against the otherwise required number of lower-priced homes. 
b.  Parcels of land. The city shall periodically adopt a valuation for donation of parcels of land intended for multifamily development, for purposes of determining credits against the number of affordable homes that would otherwise be required in a development subject to this article. The parcel of land must be zoned for the development of multi-family housing, such as R-3, R-4 and REMU. 
C.  Timing of delivery of alternative means of compliance. 
1.  Timing of providing in-lieu contributions. In-lieu contributions when permitted shall be due and deliverable to the city before the recordation of the affordable housing plan. A developer may propose an alternative to this requirement in which staged contributions are made upon the predicted occurrence of certain events, such as the sale of lots, which alternative may be approved at the sole discretion of the city. 
2.  Staged delivery of in-lieu contributions. In the case of staged delivery of in-lieu contributions, when permitted, the city's determination of the value of each contribution shall take into account the differential financial value of payments that are made later than recordation of the affordable housing plan using conventional methods of discounting future cash flows to present value. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 8, 1-14-2019)  
Part 6. - Buyer Qualification and Subsidy Recapture 
 
Sec. 38.380.150. - Qualification of buyers of affordable homes. 
A.  Lower-priced homes. To qualify for purchase of a lower-priced home, a buyer must meet the following criteria: 
1.  A household income at or below 80 percent AMI range, as verified and certified by the city; such certification must have been provided more than one year prior to the closing date of the purchase. Income verification will be performed using HUD's online income certification tool or a similar method that meets Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 24 part 5, as amended, which adjusts gross incomes based on extraordinary expenses and imputation of assets to income. 
2.  Maximum liquid assets of $25,000.00 at the time of income certification. Exceptions may be granted by the Director of community development based on extraordinary circumstances. 
3.  The household occupying the lower-priced home must meet the definition of "Household" in section 38.700.090. 
4.  The buyer must meet one of the following definitions of "first-time homebuyer": 
a.  An individual who has had no ownership interest in a principal residence during the three-year period ending with the date of purchase; or 
b.  A single parent whose only prior home was owned with a former spouse while married; or 
c.  An affected individual, defined by HUD as a displaced homemaker, who has only owned with a spouse; or 
d.  An individual who has only owned a principal residence not permanently affixed to a permanent foundation in accordance with applicable regulations; or 
e.  An individual who has only owned a property that was not in compliance with state, local or model building codes and which cannot be brought into compliance for less than the cost of construction a permanent structure. 
5.  The buyer must contribute at least $1,000.00 towards the purchase of the home unless waived in writing by the city because of extraordinary circumstances, such as death of primary or secondary income earner or qualification as displaced homemaker. 
6.  The buyer must utilize conventional or government-insured fixed-rate first-mortgage financing with a term of 15 to 30 years. 
7.  The household in a lower-priced home must occupy the home as its primary residence. Lower-priced homes may not be rented to another party, since the intent of the program is to provide these homes only for income-qualified owner occupants, with the exception of rentals for a limited period of time necessitated by a family hardship or a temporary move for one year or less, if approved in advance by the city. 
B.  Moderate-priced homes. To purchase a moderate-priced home, a buyer must occupy the home as a primary residence. The developer must provide evidence satisfactory to the city verifying the initial owner will use the home as their primary residence at time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 9, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 38.380.160. - Subsidy recapture for lower-priced homes. 
To ensure that the community investment in affordable housing is perpetuated and that beneficiaries of affordable housing programs do not receive a windfall financial benefit, the city requires repayment of subsidies as follows: 
A.  Requirement for repayment of cash subsidy. The buyer of a lower-priced home that received cash support in the form of funds from the Affordable Housing Fund or other funding through the city, including but not limited to down payment assistance, impact fee payment, or other funding shall be required to repay the subsidy, at zero percent interest, when the dwelling or property is sold, transferred, refinanced with equity converted to cash out or when the initial buyer who qualified for the subsidy has failed to abide by the requirements of this article. The subsidy will be recorded as a lien against the property at the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorders office. 
B.  Requirement for repayment of non-cash subsidy. Because affordable homes which received procedural adjustments or subsidies will be sold at a discount from market value, the city commission finds that it gives a subsidy with cash value to the initial buyer which may be recaptured under certain circumstances. Therefore, upon resale or transfer of the affordable home, the city aims to further its housing affordability goals by recapturing the principal amount of the subsidy by use of a lien in favor of the city in that amount, which will be due and payable to the city, at zero percent interest, when the home is sold or transferred or when the initial buyer who qualified for the affordable home has failed to abide by the terms of this article. 
C.  Determination of non-cash subsidy amount. The community development director determines the amount of non-cash subsidy based on the difference between 98 percent of the fair market value of the affordable home and the sales price of the home. To determine the fair market value the director may rely on market data or analysis or one or more professional appraisals provided by the buyer's mortgage lender or, the purchaser, or such other professional appraisal as may be obtained by the director for this purpose. An appraisal report used for purposes of this section must provide the fair market value of the affordable home. The commitment letter instructions provided to the appraiser must include a requirement that the appraiser not use as comparables other homes that have received subsid(ies) pursuant to this article 380, or through any affordable housing assistance from the city, State of Montana or federal program. If such property must be used as a comparable in the appraisal report, the appraiser must clearly indicate and adjust for the value of such subsidy in determining the fair market value of such property. 
D.  Reconsideration of director's determination of fair market value. Any party involved in the affordable home sale transaction, including buyer, seller, or the city's agent may request reconsideration of the director's determination of fair market value of an affordable home. In the event of such a request, the requesting party may provide the city with an appraisal that meets the requirements of subsection C of this section and/or any other written evidence the requesting party believes the director should consider in his determination. 
E.  Use of repayments to the city. The city shall only use repayments of the lien amounts to fund: 
1.  Down payment assistance for buyers of new or existing homes in Bozeman with household incomes at or below 80 percent of AMI; 
2.  Affordable rental opportunities for residents of Bozeman with incomes at or below 60 percent of AMI; or 
3.  Any other use approved by the city commission that increases affordable homeownership opportunities for residents of Bozeman with income at or below 80 percent of AMI. 
(Ord. No. 2012 , § 10, 1-14-2019)  
Part 7. - Administration and Enforcement 
 
Sec. 38.380.170. - Administration. 
A.  Director of community development authority. The director of community development or an agent designated by the city commission shall have authority to promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations and take all actions necessary to the effective operation and enforcement of this article, unless such authority is expressly reserved to the city commission or another city official, including but not limited to: 
1.  Reviewing a developers' affordable housing plan for compliance with this article; 
2.  Adopting all forms and prescribing the information to be given therein; 
3.  Monitoring developers' compliance with this article, notifying the developer of noncompliance, and ordering compliance; 
4.  Imposing any and all sanctions permitted by this article; and 
5.  Calculating the annual pricing targets for affordable homes and causing a sales price schedule to be published. The director of community development may make de minimis exceptions to the factors considered in calculating the price targets. 
B.  Administrative manual. The city will publish administrative rules and instructions approved by the city commission, including but not limited to instructions for completing the affordable housing plan, valuations required by this article, and the distribution of the required number of affordable homes between the two affordable home categories and required number of bedrooms. Such distribution by affordable home category shall be based primarily upon an assessment by the city of housing needs among the income groups corresponding to each affordable home category, but shall take into account the economic impact on developments subject to the requirements of this article. 
C.  Verification of sales prices and income certification prior to closing. The city manager may create standards for documentation the city will use to verify the sale price of a home created pursuant to this article. For the initial sale of an affordable home, the seller must provide the city with a copy of the HUD-1 form prepared by an attorney or title company indicating the sales price. The final sales price on the HUD-1 form may not exceed the maximum price for a specific affordable home as described in the current price schedule pursuant to section 38.380.070 plus an allowed maximum of $3,000.00 in buyer selected upgrades, if allowed by the first mortgage lender underwriters. In addition, the city shall require certification satisfactory to the city of homebuyer income qualification. 
D.  Monitoring completed sales. Upon receipt of a settlement statement for an affordable home, the city will determine if the completed affordable home sale complies with the approved affordable housing plan and the requirements of this article, and if not, respond to the noncompliance as provided in section 38.380.180.  
Sec. 38.380.180. - Noncompliance; sanctions. 
A.  Discovery of noncompliance. If the city determines a developer subject to an affordable housing plan has failed to comply with any terms or conditions of the affordable housing plan or this article, the Director of community development or authorized agent shall notify the developer of the noncompliance in writing and order compliance by the most reasonable and expeditious means as determined by the city. Notification shall describe a date certain by which the developer must be in full compliance (which may not be less than one week or more than one year from the date of the notice), and shall describe: (i) the exact nature of the noncompliance; and (ii) the possible sanctions for noncompliance with this notification. 
B.  Cancellation of incentives provided. If a developer sells a home for a price not in compliance with the approved affordable housing plan or any other recorded documentation obligating developer to comply with this article, the developer must, prior to the release by the city of the dwelling from the affordable housing plan or binding agreement, pay the city the difference between the sale price and the price of the affordable home as set out in the approved affordable housing plan. 
C.  Sanctions for noncompliance. In addition to other remedies available to the city pursuant to this article, if on a date certain by which compliance has been ordered by the director of community development or authorized agent, the developer remains in noncompliance, the director of community development or authorized agent shall notify the city attorney of the noncompliance and request that sanctions be imposed. The city shall have the authority to impose one or more sanctions including but not limited to the following which the city deems most effective and appropriate considering the nature of the noncompliance: 
1.  Withholding or revoking building permits, 
2.  Issuing stop-work orders, and/or 
3.  Withholding certificates of occupancy.  
ARTICLE 4. - COMMUNITY DESIGN  
DIVISION 38.400. - TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES AND ACCESS 
 
Sec. 38.400.010. - Streets, general. 
A.  All streets must comply with the adopted growth policy and/or transportation plan. The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade and location of all streets must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The design standards contained in these regulations apply to all construction, reconstruction and paving of streets. Review authority for exceptions or modifications to this section is specified in division 38.200.010. 
1.  Relation to undeveloped areas. When a proposed development adjoins undeveloped land, and access to the undeveloped land would reasonably pass through the new development, streets and alleys within the proposed development must be arranged to allow the suitable development of the adjoining undeveloped land. Streets and alleys within the proposed development must be constructed to the boundary lines of the tract to be developed, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. If the development being reviewed is a subdivision, a request for an alteration of this standard must be processed as a subdivision variance. If the development being reviewed is not a subdivision, a request for an alteration of this standard must be reviewed against the criteria of section 38.250.080.B, but will not alter the review authority who would otherwise decide upon the application. 
2.  Relation to developed areas. The developer must arrange the streets and alleys to provide for the continuation of streets and alleys between adjacent developed properties when such continuation is necessary for the convenient movement of traffic, effective provision of emergency services and efficient provision of utilities. 
3.  Separation of through and local traffic. Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the developer may be required to provide frontage roads, reverse frontage with a reservation prohibiting access along the rear property line, screen planting, or such other treatment as may be necessary for protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
4.  Distance between parallel rights-of-way. Where a development borders on or contains a railroad, limited access highway, canal, ditch or stream right-of-way, the developer may be required to provide a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable to allow for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances must also comply with the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation. 
5.  Dead-end streets and alleys. Dead-end streets must comply with city design specifications and standards, and with any city-adopted International Fire Code. No dead-end streets longer than 150 feet are permitted without an approved turn-around. Where streets terminate, the developer must provide a cul-de-sac at the terminus. Where it is planned that a dead-end street will be extended in the future, a temporary cul-de-sac must be provided. All approved turnarounds must be signed as no parking. 
a.  "T" turnarounds, in-lieu of temporary culs-de-sac, must be specifically approved by the review authority. "T" turnarounds must include two straight backup lengths of 45 feet each to accommodate city fire trucks. All other design requirements are established by the review authority. 
6.  Local streets. Local streets must be laid out to discourage speeding. 
7.  Half streets. Half streets are prohibited except when they are essential to the development, are beneficial to the city, or when the review authority is satisfied that the half street will be dedicated to the public after the adjoining property is developed. Half streets must be approved by the review authority, and when adjacent to unannexed land, the county road office. When an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be developed, the undeveloped half of the street must be provided with the new development. 
8.  Second or emergency access. To facilitate traffic movement, the provision of emergency services and the placement of utility easements, all developments must be provided with a second means of access. If, in the judgment of the development review committee (DRC), a second dedicated right-of-way cannot be provided for reasons of topography or other physical conditions, the developer must provide an emergency access, built to the standards detailed in these regulations. 
a.  This provision may be waived or conditionally waived by the DRC. 
9.  Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac are generally prohibited. The review authority may consider and approve the installation of a cul-de-sac only when necessary due to topography, the presence of critical lands, access control, adjacency to parks or open space, or similar site constraints. Pedestrian walks must be installed at the end of culs-de-sac where deemed appropriate. 
10.  Bridges and culverts. Culverts or bridges must be provided and installed by the developer where drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way. 
a.  Bridges. Bridges must be built to state department of transportation H-20 load standards, and must be reviewed and approved by the county road office and the city engineering department. 
b.  Culverts. All culverts must, at a minimum, extend across the entire improved width of the street cross section. When culverts are determined necessary by the city engineering department, the size and length of the culvert and the amount of backfill over the culvert must be determined by a registered professional engineer. 
(1)  Each culvert or other drainage facility must be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from upstream drainage areas. The minimum capacity of a culvert must be equivalent to a circular diameter of 15 inches. 
11.  Encroachment permits. The person or entity undertaking the development must obtain encroachment permits for all access to state highways. 
12.  Traffic control devices. Street signs and other traffic control devices must be installed at all intersections and any other location required by the city. The location, size, shape and height of all traffic control devices must comply with city requirements, and must conform with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications. 
13.  Sight distances. The alignment of all streets must provide adequate sight distances based on design operating speeds.  
Sec. 38.400.020. - Street and road dedication. 
A.  General. All streets or alleys within, or providing access to, the proposed development must be dedicated to the public, be private streets to be owned and maintained by an approved property owners' association, or, if the criteria of this section are met, be a public street easement. 
1.  Public street easements. Public street easements must: 
a.  Be approved by the city attorney's office; 
b.  Be recorded in the county clerk and recorder's office; and 
c.  Clearly grant to the public an unrestricted right of ingress and egress from a public street to the property to be subdivided. 
2.  Private streets. 
a.  Private streets may be required to have a public access easement if deemed necessary by the city. 
b.  If a private street is proposed, the project must be reviewed as a planned unit development. However, development proposals containing private streets are exempt from the PUD review requirement if: 
(1)  A local private street is proposed and the street would comply with the city standard right-of-way requirement of 60 feet, and the standard back-of-curb to back-of-curb width of 31, 33 or 35 feet; or 
(2)  A local private street is proposed and the street would comply with the city standard right-of-way requirement of 60 feet. The back-of-curb to back-of-curb width may vary from city standards, provided that: 
(a)  A permanent funding source, such as the levying of assessments against all properties within the development, for street maintenance is established and the funding levels will be adequate for all future private street maintenance; and 
(b)  The developer signs a waiver of right to protest the creation of SIDs, or other perpetual legal instrument, acknowledging that the city will not assume dedication and/or maintenance of the streets unless the street is brought up to city standards, or the property owners' have agreed to an assessment to fund improvements required to bring the street up to city standards. The developer must record the waiver, or other legal instrument, at the time of final plat recordation, or prior to issuance of building permits if no final plat recordation is required. 
c.  Documented proof of adequate funding and scheduling for maintenance of all private streets, must be provided, subject to section 38.220.200.  
Sec. 38.400.030. - Intersections. 
A.  The following requirements apply to street intersections: 
1.  Streets must intersect at 90-degree angles except when topography prohibits this alignment. In no case may the angle of an intersection be less than 60 degrees to the centerline of the street or road being intersected; 
2.  Two streets meeting a third street from opposite sides must be offset at least 125 feet for local roads and 300 feet for arterials or collectors. Distances must be measured from the inside edge of the access, extended at its intersection with the projected curb line of the intersecting street, to the right-of-way line, along the street frontage right-of-way line. See Figure 38.400.030; 
3.  No more than two streets may intersect at one point; 
4.  Intersections of local streets with major arterials or highways must comply with section 38.400.090; 
5.  Intersections must be designed to provide adequate visibility for traffic safety based on the designated operating speeds of the intersecting roadways; 
6.  Hilltop intersections are prohibited, unless no alternatives exist. Intersections on local streets within 100 feet of a hilltop are prohibited. Intersections on arterial and collector streets within 200 feet of a hilltop are prohibited. If no alternatives to a hilltop intersection exist, additional traffic control devices are required; 
7.  The grade of approaches to major highways may not exceed five percent; and 
8.  Any street which intersects a paved minor collector or greater street must be paved for at least 75 feet from the existing edge of pavement. 
 
Figure 38.400.030. 
Intersections. 
  
Sec. 38.400.040. - Street names. 
A.  The following requirements apply to street names: 
1.  New streets aligned with existing streets must have the same name as the existing streets. 
2.  All street names must be approved by the county geographic information systems and city engineering department prior to final plat or plan approval in order to avoid duplication and confusion with names of existing streets and roads.  
Sec. 38.400.050. - Street and road right-of-way width and construction standards. 
A.  All streets and roads providing access to, and within, the proposed development must meet the following standards: 
1.  Right-of-way width and construction standards contained in this chapter: the most recently adopted long range transportation plan; the City of Bozeman Design Standards and Specifications Policy; and the City of Bozeman Modifications to Montana Public Works Standard Specifications. 
2.  Access streets and roads which are not on the city's or county's road maintenance system must be dedicated to the public or must have a public easement which meets the criteria of this division 38.400.  
Sec. 38.400.060. - Street improvement standards. 
A.  All street improvements must be designed by and constructed under the supervision of a professional civil engineer, registered in the state, and must meet or exceed the right-of-way and construction standards adopted by the city (including but not limited to an adopted transportation plan or specifications manual) and required for the type of street to be constructed. 
B.  Plans and specifications for all public or private streets (including but not limited to curb, gutter, storm drainage, street lighting and sidewalks), must be provided to and approved by the review authority. The developer must provide professional engineering services for construction inspection, post-construction certifications and preparation of Mylar record drawings. The plans and specifications must be approved and a preconstruction conference must be conducted before any construction is initiated on the street improvements. 
1.  Surfacing. A pavement design report, based upon specific site soil data and design-year traffic loading conditions, prepared by a professional engineer, or other qualified professional approved by the review authority, must be submitted to the review authority for approval prior to plan and specification submittal if using the self-certification process, or with the plans and specifications if using the standard process. Pavement design must be in accordance with the city design standards and specifications policy and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications. 
2.  Alleys. In subdivisions where alleys are proposed, a 20-foot-wide right-of-way must be provided. The driving surface of the alley must be 16 feet wide and must be improved with gravel. 
a.  Subdividers may elect to pave subdivision alleys provided that adequate stormwater facilities are available. 
b.  Alleys must be designed and constructed in accordance with the city design standards and specifications policy and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications, and subject to approval by the city engineer. 
c.  Alleys used for backing under section 38.540.020.D must be designed to provide the required aisle width. 
3.  Traffic progression. Traffic progression is of paramount importance. Consequently, all potential intersections with signals must be placed on quarter-mile points unless otherwise approved by the review authority. 
4.  Level of service standards. All arterial and collector streets and intersections with arterial and collector streets must operate at a minimum level of service "C" unless specifically exempted by this section. The city determines level of service (LOS) values by using the methods defined by the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual. The review authority may approve a development only if the LOS requirements are met in the design year, which must be a minimum of 15 years following the development application review or construction of mitigation measures if mitigation measures are required to maintain LOS. Intersections must have a minimum acceptable LOS of "C" for the intersection as a whole. 
a.  Exception: If an intersection within the area required to be studied by section 38.220.060.A.12 does not meet LOS "C" and the intersection has been fully constructed to its maximum lane and turning movement capacity, then an LOS of less than "C" is acceptable. 
b.  Exception: The review authority may grant a waiver from an LOS of less than "C" at a specific intersection if the review authority determines: 
(1)  Granting a waiver for the intersection would not be contrary to public health and safety and is in the public interest; 
(2)  Improvements to the intersection to raise the overall level of service to a "C" or better are currently scheduled for commencement of construction within three years as shown on the most recently adopted Transportation Capital Improvement Plan; 
(3)  All rights-of-way necessary for the required intersection improvements have been obtained by the city or by the Montana Department of Transportation; and 
(4)  The commission has approved a financing plan for the intersection improvements. 
A waiver granted under this subsection is valid for the initial entitlement period of the project and applies only to the real property for which the waiver is granted. A request for the extension of the initial development approval relying upon an intersection level of service waiver is a material modification to the application per 38.100.070. 
c.  If the review authority does not grant a waiver from the level of service standard under this subsection B.4, a subdivider or other site developer may request a variance from the requirements of this section. If a variance is granted from the requirements of this section, the variance applies only to the specific development proposal for which it was granted and must not be considered evidence for any other development proposal.  
Sec. 38.400.070. - Street lighting. 
A.  Standards. For street lighting standards, see division 38.570. 
B.  Timing. For the timing of street lighting improvements, see section 38.270.030.B.3.  
Sec. 38.400.080. - Sidewalks. 
A.  General. City standard sidewalks (including a concrete sidewalk section through all private drive approaches) must be constructed in all developments on all public and private street frontages, except for alleys. The requirements of the city design standards and specifications policy and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications and per the block frontage standards of division 38.510 apply. 
B.  Sidewalks adjacent to public lands. The developer must install sidewalks adjacent to public lands, including, but not limited to, parks, open space, and the intersection of alleys and streets or street easements. Applicable sidewalks and development frontages adjacent to public lands are subject to the provisions of section 38.510.030.I. 
C.  Timing. The following requirements regarding the timing of the installation of sidewalks apply: 
1.  For subdivision improvements, please refer to section 38.270.030.B.2. 
2.  For site development improvements, sidewalks must be installed prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, or must be subject to an approved improvements agreement and financially guaranteed, as specified in division 38.270 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.400.090. - Access. 
A.  General. All final site plans and plats must contain a statement requiring lot accesses to be built to the standard contained in this section, the city design standards and specifications policy, and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications. 
1.  Lot access standards. The drive approach must be constructed in accordance with the city's standard approach, which includes a concrete apron, sidewalk section and drop-curb. 
a.  A city curb cut and sidewalk permit must be obtained from the engineering department prior to installation of the approach. 
2.  Access must comply with any city-adopted International Fire Code. 
B.  Drive access from improved public street, approved private street or alley required. 
1.  For purposes of this Code, "improved" public street, approved private street, or alley means and includes: 
a.  Any street or alley within the city constructed to a standard which meets or exceeds standards established by this chapter, the city design standards and specifications policy, and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications; 
b.  Constructed public streets which may not meet current city standards but which are constructed to a standard that has historically provided an adequate level of service to adjacent properties, which level of service would not be degraded as a result of a pending development proposal. 
2.  Unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, all lots must be provided with legal and physical access via one of the following options: 
a.  Twenty-five feet of frontage on a public or approved private street; 
b.  Twenty-five feet of frontage on a public or approved private street and an improved alley; or 
c.  Twenty-five feet of frontage on an improved alley and a greenway corridor or trail corridor with public access. This option may require additional improvements to the alley to accommodate emergency access, snow removal and storage, and the provision of utilities. The alley may also require signage for the provision of emergency services. 
C.  Drive access requirements. 
1.  Drive accesses are required for commercial parking lots and parking lots for residential developments subject to the site plan review procedures of division 38.230 of this chapter. 
2.  Parking areas for residential developments subject to the sketch plan review procedures of section 38.230.070, may take access directly from an improved public street, approved private street or improved alley as defined in subsection B.1 of this section with access provided according to the provisions of this section and section 38.540.020.D. 
3.  All drive accesses installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended must comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Residential. 
(1)  Residential lots must not have direct access to arterials or collectors, unless the standards contained in table 38.400.090-1 are complied with; 
(2)  Residential drive access standards apply to all residential development with drive access facing a street, except apartment buildings. 
(a)  Individual residential drive accesses facing the street with a single internal parking bay meeting the standard of table 38.540.020 may not exceed 12 feet in width measured at the right-of-way line and 18 feet in width measured at the curb line. 
(b)  Individual residential drive accesses facing the street with two or more internal parking bays meeting the standard of table 38.540.020 may not exceed 20 feet in width measured at the right-of-way line and 26 feet in width measured at the curb line. 
(c)  Individual and shared drive accesses must be physically separated by means of a landscaped area greater than or equal to ten feet in width between paved areas and extending from the front line of the building to the right-of-way line. 
(d)  Residential complexes with 25 or more dwelling units must meet the commercial access standards in section 38.400.090.C.3.b. 
b.  Non-residential. 
(1)  Commercial drive access widths must be no greater than 35 feet measured at the inside edge of the drive access extended, at its intersection with the projected curbline of the intersecting street. Two-way drive access must be a minimum of 24 feet and one-way drive access must be a minimum of 16 feet. 
(2)  Industrial drive access widths must be no greater than 40 feet measured at the inside edge of the drive access extended, at its intersection with the projected curbline of the intersecting street. Two-way drive accesses must be a minimum of 24 feet and one-way drive accesses must be a minimum of 16 feet. 
 
Figure 38.400.090.C.2.b. 
Commercial and industrial accesses. 
 
c.  Drive accesses for all multiple tenant commercial buildings or complexes/centers, or industrial drive accesses must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the adjacent property line unless such drive access is approved as a shared drive access. 
d.  Drive accesses to drive-in theaters, stadiums, racetracks, funeral homes or uses generating very heavy periodic traffic conflicts must be located not closer than 200 feet to any pedestrian or vehicular entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, public emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. 
e.  All commercial and industrial drive accesses on arterial streets must have 15-foot return radii unless otherwise approved by the review authority. All commercial and industrial drive accesses on other streets may have either return radii or depressed curbs. The minimum radius allowed is four feet. 
D.  Spacing standards for drive accesses. 
1.  General. 
a.  Consolidation of access points onto public streets, to achieve a distance between access points in excess of the minimum standards in this section, is desired and must be considered during all levels of site plan review. 
b.  For the purposes of this section, public or private access means any street, alley, driveway or other point of vehicular access to a publicly controlled street. 
c.  The distance between public and/or private accesses on a public street must be measured between the right-of-way line for public accesses and the nearest inside edges of private accesses according to the following distances specified in subsections D.2 and 3 of this section. 
d.  Subsection D of this section does not apply to single-household, two, three, or four unit structures on individual lots. 
 
Figure 38.400.090.D. 
Spacing standards for drive accesses. 
 
2.  These standards apply to the minimum distance between public and/or private accesses and intersections, and the minimum distance between public and/or private accesses and other public and/or private accesses. 
Table 38.400.090-1 
Minimum distance between public and/or private accesses and intersections and the minimum distance between public and/or private accesses and other public and/or private accesses 
	Access Located on Arterial Streets 	Access Located on Collector Streets 	Access Located on Local Streets 
Average Spacing 	In All Districts 	In All Districts 	In All Districts 
Partial access 1 	315' 	150' 	40' 3 
Full access 2 	660' 	330' 	40' 3 
Minimum separation 	315' 	150' 	40' 
 
1 Partial access includes right turn in and out only. 
2 Full access allows all turn movements, in and out. 
3 Accesses on local streets must be at least 150 feet from an intersection with an arterial. 
E.  Number and location of drive accesses. 
1.  Single-household uses are limited to one drive access per street face, except on properties abutting arterial streets, in which case shared accesses, or drive aisles facilitating the turning of automobiles on-site are required. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, drive accesses may not be located closer than five feet to any side property line, unless shared access, as defined in section 38.700, with the adjoining property is approved. This standard does not apply to the shared side property line of townhouses units with adjacent garages using attached drive aisles. 
F.  Shared drive access. The city desires and encourages sharing access drives, as defined in section 38.700.170 of this chapter, between separate parcels. 
G.  Access approval required. All drive accesses may be approved by the review authority for width and location. 
H.  Modifications of property access standards. 
1.  Some of the standards listed in subsections C through E of this section, may be relaxed by the review authority if it is shown during the development review process that more efficient design can be accomplished without jeopardizing the public's health, safety and welfare, the intent of this chapter, or the intent of the city's growth policy. 
2.  Modifications from access standards may be approved by the review authority. 
3.  Commercial developments (including residential complexes for five or more households) which may not be able to meet the requirements of subsections C through E of this section, and are requesting modifications from the standards, must submit to the city engineer a report certified by a professional engineer addressing the following site conditions, both present and future: 
a.  Traffic volumes; 
b.  Turning movements; 
c.  Traffic controls; 
d.  Site design; 
e.  Sight distances; and 
f.  Location and alignment of other access points. 
4.  Based upon the above data, the review authority will determine whether a modification from the required standards is justified and, if so, what alternative requirements will be necessary.  
Sec. 38.400.100. - Street vision triangle. 
A.  Arterial streets. On corner lots on arterial streets in all districts, no fence, wall or planting in excess of 30 inches above the street centerline grade is permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the intersection of the projected curblines of the two intersection streets, thence 50 feet along one curbline, thence diagonally to the point 50 feet from the point of beginning on the other curblines, then to the point of beginning, except when traffic control signals are installed, in which case the a local street vision triangle shall apply. Nothing in this section prohibits portions of buildings 12 feet or more above grade from encroaching into required vision triangle setbacks. 
B.  Collector and local streets. On corner lots, on collector and local streets, in all districts, no fence, wall or planting in excess of 30 inches above the street centerline grades is permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the intersection of the projected curblines of two intersecting streets, thence 40 feet along one curbline, thence diagonally to a point 40 feet from the point of beginning on the other curbline, then to the point of beginning. 
C.  Drive aisles and alleys. At the intersection of each driveway or alley with a street, no fence, wall or planting in excess of 30 inches above the street centerline grade is permitted within a triangular area where corners are defined by two points on the right-of-way line, 15 feet on each side of the centerline of the driveway or alley and a point on centerline ten feet outside the right-of-way. Any driveway or alley wider than 30 feet curb to curb at the right-of-way line must use the vision triangle standard for local streets when intersecting local, collector, or arterial streets. 
D.  Provision for trees in street vision triangle. 
1.  Single-stem canopy trees are discouraged but may be permitted in street vision triangles as described in this section, provided that mature trees do not significantly affect safe driving conditions and are maintained such that no canopy foliage exists below a height of ten feet above centerline of intersecting streets. 
2.  Trees which are located in the street vision triangle and which preexisted the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be allowed to remain, provided the trees are trimmed such that no limbs or foliage exist below a height of ten feet above centerline grades of intersecting streets. 
 
Figure 38.400.100. 
Street vision triangles. 
  
Sec. 38.400.110. - Transportation pathways. 
A.  General. Pathways must be installed in accordance with this chapter, the growth policy, the most recently adopted long-range transportation plan, any adopted citywide park plan, and any adopted individual park master plan, and must comply with City of Bozeman Design Specifications. See also sections 38.410.100, 38.420.070 and 38.420.110. 
B.  Pathway categories. The development review committee (DRC) must determine whether a pathway is a transportation pathway or a recreation pathway. For subdivision and planned unit development proposals, this determination must be made during the pre-application process. 
1.  Transportation pathways. Developers must install transportation pathways, to provide adequate multimodal transportation facilities within the development, as part of the required development improvements. Transportation pathways must be Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessible, and include the following types of facilities: 
a.  Sidewalks (also see division 38.510 for sidewalk standards, depending on the applicable block frontage designation); 
b.  On-street bike lanes and bike routes; 
c.  Boulevard trails; and 
d.  Class I trails; 
(1)  With the exception of trail corridors within required watercourse setbacks, corridors for Class I trails must be dedicated to the city. The dedicated trail corridor must be at least 25 feet in width to ensure adequate room for the construction, maintenance and use of the trail. Transportation trail corridors cannot be used to satisfy parkland dedication requirements; and 
e.  Pathways that connect community or neighborhood commercial nodes by a reasonably direct route; or 
f.  Pathways that connect major residential, employment, educational, or other service nodes by a reasonably direct route. 
2.  Recreation pathways. For the definition of recreation pathways, please see section 38.420.110.B. 
C.  Related facilities. If pathways are proposed or required, stream crossings and other similar improvements, where necessary, must be installed. Bridge design and construction must comply with city specifications and standards, and must be submitted to the community development department for review and approval. Any necessary permits for bridges must be obtained by the developer from the appropriate agency prior to installation of the stream crossings. 
D.  Trail requirements. The class of the trail must be determined by the review authority, and the trail must be designed and constructed according to any adopted park or recreation plan or other city specifications and standards. Trails and bridges must meet ADA specifications for recreational facilities and maintain a natural appearance. Trail plans and specifications must be submitted to the planning and parks departments for review and approval prior to installation. 
E.  Bikeways and boulevard trails. Wherever new streets are to be developed as a result of a development proposal, or wherever existing streets or roads are required to be improved, the developer may be required to incorporate striped bicycle lanes along the shoulder, meeting current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards, into the design and construction or improvement of the streets or roads. The decision to install a boulevard trail instead of a bike lane must be based on the most recently adopted long-range transportation plan. The review authority may consider exceptions based on the particular characteristics of a transportation corridor and recommendations from the DRC and the Bozeman Area Bicycle Advisory Board. Boulevard trails and bike lanes must be designed and constructed in accordance with the most recently adopted long-range transportation plan, and any other applicable city specifications and standards. 
F.  Pathway maintenance. Trails within and adjacent to the proposed development, as well as off-street pathways (i.e., sidewalks and boulevard trails) along external development streets, must be maintained by the developer (including snow removal) in accordance with an approved maintenance plan until 50 percent of the lots within the development are sold. Thereafter, the property owners' association must be responsible for maintenance. The property owners' association may establish an improvement district to collect assessments to pay for the maintenance. 
G.  Pathway easements. Where pathways cross private land or common open space, the proper public access easements must be provided. Public access easements for pathways must be at least 25 feet wide. The director of public works may accept an alternate easement width when said easement is parallel to a road ROW. 
H.  Trails in required watercourse setbacks. Trail corridors within required watercourse setbacks must not be dedicated to the city, and such land may not be used to satisfy parkland dedication requirements. When publicly accessible trails are established within required watercourse setbacks, public access easements at least 25 feet in width must be provided to ensure adequate room for the construction, maintenance and use of the trail. 
I.  Corridors. Corridors for transportation pathways may not be used to satisfy parkland dedication requirements. 
J.  Development frontages adjacent to trails are subject to the block frontage provisions of section 38.510.030.I.  
Sec. 38.400.120. - Public transportation. 
A.  Street design. All interior and exterior development streets that are designated as transit routes must be designed to accommodate transit vehicles and facilities. Considerations for transit street design include but are not limited to: 
1.  Pavement design; 
2.  Lane width; 
3.  Corner radii; 
4.  Street grade; 
5.  Curb height; and 
6.  Right-of-way width. 
B.  Other transit considerations. Developments with designated transit routes must be designed with consideration to the following requirements: 
1.  Spacing of transit stops. All lots within the development must not be further than one-half mile from a designated transit route; 
2.  Length of transit stops. Developments must be designed to accommodate a bus length of at least 90 feet on designated transit routes; 
3.  Distance from intersection. Transit stops must be at least five feet from pedestrian crosswalks or the end of corner radii; 
4.  Driveway conflicts. Lots and lot accesses must be configured to avoid conflicts with transit stops; and 
5.  Lighting. Subdivision street lighting must be configured to provide adequate lighting at transit stops. 
C.  Transit facilities. If any streets on the interior or exterior of the development are designated as transit routes, the review authority may require the developer to provide transit facilities such as transit stop signage, benches, bike racks, lighting and bus shelters.  
DIVISION 38.410. - COMMUNITY DESIGN AND ELEMENTS 
 
Sec. 38.410.010. - General standards. 
A.  Conformance. The design and development of all land uses must conform to this chapter, adopted growth policies, any relevant adopted neighborhood or subarea plan, and other resolutions and regulations, including any and all amendments thereto. 
B.  Natural environment. The design and development of all land uses must be properly related to topography, and must, to the extent possible, preserve the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil, trees and other existing vegetation. 
C.  Lands unsuitable for development. Land which the city has found to be unsuitable for development because of potential hazards such as flooding, landslides, excessive slope, rock falls, subsidence, high water table, presence of wetlands; or because of unreasonable burdens on the general public such as requirements for the excessive expenditure of public funds, environmental degradation, or congestion in the streets or roads must not be used for building or residential purposes unless the hazards or excessive public burdens are eliminated or will be overcome by appropriate design and construction plans. Slopes of 25 percent or greater are presumed unbuildable unless demonstrated otherwise by the developer.  
Sec. 38.410.020. - Neighborhood centers. 
A.  To provide a neighborhood focal point, all residential subdivisions or planned unit developments that are ten net acres in size or greater, must have a neighborhood center. Developments may be exempted from this requirement if every lot within the development is within one-half mile of an existing neighborhood center. Generally, the center must be no less than one acre in size. The center must be comprised of a park, square, green, plaza, transit stop, neighborhood commercial center, civic use or any combination of these. The following requirements apply to all neighborhood centers: 
1.  The geographic center point of the neighborhood center must be no further than 600 feet from the geographic center point of the development. This requirement may be waived in the following circumstances: 
a.  The development would create parcels that are all non-residential; 
b.  The center is a neighborhood commercial center or is adjacent to a neighborhood commercial center; 
c.  The site is constrained by the presence of critical lands; 
d.  The site is part of an approved subarea plan that shows the center in a different location; or 
e.  The topography of the site presents physical constraints on the property. 
2.  With the exception of civic and neighborhood commercial center uses, the developer must install all center-related improvements as part of the required development improvements. When a multi-phase project is developed, improvements must be installed with each phase. Required improvements must be based on the definition of each feature found in article 7 of this chapter, and/or city standards. 
3.  The neighborhood center must have frontage along 100 percent of its perimeter on public or private streets or roads. The city may consider and approve the installation of streets along less than 100 percent, but not less than 50 percent, of the perimeter in accordance with section 38.420.060. 
4.  With the exception of civic and neighborhood commercial center buildings and grounds, the center is considered a common area to be owned and maintained by the property owners' or a property owners' association. The property owners' association may establish an improvement district to collect assessments to pay for the maintenance. 
5.  After receiving a recommendation from the city recreation and parks advisory board, areas within neighborhood centers used for park, square, or green may count towards parkland dedication requirements (subject to review and approval by the review authority) if they meet the following criteria: 
a.  The area is predominantly open space with enhanced natural features, but may contain amenities such as sidewalks, seating, drinking and ornamental fountains and public art; and 
b.  The area provides active and/or passive recreation opportunities. 
6.  The neighborhood center may be used for limited stormwater retention/detention facilities if reviewed and approved by the review authority. However, any part of the center used for stormwater management does not count towards park dedication requirements. 
7.  New neighborhood commercial centers are subject to the community design framework master plan provisions of sections 38.210.130 and 38.510.030.L.  
Sec. 38.410.030. - Lot. 
A.  Dimensions and orientation. Lot size, width, shape and orientation must be appropriate for the location and contemplated use of the development. In residential developments, a variety of lot sizes must be provided to facilitate housing diversity and choice, and to meet the projected requirements of people with different housing needs. Lot designs with irregular shapes, narrow necks, points and flag shapes are permitted only when the developer can demonstrate that the proposed lot designs are necessary due to topography or other physical constraints on infill. Each lot must contain a satisfactory building site adequate for the uses permitted in its zoning district. Each lot must conform to this chapter, any growth policies, any applicable adopted neighborhood or subarea plan, and to any applicable regulations of the state department of environmental quality. 
B.  Division by rights-of-way. No single lot must be divided by a public street, alley, or public or private utility right-of-way or easement that would reduce the amount of buildable land to less than the minimum lot size required by this chapter for the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Double/through and reverse frontage. Double/through frontage and reverse frontage lots are prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets; to provide access to development adjacent to limited access streets; to overcome topography or other physical conditions; or to overcome specific disadvantages of existing design and orientation. Lots fronting on a street and an alley are not considered double/through or reverse frontage lots. 
D.  Courtyard access lots. This includes a series of lots clustered around a private internal roadway. Minimum standards: 
1.  Maximum number of lots served by a courtyard access: Five (this includes lots fronting the street on either side of the courtyard access). 
2.  Maximum length of a courtyard access: 100 feet (or deeper if approved by the fire marshal). The length may be increased to 150 feet if all structures beyond 100 feet of the street are equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
3.  Surface width of courtyard access: 15 feet minimum, to provide access for ambulances. Provisions must be made to keep the access clear of snow, vehicles ("no parking" signs), and vegetation. 
4.  An easement of 20 feet in width must be secured over the applicable parcels to allow lots legal access to the public street. A maintenance agreement is required for all applicable lots and must be recorded on the plat. 
5.  Buildings accessed from a courtyard access are limited to two-stories in height, due to aerial apparatus access limitations. 
 
Figure 38.410.030.D. 
Examples of courtyard access lots. 
 
E.  Corner lots. Corner lots must have sufficient width to permit appropriate building setbacks from both streets and provide acceptable visibility for traffic safety. 
1.  Homes on corner lots must have the same orientation as homes on lots on the interior of the block, unless otherwise approved through an overall development plan. 
F.  Width. Lots must have a width sufficient to allow normal construction without the construction encroaching on property lines, and must comply with the building setback requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Depth. Except for individual lots for individual townhomes; lots used to meet the requirements of chapter 38, division 38.380; lots serviced by an alley; or when necessitated by physical features of the land, no lot may have an average depth greater than three times its average width. 
H.  Side lot lines. Side lot lines must be at substantially right angles to street or road lines and radial to curved street or road lines. 
I.  Frontage. Unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, all lots must have frontage in compliance with section 38.400.090.B to provide, among other things, adequate room for snow removal, lot access and utility easements. 
J.  Civic uses. If lots are reserved or identified for civic uses, these lots must be prominent sites at the termination of street vistas, or in the neighborhood center. 
K.  Exceptions. Commonly owned lots designated for accessory uses (i.e., stormwater management, open space, utilities) are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
L.  All tracts except ROW must have an identifying lot number restarting with each block.  
Sec. 38.410.040. - Blocks. 
A.  Size and orientation. Blocks must be designed to ensure a high level of multimodal connectivity, traffic safety, and ease of traffic control and circulation; to accommodate the special needs of the use contemplated; and to take advantage of the limitations and opportunities of the topography. 
B.  Block length. Block length must not be designed, unless otherwise impractical, to be more than 400 feet in length or less than 300 feet in length. Block lengths may be longer than 400 feet if necessary due to topography, the presence of critical lands, access control, or adjacency to existing parks or open space. In no case may a block exceed 1,320 feet in length. 
C.  Block width. Blocks must not be less than 200 feet or more than 400 feet in width, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from a traffic arterial or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
D.  Rights-of-way for pedestrians. Rights-of-way not less than ten feet wide for pedestrian walks are required where deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to parks, open space, schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. In addition, no continuous length of block may exceed 600 feet without intersecting a street or pedestrian walk. Pedestrian walks must also be installed at the end of cul-de-sac where deemed appropriate. 
1.  Setbacks adjacent to pedestrian rights-of-way less than 30 feet wide must be not less than ten feet. Setbacks adjacent to pedestrian rights-of-way 30 feet wide or greater must be not less than five feet. 
2.  The pedestrian walks must be maintained by the adjacent property owner or by the property owners' association. The party responsible for maintenance of pedestrian walks must be identified in the preliminary plat application. 
3.  Pedestrian walks must be constructed as a city standard sidewalk, and comply with the provisions of section 38.400.080. 
E.  Developments which have clearly delineated blocks must use block numbers or letters; each block must contain its own grouping of lot numbers and must be wholly surrounded by a street, separated by a park or pathway, not an alley. 
 
Figure 38.410.040. 
Blocks. 
  
Sec. 38.410.050. - Utilities. 
A.  Utilities must be placed underground, wherever technically and economically feasible. Underground utilities, if placed in a street right-of-way, must be installed after the street has been brought to grade and before it is surfaced. 
B.  If overhead utility lines are used, they must be located at the rear property line. 
C.  Utility facilities must be designed by utility firms in cooperation with the developer. The facilities are subject to all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the appropriate regulatory authorities. 
D.  The developer must provide adequate and appropriate utility easements in compliance with section 38.410.060.  
Sec. 38.410.060. - Easements. 
A.  Required easements. Where determined to be necessary, public and/or private easements must be provided for private and public utilities, drainage, vehicular or pedestrian access, etc. 
1.  In subdivisions, all easements must be described, dimensioned and shown on the final plat in their true and correct location. 
2.  In all other developments, the proper easements documents must be prepared for review and approval by the city, and filed at the county clerk and recorder's office. The easement documents must be accompanied by an exhibit indicating the dimensions, and true and correct location, of all easements. 
3.  No lot may be encumbered by a public or private utility easement in a way that would decrease the amount of buildable land to less than the area required by this chapter for the applicable zoning district. 
B.  Private utility easements. Private utilities include, but are not limited to, natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable and fiber optic lines. The developer must provide private utility easements necessary to extend private utilities to the development, and to provide for the construction and maintenance of private utilities within the development. 
1.  General. 
a.  Building setbacks must be coordinated with all provided utility easements. If a utility easement will be greater than the building setback required by this chapter, a note to that effect must be placed on the final plat and/or final site plan as appropriate. 
b.  Where a utility easement is to be located in an existing, dedicated right-of-way, an encroachment permit must be obtained from the local or state street or road department having jurisdiction. 
c.  If placed in a city right-of-way, easements must be in a location required by and agreed upon in writing by all of the appropriate utility companies and the review authority. 
2.  Easement size. 
a.  Front setback utility easements. Front setback utility easements must be ten feet wide, and must always be provided unless written confirmation is submitted to the community development department from all utility companies providing service indicating that front setback easements are not needed. 
b.  Rear setback utility easements. The provision of rear setback utility easements is not mandatory unless they are required by any or all of the utility companies to adequately serve the development. If provided, rear setback utility easements on each lot must be six feet wide if adjacent to a public alley and ten feet if not adjacent to a public alley. 
c.  Side setback utility easements. The provision of side setback utility easements is not mandatory unless they are required by any or all of the utility companies to adequately serve the development. If provided, the width of the side setback utility easement must be determined on a case-by-case basis based on the needs of the utility companies. 
3.  Private utility plans. 
a.  When the concurrent construction option will be used, based on the provisions of section 38.270.030.D, private utility plans must be included with the preliminary PUD submittal. 
b.  Private utility plans must be provided with any plans and specifications submittals for the construction of new water, sewer or street infrastructure as specified in the city's design standards and specifications policy. 
4.  No building shall be constructed that encroaches on a private utility easement unless written approval from all utility companies is provided to the community development department. 
C.  Public utility easements. Public utilities include water, sewer and stormwater facilities that are dedicated to and maintained by the city. 
1.  A public utility easement must be granted for all public utility mains not located within public street right-of-way. An easement must be at least 30 feet wide for either one or two utility mains. An additional ten feet of width is required for each additional main that occupies the easement. Wider easements may be required at the discretion of the city for large utility lines. 
2.  Public utility easements must be provided for all meter pits and fire hydrants maintained by the city. 
3.  No permanent structures shall be placed within public utility easements unless an encroachment permit has been obtained from the city. 
D.  Easements for agricultural water user facilities. 
1.  Except as noted in subsection D.2 of this section, the developer must establish appropriate agricultural water user facility easements that: 
a.  Are in locations of appropriate topographic characteristics and sufficient width to allow the physical placement and unobstructed maintenance of active open ditches or below ground pipelines. The easement must facilitate the delivery of water for irrigation to persons and lands legally entitled to the water under an appropriated water right or permit of an irrigation district or other private or public entity formed to provide for the use of the water right; 
(1)  The easements must ensure the conveyance of irrigation water through the land to be developed to lands adjacent to or beyond the development's boundaries in quantities and in a manner consistent with historic and legal rights; and 
(2)  A minimum easement width of ten feet is required on each side of irrigation canals and ditches. 
b.  Are a sufficient distance from the centerline of the agricultural water user facility to allow for construction, repair, maintenance and inspection of the ditch or pipeline; and 
c.  Prohibit the placement of structures or the planting of vegetation other than grass within the agricultural water user facility easement without the written permission of the facility owner. 
2.  The developer need not establish agricultural water user facility easements as provided above if the following provisions were met or will be met via the subdivision or site plan process: 
a.  The average lot size is one acre or less and the developer provides for disclosure, in a manner acceptable to the review authority, that adequately notifies potential buyers of lots that are classified as irrigated land and may continue to be assessed for irrigation water delivery even though the water may not be deliverable; or 
b.  The water rights are removed or the process has been initiated to remove the water rights from the subdivided or developed land. If the water rights have been or will be removed from the land within the development it must be so noted with the preliminary plat or plan submittal. If removal of water rights is not complete upon filing of the final plat or approval of the final site plan, the developer must provide written notification to prospective buyers of the intent to remove the water right and must document that intent, when applicable, in agreements and legal documents for related sales transactions. 
3.  The realignment or relocation of active irrigation ditches or pipelines is discouraged. If an agricultural water user facility or points of diversions thereon are proposed to be realigned or relocated, the developer's professional engineer must certify, prior to final plat or final plan approval, that the water entering and exiting the realigned or relocated agricultural water user facility is the same quality and amount of water that entered or exited the facility prior to realignment or relocation. 
4.  Stormwater from a development must not be discharged to an agricultural water user facility without written approval from the owner of the facility and corresponding stormwater conveyance easements. 
5.  If the developer demonstrates that easements have been extinguished pursuant to state law, or the holder of the easement consents in writing to the extinguishment, or the easement is not required per subsection D.2, the developer may remove ditch laterals from within the subdivision. 
6.  If agricultural water user facility easements are required, a notice must also be recorded with a final plat or prior to final plan approval, stating that the easements are subject to the requirements of Section 70-17-112, MCA restricting interference with canal or ditch easements and that irrigation works are subject to Section 85-7-2211 and 85-7-2212, MCA regarding duties and liability. The notice must include language to assure the duties are binding upon all successors in interest and remain in effect until such time that the agricultural water user facility is abandoned in accordance with the requirements of Montana Law or alternative requirements are agreed to in writing by all applicable parties. The easements must be prepared as documents separate from a final plat but may be referenced on a final plat. 
E.  Other easements. Public access easements for streets and trails must be provided in accordance with the provisions of divisions 38.400 and 38.420 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.410.070. - Municipal water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems. 
A.  General. All municipal water supply, sanitary sewer and storm sewer system facilities must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The developer must install complete municipal water and sanitary sewer system facilities, or a system allowed by section 38.350.030.D, and may be required by the city to install municipal storm sewer system facilities. These systems must be installed in accordance with the requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the city, and must conform with any applicable facilities plan. The city's requirements are contained in the Design Standards and Specifications Policy and the City of Bozeman Modifications to Montana Public Works Standard Specifications, and by this reference these standards are incorporated into and made a part of these regulations. The developer must submit plans and specifications for the proposed facilities to the city and to the state department of environmental quality and must obtain their approvals prior to commencing construction of any municipal water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system facilities. 
2.  The cutting of any city street must be done in compliance with the city's street cut policy. 
3.  When a proposed development adjoins undeveloped land, and municipal infrastructure mains would reasonably pass through the new development to the undeveloped land, municipal infrastructure mains must be arranged to allow the suitable development of the adjoining undeveloped land. Municipal infrastructure mains within the proposed development must be constructed to the boundary lines of the tract to be developed, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. An exception to this standard may be granted upon written request of the applicant if the applicant demonstrates during the development review process that more efficient design can be accomplished without jeopardizing the public's health, safety and welfare, the intent of this chapter, or the intent of the city's growth policy. 
B.  Municipal water supply system; additional requirements. Municipal water supply system facilities must also comply with the following requirements: 
1.  When the city's municipal water main is extended, the length of a dead-end water main typically may not exceed 500 feet in length, unless approved in writing by the city. 
2.  The length of service lines from the main to the structure may not exceed 150 feet in length, unless approved in writing by the city.  
Sec. 38.410.080. - Grading and drainage. 
A.  The developer must install complete drainage facilities in accordance with the requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the city, and must conform to any applicable facilities plan and the terms of any approved site specific stormwater control plan. The city's requirements are contained in the Design Standards and Specifications Policy and the City of Bozeman Modifications to Montana Public Works Standard Specifications, and by this reference these standards are incorporated into and made a part of these regulations. The developer must submit plans and specifications to the city and to the state department of environmental quality (if applicable), and must obtain their approvals prior to commencing construction of any drainage system facilities. 
B.  Provisions must be made for the control and drainage of surface water around buildings. Generally, all lots and street boulevard areas must be graded no lower than the back of curb or level of street, whichever is applicable, prior to final plat or final occupancy approval as appropriate. Exceptions may be granted by the city when adequate drainage facilities are provided. All drainage plans must comply with the requirements of the International Building Code and International Residential Code as adopted by the city, and by this reference these standards are incorporated into and made a part of these regulations. 
C.  Drainage systems must not discharge into any sanitary sewer facility or agricultural water user facility. 
D.  Stormwater retention or detention ponds may be located within public parkland, but such areas must not count towards the parkland dedication requirement. Any stormwater ponds located on parkland must be designed, constructed and/or added to so as to be conducive to the normal use and maintenance of the park. Stormwater ponds serving multiple lots in separate ownership must not be located on private lots or public rights-of-way. Stormwater retention or detention ponds must be maintained by the property owners' association. 
E.  The city may require the developer to establish easements or other perpetual controls to prevent encroachment or disruption of drainageways or facilities. 
F.  Stormwater facilities generally must not occupy more than one-third of a required front setback. Departures will be considered (per section 38.250.060) for stormwater facilities with Low Impact Development (LID) components, underground components, or exceptional design. 
G.  All finish grades in landscaped areas must comply with the provisions set forth in section 38.550.050.L. 
H.  Stormwater retention/detention facilities in landscaped areas must be designed as landscape amenities. They must be an organic feature with a natural, curvilinear shape. The facilities must have 75 percent of surface area covered with live vegetation appropriate for the depth and design of the retention/detention facility, and be lined with native grasses, indigenous plants, wet root tolerant plant types and groupings of boulders to create a functional, yet natural site feature. A cross section and landscape detail of each facility must be submitted with the final landscape plan for review and approval. Facilities with a slope up to and including ten percent grade may be grassed and irrigated to blend into the adjacent landscaped area.  
Sec. 38.410.090. - Fire protection requirements. 
A.  All developments must be planned, designed, constructed and maintained so as to minimize risk of fire and to permit the effective and efficient suppression of fires in order to protect persons and property. 
1.  The placement of structures must minimize the potential for flame spread and permit adequate access for firefighting equipment; and 
2.  Adequate firefighting facilities must be provided, including an adequate and accessible water supply and water distribution system. 
a.  National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards for hydrant systems must be met. 
b.  City's requirements as contained in the design standards and specifications policy and the city modifications to state public works standard specifications must apply.  
Sec. 38.410.100. - Watercourse setback. 
A.  Where a development is crossed by or is adjacent to a watercourse, the developer must mitigate the impacts of the development on the watercourse. This mitigation may not be less restrictive than the requirements of the city floodplain regulations or any other applicable regulation of this chapter. The purpose of this mitigation is bank stabilization; sediment, nutrient and pollution removal; and flood control. 
1.  Setback for developments granted preliminary plan or plat approval prior to July 10, 2002. These provisions apply to all developments granted preliminary plan or plat approval prior to July 10, 2002, including applicable subdivision exemptions: 
a.  Setbacks. A minimum 100-foot setback must be provided along both sides of the East Gallatin River. A minimum 35-foot setback must be provided along both sides of all other watercourses. 
(1)  A portion of the required setback, immediately adjacent to the ordinary high water mark, must be left in a natural vegetative state as follows: 
(a)  East Gallatin River—50 feet. 
(b)  Other watercourses—Five feet. 
(2)  No fence, residential or commercial structure, fill material, parking or other similar improvements shall be located within required watercourse setbacks. 
(3)  All watercourse setbacks must be measured from the ordinary high water mark as defined in section 38.700.140. When no ordinary high water mark is discernible, setbacks must be measured from the top of the stream bank. 
2.  Setbacks for developments granted preliminary plan or plat approval on or after July 10, 2002. These provisions apply to all developments granted preliminary plat or plan approval on or after July 10, 2002: 
a.  In the event a site with an existing development, that is subject to subsection 1 of this section, is submitted to the city for a review subject to divisions 38.230, 38.430 and 38.280 of this chapter after July 10, 2002, the proposed development must comply with this subsection 2 to the extent reasonably feasible given the existing site conditions. The final approval body for the proposed development must determine the extent that is reasonably feasible, subject to any appeal provisions that may apply. Such administrative relief must not reduce setbacks below those provided for in subsection 1 of this section. 
b.  In addition to any relaxation of watercourse setbacks provided by subsection 2.a of this section, nothing in this section prohibits an owner of affected property from: 
(1)  Applying for a variance to dimensional standards of the watercourse setbacks as allowed by and subject to the requirements of division 38.250 of this chapter; 
(2)  When applicable, seeking a deviation to dimensional standards of the watercourse setback as allowed by and subject to the requirements of divisions 38.340 or 38.430 of this chapter; 
(3)  Combining two or more lots to assemble a larger and more usable parcel; 
(4)  Petitioning the state department of fish, wildlife and parks and the county water conservation district to seek the reclassification of the relevant watercourse as an irrigation facility not subject to the requirements of this section; 
(5)  After receipt of required permits, relocating the watercourse; or 
(6)  Pursuing any other lawful means of relief from the effects of this section. 
c.  Setbacks. Unless otherwise specified in subsection 2.e of this section, the following setback requirements must be met: 
(1)  East Gallatin River. A minimum 100-foot setback must be provided along both sides of the East Gallatin River. 
(2)  Sourdough/Bozeman Creek and Bridger Creek. A minimum 75-foot setback must be provided along both sides of Sourdough/Bozeman and Bridger Creeks. 
(3)  Other watercourses. A minimum 50-foot setback must be provided along both sides of all other watercourses. 
(4)  All required watercourse setbacks must be extended as necessary to address these additional requirements. 
(a)  The setback must extend to the edge of any delineated 100-year floodplain if the floodplain is larger than the setbacks established in this subsection 2.c; 
(b)  The setback must include immediately adjacent wetlands (i.e., fringe). The buffer width must be extended by the width of the wetland; 
(c)  Areas with a slope greater than 33 percent do not count towards the width of the setback; and 
(d)  The setback must include connected wetlands. The buffer width must be extended by a minimum of 50 feet beyond the perimeter of the connected wetlands. 
(5)  All watercourse setbacks must be measured from the ordinary high water mark as defined in section 38.700.090. When no ordinary high water mark is discernible, setbacks must be measured from the top of the stream bank. 
d.  No newly constructed residential or commercial structure, addition to an existing structure, fence, deck, fill material (other than that required for exempt uses), parking lot or other impervious surfaces, or other similar improvements may be located within required watercourse setbacks, unless approved through, and in conformance with, a variance or deviation process as authorized in this chapter. 
e.  Exceptions. The watercourse setback is divided into two zones. Zone 1 consists of the 60 percent of the setback closest to the watercourse, and Zone 2 consists of the 40 percent of the setback furthest from the watercourse. 
(1)  On-site stormwater treatment facilities may be located in Zone 2. 
(2)  Trails and trail-related improvements may be placed within the required watercourse setback subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Trails, and trail-related improvements such as benches and trail signage, may be placed in Zone 2; 
(b)  Limited, non-looping developed spur trails to the water's edge may cross all zones. Benches and limited informational/interpretive signage may be placed in Zone 1 at the terminus of spur trails; 
(c)  Due to topography, avoidance of wetlands, or other geographical constraints, portions of non-spur trails may need to be placed within Zone 1. Trail construction within Zone 1, inclusive of watercourse crossings and spur trails, per each side of the watercourse, may not exceed the length of 300 percent of the width of the applicable watercourse setback per 500 lineal feet of watercourse; 
(d)  All trails must be constructed to minimize bank instability, sedimentation, nutrient and pollution runoff. Trails must be aligned to minimize damage to plant and wildlife habitat; and 
(e)  Trails crossing the watercourse and trail-related bridge structures may be located within all zones provided that the appropriate local, state and federal permits are obtained. 
(3)  Streets, sidewalks, utility lines or similar public construction may be permitted within all zones for the purpose of crossing a watercourse or protecting public health and safety. The following practices must be observed: 
(a)  Crossings must be minimized to the greatest extent feasible; 
(b)  Crossings with direct angles (90 degrees) must be used to the greatest extent feasible instead of oblique crossing angles; 
(c)  Construction must be capable of withstanding 100-year flood events; 
(d)  The subdivision grading and drainage plan must be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated stormwater into a watercourse; and 
(e)  A bank stabilization plan for all public construction watercourse crossings must be prepared and approved by the city prior to site preparation and installation of the improvement. 
(4)  Outlets from stormwater treatment facilities may pass through all zones in order to discharge to the receiving watercourse, provided that all required permits are obtained. 
(5)  Control of noxious weeds is required and activities required within limits outlined in any approved noxious weed control plan may occur in all zones. 
f.  Setback planting. A setback planting plan must be prepared by a qualified landscape professional, and must be reviewed and approved by the community development department prior to the commencement of development or site preparation. The plan must include a schedule, and plantings must be depicted on the plan as follows: 
(1)  Zone 1: Zone 1 must be planted with new or existing native materials suited for a riparian area based on the following calculations. One hundred percent of the disturbed areas of Zone 1 must be planted with a ground cover of native riparian sedges, forbs and grasses suited for the area. In addition, a minimum of one shrub for every ten linear feet and one tree for every 30 linear feet of the watercourse is required along each side of the watercourse. Grouping or clumping of trees and shrubs as appropriate in a riparian area is encouraged. Species that are appropriate to the soil hydrologic conditions (wetness of soil and depth to the water table) must be used. Tree and shrub species selected must be suitable for the climate and for planting in a riparian area with an emphasis on native species. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), the state native plant society and the county local water quality district (LWQD) are good sources of landscaping materials and/or landscaping information. 
(2)  Zone 2: Disturbed areas of Zone 2 must be planted with new or existing native grasses suited for the area. 
(3)  Maintenance of the watercourse setback landscaping is required. If it can be demonstrated that irrigation is present for the trees and shrubs, and fencing is provided for the trees and shrubs, the number of required trees may be reduced to one tree for every 60 linear feet and one shrub for every 20 linear feet of the watercourse along each side of the watercourse. 
(4)  Planting materials are exempt from the size requirements of section 38.550.050.G.3. 
(5)  To prevent soil erosion and the invasion of noxious weeds, the watercourse setbacks on all land proposed for development must be covered with existing vegetation or must be seeded with native grasses as soon as seasonally feasible or prior to commencement of any site development or site preparation work. 
(6)  Native must mean those plants which are native to the Gallatin Valley. 
(7)  Use native grasses, forbs, sedges and other herbaceous plants in areas of disturbance (e.g., bridges, culverts, utilities installation, trails) within the watercourse setback. Native woody plantings are required in all zones in both disturbed and undisturbed areas. 
g.  Except as otherwise allowed in subsections 2.e and f of this section, no disturbance of soils and existing vegetation shall occur in any zones. 
3.  Other provisions. 
a.  The watercourse setback must be depicted on all preliminary and final plats and plans. 
b.  These provisions do not apply to agricultural uses, including lands controlled in the conservation reserve program (CRP), and activities and structures that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Any agricultural uses, activities or structures established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived must comply with these regulations. An agricultural use, activity or structure is considered abandoned if not used for agricultural purposes for more than 180 consecutive days. 
 
Figure 38.410.100-1. 
100 year floodplain. 
 
 
Figure 38.410.100-2. 
Watercourse setback on a slope. 
 
 
Figure 38.410.100-3. 
Watercourse Setback. 
 
 
Figure 38.410.100-4. 
Wetlands. 
  
Sec. 38.410.110. - Ridgelines and viewsheds. 
A.  For the purpose of having structures blend more naturally into the landscape rather than being a prominent focal point, ridgeline protection areas are established. These areas are defined in division 38.700 of this chapter and are identified and designated based on topographic characteristics. The Bozeman Ridgeline Map identifies areas with a high likelihood of meeting the standards for ridgelines. 
1.  All buildings located within a ridgeline protection area must be set back from the ridgeline a distance not less than three times its height above grade. The distance of the setback must be measured perpendicular from the ridgeline. 
a.  Exception. In the event a building permit is sought for a lot approved or created prior to January 1, 2004, the proposed development must comply with this section to the extent reasonably feasible given the lot dimensions, orientation, and other characteristics. The final approval body for the proposed development must determine the extent that is reasonably feasible and may relax the special setback required by this section, subject to applicable appeal provisions. Such administrative relief must not reduce setbacks below those required elsewhere in this chapter. 
 
Figure 38.410.110. 
Ridgeline protection area. 
  
Sec. 38.410.120. - Mail delivery. 
If mail delivery will not be to each individual lot within the development, the developer must provide an off-street area for mail delivery within the development in cooperation with the United States Postal Service. The city will not be responsible for maintaining or plowing any mail delivery area constructed within a city right-of-way.  
Sec. 38.410.130. - Water rights. 
A.  Prior to a final approval of all development reviewed as a site plan, conditional use permit, planned unit development, or subdivision and prior to an annexation of any land, one of the following must occur: 
1.  Payment must be made to the city of a payment-in-lieu of water rights, calculated based on the annual demand for volume of water the development will require multiplied by the most current annual unit price; or 
2.  The city may elect to accept a transfer to the city of ownership of water rights if the water rights proposed to be transferred are legally and physically adequate as determined by the city to provide the annual volume of water the development will require. A transfer of ownership of water rights must be in a form and manner suitable for municipal purposes and as approved by the review authority. 
3.  In addition to but notwithstanding the above, a development may propose the installation of non-potable water systems for irrigation or other approved uses. The installation of a non-potable water system may result in a reduction in the payment required under subsection A.1 or amount of water rights under subsection A.2. To receive credit against the water demand calculation, the development must meet all physical requirements for such systems as established by the city and must comply with all applicable administrative requirements. 
B.  If adequate water rights were transferred or a payment-in-lieu was previously provided to the city for the subject property, evidence of those rights or payment-in-lieu may be offered to demonstrate compliance with this section. If the expected demand for water by the proposed development increases by more than one acre-foot over that for which water rights or payment-in-lieu of water rights were previously provided, additional water rights or payment-in-lieu of water rights pursuant to subsection A equal to the difference between the previously provided water rights or payment-in-lieu and the estimated current demand or payment-in-lieu price must be provided. 
C.  Provision of water rights or payment-in-lieu may be deferred: 
1.  By phase for phased developments. 
2.  For annexations of vacant land when the annexation is in excess of ten acres. 
3.  For annexation of parcels of ten acres or less, or for any size parcel if development exists on the area being annexed prior to the annexation and provision of water rights or payment-in-lieu pursuant to subsection A is provided at the time of annexation for the uses present on the site at the time of annexation. Subsequent development is subject to the provisions of subsection A. 
4.  For additional development beyond one dwelling unit per lot for lots zoned residential within a subdivision if water rights or payment-in-lieu is provided pursuant to subsection A prior to final plat for at least one residential unit on that lot. Additional development requires compliance with this section. A notice of restriction on future development in a form acceptable to the city must be recorded with the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder prior to the city granting a waiver under this section. 
5.  For commercial, industrial and institutional uses, until final site plan approval or the issuance of any building permit, whichever occurs first. 
D.  The city manager must adopt administrative procedures to implement this section. The director of public works must adopt standards for the calculation of demand for water use. The unit cost for payment-in-lieu must be established by commission resolution. The administrative procedures must include but need not be limited to standards governing acceptance of water right transfers, and a means to establish credits against the transfer of excess rights. The standards governing acceptance of water right transfers may enable a deferral of payment-in-lieu, provided that the party obligated for the payment-in-lieu executes a fee deferral agreement and related documents as approved by the city attorney to be recorded at the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder's office securing the amount due. 
E.  The amount paid for a payment-in-lieu must be calculated using the per unit price in effect on the date the payment-in-lieu of water rights is to be made to the city. The director of public works must make proper distribution to the funds for which such payments are made of all money collected.  
DIVISION 38.420. - PARK AND RECREATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 38.420.010. - General. 
Except as provided in section 38.420.020.B, all subdivisions and residential developments subject to division 38.230 of this chapter, must comply with the provisions of this division 38.420. The purpose of this division 38.420 is to comply with sections 76-2-304 and 76-3-621 MCA; to advance the city's adopted plans for parks, trails and open space; to provide equal protection and treatment for different housing types and review processes with similar impacts on demand for service; to advance public health by encouraging and facilitating physical activity; and to address housing affordability.  
Sec. 38.420.020. - Park area requirements. 
The requirements of this article are based on the community need for parks and the development densities identified in the growth policy and this chapter. 
A.  The area required by this subsection must be provided as a land dedication unless an alternate method of compliance is approved by the review authority. 
1.  When the net residential density of development is known, 0.03 acre per dwelling unit of land must be provided. 
a.  When the net residential density of development is known at the time of preliminary plat and net residential density is in excess of eight dwellings per acre, the requirement for dedication for that density above eight dwellings per acre must be met with a cash donation in-lieu of the additional land unless specifically determined otherwise by the review authority. 
b.  If net residential density is in excess of eight dwellings per acre, the requirement for dedication for that density above eight dwellings per acre must be met with a cash donation in-lieu. 
c.  When developed as group quarters, such as group living or community residential facilities, rather than individual dwelling units, in lieu of 0.03 acres per dwelling unit, an area of 575 square feet per resident must be provided. 
d.  Land dedication or its equivalent must not be required for any dwelling units or group quarters occupancy in excess of the following: 
(1)  For development within the R-1, R-2, and R-MH zoning districts, the maximum net residential density must be ten dwelling units or 22.5 persons in group quarters per acre. 
(2)  For development within the R-3, R-4, R-5, R-O, and REMU zoning districts, the maximum net residential density must be 12 dwelling units or 27 persons in group quarters per acre. 
(3)  For development within other zoning districts not previously specified and developed for residential uses, the maximum net residential density must be 12 dwelling units or 27 persons in group quarters per acre. 
2.  If net residential density of development is unknown, 0.03 acres per dwelling unit must be provided as follows: 
a.  For initial subdivision or other development: 
(1)  Within the R-1, R-2, and R-MH zoning districts: an area equal to that required for six dwelling units or 13.5 persons in group quarters per net acre. 
(2)  Within the R-3, R-4, R-5, REMU, and unless legally restricted from residential uses the R-O zoning districts: an area equal to that required for eight dwelling units or 13.5 persons in group quarters per net acre. 
(3)  Within other zoning districts which are intended for residential development: the equivalent to an area dedication for six dwelling units or 13.5 persons in group quarters per net acre must be provided as cash-in-lieu. 
b.  For subsequent development when net residential density becomes known, the net residential density per acre above the minimum established above must be rounded to the nearest whole number and applied as shown in the following table. All prior provision of parkland for the project site must count towards the maximum required dedication. 
Table 38.420.020.A 
Parkland Dedication Provisions 
Zoning District 	Required Dedication per Dwelling 	Maximum Required Dedication per Acre 	Cash-in-Lieu Required 
R-1, R-2, R-MH 	.03 acres or equivalent 	10 dwellings 	Yes 
R-3, R-4, R-5, R-O, and REMU 	.03 acres or equivalent 	12 dwellings 	Yes 
All other districts 	.03 acres or equivalent 	12 dwellings 	Yes 
	Required area per person 	Maximum required dedication per net acre 	
Group quarters 	575 square feet or equivalent 	27 persons 	Yes 
 
3.  Special case. The city has established chapter 38, division 380, to encourage the provision and development of affordable housing. Reductions in required parkland dedication are established in section 38.380.300. The reductions in parkland dedication to conform to division 38.380, may not reduce the development's parkland requirements below the minimum established by MCA 76-3-621. 
B.  Exceptions. Land dedication or its equivalent cash donation in-lieu of land dedication must not be required for: 
1.  Land proposed for subdivision into parcels larger than five acres. Development of a parcel larger than five acres may require parkland dedication pursuant to section 38.420.020.C. 
2.  Subdivision into parcels which are all non-residential. 
3.  A subdivision in which parcels are not created, except when that subdivision provides permanent multiple spaces for recreational camping vehicles or manufactured homes. 
4.  A subdivision in which only one additional parcel is being created. Development of the additional parcel may require parkland dedication pursuant to section 38.420.020.C. 
5.  A development for which the required amount of parkland is shown to have already been provided. 
6.  Section 38.420.020.A.2 does not apply to subsequent site development located within major subdivisions which received preliminary plat approval after July 1, 1973, and which received final plat approval prior to October 1, 2005. 
7.  Development creating only one additional dwelling unit or increasing occupancy of group quarters by no more than four persons. 
C.  Development of a lot previously exempted from park dedication must be reviewed pursuant to this article. If the lot is no longer exempt from the park dedication requirement the development is subject to section 38.420.020.A. 
D.  To ensure coordination when parks are being created by a multiphase development, the entire parkland dedication must be accomplished at the time of the initial phase of the development. If necessary, this may be accomplished through the grant of public access easements during later phases. 
E.  The following land is unacceptable for parkland dedication: 
1.  Required watercourse setbacks unless approved by the review authority for incorporation into the design of the larger park area. 
2.  Stormwater retention or detention ponds, unless approved by the review authority and designed and constructed to the city's adopted standards for joint park/stormwater control use. The city may accept such land for dedication to the city but must be maintained by the property owners' association unless and until responsibility is assumed by affirmative action of the city. 
3.  Land with a grade of 25 percent or greater, unless the city commission makes specific findings in its favor as part of the adoption of a park master plan. 
4.  Other land such as landslides, rock falls, or subsidence areas, debris deposition areas, environmentally contaminated areas, and land containing deteriorated structures or other public or private nuisances, unless the review authority determines the hazards or excessive public burdens can be eliminated or will be overcome by appropriate design and construction plans. 
F.  When land offered to the city for dedication as parkland exceeds the amount required, the additional usable land may be dedicated to the city in the same manner and subject to the same standards as minimum required areas. 
G.  Public use. Land donated or dedicated to meet the requirements of this section must be provided for public use. The developer must execute the appropriate public access easements on privately-owned common land. The easements must be held by the city. The city's responsibilities for parkland dedicated by easement must be the same as for fee simple parkland dedication.  
Sec. 38.420.030. - Cash donation in-lieu of land dedication. 
A.  The review authority may determine whether the park dedication must be a land dedication, cash donation in-lieu of land dedication or a combination of both. For the purposes of this section construction of park improvements above the minimum improvements required by ordinance may be allowed as a method of cash donation. When making this determination, the review authority must consider the factors established by resolution of the city commission. The approval authority is governed by section 38.200.010. 
B.  When a combination of land dedication and cash donation in-lieu of land dedication is required, the required cash donation may not exceed the proportional amount of the total required mitigation not covered by the land dedication. Nothing in this section prohibits a developer from offering more than the required minimum. 
C.  Cash donation in-lieu of land dedication must be equal to the fair market value of the amount of land that would have been dedicated. The fair market value is the value of the unsubdivided, unimproved land after it has been annexed and given a municipal zoning designation. 
The city commission may adopt procedures to be used by the director of parks and recreation to determine the fair market value. The amount of the cash-in-lieu to be provided must equal the city's established fair market value per square foot times the amount of land required to be dedicated. The city must periodically update the market value as deemed necessary to reflect changes in the price of land. The valuation used for calculating the amount due will be the valuation in effect at the time an application for final plat or final plan approval is complete. 
1.  Alternative. A developer may provide an alternate market valuation which complies with the following: 
a.  The developer must provide an appraisal of the fair market value by a certified real estate appraiser of their choosing and is responsible for the appraisal fee. 
b.  When a land value must be established for cash-in-lieu of land dedication to satisfy the requirements of section 38.420.020, and the value of the land in an unsubdivided, unimproved, but annexed and zoned condition cannot be reasonable determined, the developer may provide an appraisal of residentially zoned property with a zoning designation that allows the density of dwellings proposed for development. 
c.  The appraisal provided for the purpose of section 38.420.030 must be conducted not sooner than 90 days prior to the submittal of an application for final plat or final site plan approval. 
D.  Where a cash donation has been accepted in-lieu of land dedication, the amount of cash donation must be stated on the final plat or plan as appropriate. 
E.  Where a cash payment or construction of improvements has been accepted in-lieu of land dedication, the city must record in the meeting minutes or other written decision why the dedication of land for parks was undesirable. 
F.  Use of cash donations. 
1.  The city must use a cash donation for development or acquisition of parks to serve the development. 
2.  The city may use the cash donation to acquire or develop parks or recreational areas within its jurisdiction or for the purchase of public open space or conservation easements, only if: 
a.  The park, recreational area, open space or conservation easement is within a reasonably close proximity to the proposed development; and 
b.  The city commission has formally adopted a citywide park plan that establishes the needs and procedures for use of the cash donation.  
Sec. 38.420.040. - Park use. 
As part of an individual park master plan, the developer must indicate the proposed use of the park as active, passive, playground, ball field, etc. However, the final use of the park must be determined by the review authority.  
Sec. 38.420.050. - Location. 
A.  General. The review authority, in consultation with the developer, recreation and parks advisory board, and the planning board if applicable, may determine suitable locations for parks and playgrounds. Parkland must be located on land suitable to and supportive of the activities and functions depicted in the relevant park plan, and unless the park plan indicates a requirement for another configuration, should be kept in a large block. 
B.  Subarea or neighborhood plans. If a subarea or neighborhood plan has been adopted for the area, the subdivision must comply with the subarea or neighborhood plan for the location of parks.  
Sec. 38.420.060. - Frontage. 
A.  Parkland, excluding linear trail corridors, must have frontage along 100 percent of its perimeter on public or private streets or roads. The city may consider and approve the installation of streets along less than 100 percent, but not less than 50 percent, of the perimeter when: 
1.  Necessary due to topography, the presence of critical lands, or similar site constraints; and/or 
2.  When the following elements are included: 
a.  When direct pedestrian access is provided to the perimeters without street frontage; 
b.  When additional land area is provided in the park to accommodate the off-street parking which would have otherwise been provided by the additional length of perimeter streets and the additional land is developed as a parking area; or 
c.  When additional land area is provided in the park to accommodate the off-street parking which would have been provided by the additional length of perimeter streets and, in lieu of the constructed parking area, an equivalent dollar value of non-parking improvements within the park are provided according to the individual park plan. 
 
Figure 38.420.060. 
Acceptable park frontages. 
  
Sec. 38.420.070. - Linear parks. 
A.  General. If consistent with the growth policy or citywide park plan, and if reviewed and approved by the review authority, linear parks must be dedicated to the city to provide corridors for recreation pathways as defined in section 38.420.110. 
1.  Pathway corridors within required watercourse setbacks must not be dedicated to the city as linear parks and such land may not be used to satisfy parkland dedication requirements. Instead, cash donation in-lieu of land dedication credit must be granted only for the cost of constructing Class II or III recreational trails if public access is provided. The developer must provide a detailed cost estimate for installation of the trail, for review and acceptance by the city, to determine the cash donation credit. 
a.  Within required watercourse setbacks, a public access easement that is at least 25 feet in width must be provided to ensure adequate room for the construction, maintenance and use of the trail. 
B.  Width. To ensure adequate room for pathway construction, maintenance and use, linear parks must be at least 25 feet in width. 
C.  Maintenance. These areas must be maintained in accordance with section 38.420.110.E until an alternative method (e.g., a citywide parks maintenance district) of funding and maintaining the linear park is established.  
Sec. 38.420.080. - Park development. 
A.  General. Developers must consult any adopted citywide park plan, and with the recreation and parks advisory board which implements the plan, to determine the types of parks needed for the proposed development and surrounding area. Parks must be developed in accordance with the citywide park plan and any approved park master plan. At a minimum, all parks must be improved to the following standards by the developer, prior to final plat or final occupancy approval as appropriate: 
1.  Minimum required improvements to land dedications. The subdivider must level any park area, amend the soil, seed disturbed areas to allow mowing with turf type mowers, and install an underground irrigation system in compliance with city standards and specifications. 
a.  Parks must be seeded with drought tolerant grass seed unless approved otherwise in writing by the park superintendent. 
2.  Irrigation. The developer must irrigate the park area until 50 percent of the subdivision lots or condominium units are sold. Thereafter, the property owners' association must be responsible for park irrigation. The property owners' association may establish an improvement district to collect assessments to pay for irrigation. 
a.  Wells must be used to irrigate parkland. 
B.  Boundaries. The park boundary bordering all private lots must be delineated at the common private/public corner pins, with flat, flexible fiberglass posts, a minimum of six feet in length with no less than two feet driven into the ground. Each post must be labeled with a permanent glued on sign stating "Park Boundary" or "Property Boundary." Other forms of boundary marking may be approved by the planning or other appropriate department. 
C.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks, when required within the development, must be installed by the developer at points where the park borders or crosses public or private streets. 
D.  Stormwater detention/retention ponds. Stormwater retention or detention ponds may be located within public parkland, but such areas do not count towards the parkland dedication requirement. Any stormwater ponds located on parkland must be designed, constructed and/or added to so as to be conducive to the normal use and maintenance of the park. Stormwater ponds may not be located on private lots. Stormwater retention or detention ponds must be maintained by the property owners' association. 
E.  Clean up required. All fencing material, construction debris and other trash must be removed from the park area.  
Sec. 38.420.090. - Waiver of park maintenance district. 
When required, the developer must sign, and file at the county clerk and recorder's office, a waiver of right to protest the creation of a park maintenance district. The waiver must be filed with the final subdivision plat, or recorded at the time of other final approval.  
Sec. 38.420.100. - Waiver of required park dedication. 
A.  The review authority may waive the park dedication or cash donation in-lieu of land dedication requirement if land equal to or exceeding the area of the dedication otherwise required by this division 38.420 is set aside by one of the following means: 
1.  The proposed development provides: long-term protection of critical wildlife habitat; cultural, historical, archaeological or natural resources; agricultural interests; or aesthetic values. 
2.  The proposed development provides for a planned unit development or other development with land permanently set aside for park and recreational uses sufficient to meet the needs of the persons who will ultimately reside in the development. 
3.  The development is a land subdivision created by rent or lease (i.e., manufactured housing communities and recreational vehicle parks) with land permanently set aside for parks or playgrounds within the subdivision for rent or lease for the common use of the residents of the development. 
a.  These park or playground areas must be maintained by the property owners' association. 
4.  The developer provides for land outside of the subdivision to be set aside for park and recreational uses sufficient to meet the needs of the persons who will ultimately reside in the subdivision. 
a.  The land being developed must be within the service area, as designated by an adopted citywide park plan, of the dedicated parkland; and 
b.  The developer must dedicate the off-site parkland to the city; or 
c.  The developer must execute the appropriate public access easements on privately-owned land. The easements must be held by the city. The city's responsibilities for parkland dedicated by easement must be the same as for fee simple parkland dedication. 
5.  The developer provides land outside the development that affords long-term protection of critical wildlife habitat; cultural, historical, archaeological or natural resources; agricultural interests; or aesthetic values; and the area of the land to be subject to long-term protection equals or exceeds the area of the dedication otherwise required by this division 38.420. 
6.  A subdivider dedicates land to School District 7 to provide some or all of the land area required by section 38.420.020. The area dedicated to the school district may be used for school facilities or buildings, including but not limited to playgrounds or other recreational facilities. Any dedication to the school district must be subject to the approval of the review authority and acceptance by the board of trustees of School District 7. 
a.  In approving a dedication of land to the school district the review authority must make affirmative findings that: 
(1)  Adequate public parkland already exists within the vicinity of the dedicating subdivision to meet service standards established by the city's parks master plan; 
(2)  The land is located within the city limits or within one mile of city limits; 
(3)  The school district has established a facility plan to demonstrate how the dedicated property will be utilized; 
(4)  The school district's facility plan must describe any coordination intended for joint use of the property by the school district and the city; and 
(5)  The option for cash-in-lieu of land described in section 38.420.030 must not be used in place of a land dedication to the school district. 
b.  It must be noted in a certificate on the plat and in any deed to the land that if School District 7 later chooses to dispose of the property, it must revert to the city to be used for park purposes. The land must be transferred to the city from School District 7 with clear title and in a condition meeting the minimum development standards for parks established in section 38.420.080. 
7.  If a tract of land is being developed under single ownership as a part of an overall plan, and part of the tract has previously been subdivided or developed, and sufficient parkland dedication or cash donation in-lieu of land dedication has been provided from the area that has been previously subdivided or developed to meet the requirements of this section for the entire tract being developed, the city commission must issue an order waiving the land dedication and cash donation requirements for the subsequently developed area. 
B.  Section 38.420.020 requires mitigation of recreational impacts, usually by dedication of land for parks. Under defined circumstances in this section the required dedication may be waived. However, the underlying issue of mitigating recreational impacts must be addressed. If an application provides one or more of the alternatives under paragraph A of this section then the required mitigation has been partially provided. To complete the mitigation, the alternative to land dedication must allow public access. The developer must execute the appropriate public access easements in a form acceptable to the city attorney prior to final approval of the development. The easements must be held by the city.  
Sec. 38.420.110. - Recreation pathways. 
A.  General. Developers must install pathways in accordance with this chapter, the growth policy, the most recently adopted long-range transportation plan, any adopted citywide park plan, and any adopted individual park master plan, and must comply with City of Bozeman Design Specifications. 
B.  Pathway categories. The development review committee (DRC) is responsible for determining whether a pathway is a transportation pathway or a recreation pathway. For subdivision proposals, this determination must be made during the pre-application process. 
1.  Recreation pathways. The review authority may require developers to install recreation pathways and/or to provide recreational and physical fitness opportunities within the development as part of the required development improvements. Recreation pathways include the following: 
a.  Pathways that do not connect major residential, employment, educational or service nodes; 
b.  Pathways that connect parks, but do not connect major residential, employment, educational or service nodes; 
c.  Pathways that are not ADA accessible due to topography; 
d.  Pathways located within parks; and 
e.  Class II and III trails. 
2.  Transportation pathways. For the definition of transportation pathways, see section 38.400.110. 
C.  Related facilities. If pathways are proposed or required, stream crossings and other similar improvements, where necessary, must be installed. Bridge design and construction must comply with city specifications and standards, and must be submitted to the community development department for review and approval. Any necessary permits for bridges must be obtained by the developer from the appropriate agency prior to installation of the stream crossings. 
D.  Trail requirements. The class of the trail must be determined by the review authority and the trail must be designed and constructed according to any adopted park or recreation plan or other city specifications and standards. Trails and bridges must meet Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) specifications for recreational facilities and maintain a natural appearance. Trail plans and specifications must be submitted to the planning and parks departments for review and approval prior to installation. 
E.  Pathway maintenance. Recreation pathways within the proposed development must be maintained, in conformance with an approved maintenance plan, by the developer until 50 percent of the lots or condominium units are sold. Thereafter the property owners' association is responsible for maintenance. The property owners' association may establish an improvement district to collect assessments to pay for the maintenance. 
F.  Pathway easements. Where pathways cross private land or common open space, the proper public access easements must be provided. Public access easements for pathways must be at least 25 feet wide. 
G.  Linear parks. Corridors for recreation pathways may be dedicated to the city in accordance with section 38.420.070. 
H.  Park and pathway development frontages. All developments adjacent to existing or planned trails or parks are subject to the block frontage standards of section 38.510.030.I (trail/park frontages). 
 
Figure 38.420.110. 
Acceptable park and pathway development frontages. 
  
DIVISION 38.430. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
 
Sec. 38.430.010. - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of the city through the use of the planned unit development (PUD) concept, to promote maximum flexibility and innovation in the development of land and the design of development projects within the city. Specifically, with regard to the improvement and protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, it is the intent of this chapter to promote the following community objectives: 
1.  To ensure that future growth and development occurring within the city is in accord with the city's adopted growth policy, its specific elements, and its goals, objectives and policies; 
2.  To allow opportunities for innovations in land development and redevelopment so that greater opportunities for high quality housing, recreation, shopping and employment may extend to all citizens of the city area; 
3.  To foster the safe, efficient and economic use of land, transportation and other public facilities; 
4.  To ensure adequate provision of public services such as water, sewer, electricity, open space and public parks; 
5.  To avoid inappropriate development of lands and to provide adequate drainage, water quality and reduction of flood damage; 
6.  To encourage patterns of development which decrease automobile travel and encourage trip consolidation, thereby reducing traffic congestion and degradation of the existing air quality; 
7.  To promote the use of bicycles and walking as effective modes of transportation; 
8.  To reduce energy consumption and demand; 
9.  To minimize adverse environmental impacts of development and to protect special features of the geography; 
10.  To improve the design, quality and character of new development; 
11.  To encourage development of vacant properties within developed areas; 
12.  To protect existing neighborhoods from the harmful encroachment of incompatible developments; 
13.  To promote logical development patterns of residential, commercial, office and industrial uses that will mutually benefit the developer, the neighborhood and the community as a whole; 
14.  To promote the efficient use of land resources, full use of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed human-scale design; and 
15.  To meet the purposes established in section 38.100.040.  
Sec. 38.430.020. - Application and uses of a planned unit development. 
A.  A planned unit development may be applied to any subdivision, or to any development having one or more principal uses or structures on a single parcel of real property or contiguous parcels of real property. Land use patterns and uses must conform to growth policy land use designations and underlying zoning districts. Approval for an additional use or combination of uses may be allowed in a planned unit development only when such additional uses are consistent with the city growth policy and relevant criteria in section 38.430.090.E and are not prohibited elsewhere in this chapter. 
B.  All planned unit developments must consist of a harmonious arrangement of lots, uses, buildings, parking areas, circulation and open spaces. All planned unit developments must be designed as an integrated unit, in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient development. 
C.  Any planned unit development is considered as a conditional use within the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
D.  All planned unit developments must complement or be harmonious with existing adjacent development.  
Sec. 38.430.030. - Special conditions of a planned unit development. 
A.  The following special conditions apply to any planned unit development: 
1.  Single ownership. The tract or parcel of land involved must be either in one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all the property to be included. 
2.  Title holdings. The approved final plan must specify the manner of holding title to areas and facilities of joint use and how areas of joint use must be maintained. Normally such areas and facilities must be retained in title by the developers or deeded to an organization composed of all owners in the development meeting the requirements of section 38.220.310. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Use of general building and development standards. 
a.  All planned unit developments must be reviewed against the development standards established in this chapter. However, in order to encourage creativity and design excellence that would contribute to the character of the community, deviations from the requirements or the standards of this chapter may be granted by the review authority after considering the recommendations of the applicable review bodies established by this chapter. The PUD application must be accompanied by written and graphic material sufficient to illustrate the initial and final conditions that the modified standards will produce. Such written and graphic materials may include textual descriptions, site plans, renderings of proposed elevations or landscapes, or similar materials. 
b.  All requested deviations, waivers of submittal requirements and other relaxations of regulatory requirements must be identified in writing at the time of preliminary plan submittal. Failure to identify such items may result in the delay of application processing in order to receive necessary materials, provide additional public notice or implement other curative actions. 
c.  The review authority must make a determination that the deviation will produce an environment, landscape quality and character superior to that produced by the existing standards of this chapter, and which will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this division 38.430, with the adopted goals of the city growth policy and with any relevant adopted design objectives plan. Upon deciding in favor of the deviation request, the review authority may grant deviations, above or below minimum or maximum standards respectively as established in this chapter, including the complete exemption from a particular standard. If the review authority does not determine that the proposed modified standards will create an environment, landscape quality and character superior to that produced by the existing standards of this chapter, and which will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this division 38.430 and with any relevant design objectives plan, then no deviation will be granted. 
5.  Establishing additional standards. In addition to the general building and development standards, the city has the right to establish general design standards, guidelines and policies, for the purpose of implementing and interpreting the provisions of this division 38.430. 
6.  Conformance to sign code. All signs proposed in conjunction with a planned unit development must comply with division 38.560 of this chapter. All signage must be approved as part of the PUD and must be designed as an integral element of the overall planned unit development. Approval of signs within a planned unit development rests upon a determination by the city commission, as provided by the specific proposal, that the intent of the sign regulations is achieved. The review authority may approve a deviation for signs which do not comply with division 38.560 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.430.040. - Planned unit development review procedures and criteria. 
A.  When a subdivision is proposed in conjunction with a zoning planned unit development, the subdivision review must be coordinated with the zoning review. All steps listed in this section apply whether the application is for a subdivision or zoning PUD, and references herein to plan includes plat unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Approval of a planned unit development consists of three procedural steps: pre-application, preliminary plan, and final plan. All subdivision PUDs must also meet all standards for plats. 
1.  Pre-application review. 
a.  A pre-application review is mandatory for all planned unit development proposals. 
b.  A pre-application must be submitted for review and discussion with the DRC, DRB, and planning staff of the applicant's proposal and any requirements, standards or policies that may apply. This step represents an opportunity to identify any major problems that may exist and identify solutions to those problems before formal application. 
c.  Pre-application review procedures. Pre-application review meetings will be held by the DRC and DRB and will provide guidance for planned unit development applications. The general outline of the planned unit development proposal, presented as graphic sketch plans, must be submitted by the applicant to the community development department at least ten days prior to the meeting of the review bodies. The outline must be reviewed by the DRC and DRB. Thereafter, the community development department must furnish the applicant with written comments regarding such submittal, including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the components of the planned unit development preliminary plan application. 
2.  Preliminary plan review. Sufficient information must be submitted to permit review of the land use relationships, densities and the type, size and location of the principal design elements of the planned unit development by the advisory bodies and review authority. For a planned unit development that will be developed in phases, the developer must submit either a preliminary plan for all phases, or else submit a preliminary plan for the initial phase or phases and development guidelines for all subsequent phases. Submittal requirements are in addition to those required for site plan and conditional use permit review. 
a.  Application process. Upon completion of pre-application review and receipt of the community development department's comments on the pre-application, an application for preliminary plan approval may be filed with the community development department. 
b.  Public hearings and meetings. Notice of public hearings and/or public meetings for any preliminary plan application must be provided in accordance with division 38.220 of this chapter. 
c.  Review criteria. In order to approve an application for a planned unit development the city commission must determine that the application is in conformance with all applicable standards, objectives and criteria of this chapter unless an appropriate deviation is granted. 
d.  Recommendations. The DRC and DRB must recommend the approval, conditional approval or denial of the preliminary plan to the review authority and must include in such recommendation the basis upon which such recommendation was determined. 
e.  Preliminary plan approval. The city commission, after conducting a public hearing, may approve, disapprove or approve with conditions the proposed planned unit development. The city commission must issue a written record of its decision to discuss and weigh the review criteria and standards applicable to the PUD. 
3.  Final plan review and approval. The final plan must be in compliance with the approved preliminary plan and/or development guidelines except as provided for in subsection 3.d of this section, and must be reviewed by DRC and ADR staff and approved by the review authority. 
a.  Application process. Upon approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plan and the completion of any conditions imposed in connection with that approval, an application for final plan approval may be submitted. 
b.  Review criteria; compliance with preliminary plan. For approval to be granted, the final plan must comply with the approved preliminary plan. This means that all conditions imposed by the city commission as part of its approval of the preliminary plan have been met and: 
(1)  The final plan does not change the general use or character of the development; 
(2)  The final plan does not increase the amount of improved gross leasable non-residential floor space by more than five percent, does not increase the number of residential dwelling units by more than five percent and does not exceed the amount of any density bonus approved with the preliminary plan; 
(3)  The final plan does not decrease the open space and/or affordable housing provided; 
(4)  The final plan does not contain changes that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, excluding properly granted deviations, the applicable objectives and criteria of section 38.430.100, or other objectives or criteria of this chapter. The final plan must not contain any changes which would allow increased deviation/relaxation of the requirements of this chapter; and 
(5)  The final plat, if applicable, does not create any additional lots which were not reviewed as part of the preliminary plan submittal. 
c.  Final plan approval. The final plan may be approved if it conforms to the approved preliminary plan in the manner described above. Prior to final plan approval, the review authority may request a recommendation from the DRB, DRC, ADR staff, or other entity regarding any part of a proposed final plan. If a final plat is part of the final plan submittal, the review authority per section 38.200.010 is responsible for approval of the final plat. 
(1)  Final plats associated with a PUD must comply with the requirements of sections 38.240.150 and 38.220.070. 
d.  Amendments to final plan. Issuance of building permits and other development approvals are based on the approved final plan and any conditions of approval. No city administrative personnel are permitted to issue permits for improvements which are not indicated on the approved final plan with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Minor changes. 
(a)  Minor changes to a planned unit development may be approved administratively and in writing, whereupon a permit may be issued. Such changes may be authorized without additional public notice at the discretion of the review authority. This provision does not prohibit the review authority from requesting a recommendation from the DRB, DRC, ADR staff or other entity. 
(b)  Minor changes are defined as follows: 
(i)  Those developments that do not change the character of the development; 
(ii)  An increase of less than five percent in the approved number of residential dwelling units; 
(iii)  An increase of less than five percent in the approved gross leasable floor areas of retail, service, office and/or industrial buildings; 
(iv)  A change in building location or placement less than 20 percent of the building width without compromising requirements of the UDO; 
(v)  An increase in the number of lots less than two percent without increasing the density by more than five percent. This is applicable only to zoning PUD plans, not subdivision PUD plats; 
(vi)  A final plan which does not contain any changes which would allow increased deviation/relaxation of the requirements of this chapter; and/or 
(vii)  A final plat, if applicable, which does not create any additional lots which were not reviewed as part of the preliminary plan submittal. 
(c)  When a planned unit development has been prepared in sufficient detail to address the concerns of division 38.230 of this chapter including but not limited to general building envelopes, design character of buildings, and landscaping for some or all of the parcels within its boundaries the final site development plans may be reviewed as an amendment to the PUD final plan. The intention to use this provision must be part of the initial submittal and review of the PUD. 
(2)  Major changes. 
(a)  Major changes to a planned unit development must follow the same planned unit development review and public notice and comment process required for approval of preliminary plans. The final plan must not contain any changes which would allow increased deviation/relaxation of the requirements of this chapter without being individually noticed and reviewed for the proposed change. 
(b)  Major changes are defined as follows: 
(i)  A change in the character of the development; 
(ii)  An increase of greater than five percent in the approved number of residential dwelling units; 
(iii)  An increase of greater than five percent in the approved gross leasable floor areas of retail, service, office and/or industrial buildings; 
(iv)  A reduction in the approved open space and/or affordable housing units provided; 
(v)  A change in the location and placement of buildings; and/or 
(vi)  An increase in the number of lots above what was approved through the preliminary plan review. This is applicable only to zoning PUD plans, not subdivision PUD plats. The final plat, if applicable, may not create any additional lots which were not reviewed as part of the preliminary plan submittal.  
Sec. 38.430.050. - Plan submittal requirements. 
For each stage of the review process, the applicable information and data described in division 38.220 of this chapter must be submitted unless the DRC determines that the information is unnecessary for the proper evaluation of the development based on the evaluation of the pre-application review. Only after the community development department has determined that all required information has been submitted will the application be processed. When a proposed PUD includes both a subdivision and zoning component, a coordinated application on a form to be provided by the community development department must be used to coordinate submittal materials and prevent redundant requirements.  
Sec. 38.430.060. - Duration of planned unit development approval. 
A.  Duration of preliminary plan approval. The provisions of this subsection A do not apply to subdivision elements of a PUD. 
1.  Within a maximum of one year following the approval of a preliminary plan, the applicant must file with the community development department a final plan in detailed form covering the entirety, or one or more phases, of the development. 
2.  Upon application and in accordance with the standards of section 38.230.140.F, the community development director may administratively extend the period for filing a final plan for six-month periods. The granting of administrative extensions under this section may, at the discretion of the community development director, be referred to the city commission. 
3.  If no final plan is filed covering all or any portion of the preliminary plan within the above time limits, the right to proceed under the preliminary plan will expire for any portion of the preliminary plan for which a final plan has not been timely filed. 
B.  Duration of final plan approval. 
1.  The applicant must undertake and complete the development of an approved final plan within two years from the time of final plan approval. For the purposes of this section, a development is substantially complete once all engineering improvements (water, sewer, streets, curbs, gutter, streetlights, fire hydrants and storm drainage) are installed and completed in accordance with city rules and regulations. Extensions for periods of not more than one year may be administratively granted by the community development director in accordance with the standards of section 38.230.140.F. The granting of administrative extensions under this section may, at the discretion of the community development director, be referred to the city commission. 
2.  A request for extension of final approval under this section must be submitted to the community development director in writing by the applicant at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration. Failure to submit a written request within the specified time period will cause forfeiture of the right to extension of final approval. Failure to construct the development and implement improvement requirements within the specified time limit will cause a forfeiture of the right to proceed under the final plan and require resubmission of all materials and re-approval of the same through the preliminary plan procedures. 
3.  The timing of all extensions of final plan approval must be coordinated with the approval period established for any subdivision plat approval that is part of the PUD so that any expiration dates are consistent. 
4.  Final plan approval may occur multiple times under the provisions for phased PUDs described in section 38.430.070.  
Sec. 38.430.070. - Phasing of planned unit developments. 
A.  Applications for phased planned unit developments. If a planned unit development is intended to be developed over time in two or more separate phases, application for approval of a phased planned unit development must follow procedures established for pre-application review as outlined in this division 38.430. After pre-application review is completed, phased PUDs may be proposed in accordance with one of the following procedures: 
1.  Application for simultaneous approval of all phases of the PUD. 
a.  Where all phases of a PUD are planned in detail, an application for approval of all phases of the PUD may be made in accordance with preliminary plan review and approval procedures outlined in this division 38.430. In such cases, preliminary plans and all required supplemental information must clearly set forth phased development boundaries, schedules and other details pertaining to the phasing of the project. 
b.  Upon approval of the preliminary plan for all phases of the PUD, each phase of the development may occur in accordance with the review and approval procedures for final plans as specified in this division 38.430. 
2.  Application for approval of initial phase of the PUD with subsequent phases master planned and subject to development guidelines. Where the applicant wishes to gain preliminary and final approval for the initial phase of a PUD, and further wishes to gain master plan and development guidelines approval for subsequent phases of the PUD, preliminary and final plan review and approval procedures for the initial phase must be followed in accordance with this division 38.430. A master plan and development guidelines for the remaining phases of the development must be provided for review and approval as outlined in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Phased PUD approval process. Master plans and development guidelines will be reviewed and approved according to the procedures established for preliminary plans as set forth in this division 38.430. When a master plan and development guidelines for a phased PUD have been reviewed and approved by the review authority, each phase of the PUD may be developed in accordance with the review and approval procedures set forth in this division 38.430 for final plan reviews. 
C.  Phased PUD review criteria. 
1.  The review criteria for phased preliminary and final PUDs is the same as that for PUDs as set forth in this chapter. 
2.  In those cases where master plans and development guidelines are proposed to govern the development of future phases of the PUD, the review authority must determine that the proposed master plan and development guidelines are provided in sufficient detail to support a determination that the phased PUD will comply with all requirements for PUD approval if developed in accordance with the approved master plan and development guidelines. 
3.  DRB or ADR staff, as applicable, and DRC must review preliminary and final plans, for those phases of a PUD which have an approved master plan and development guidelines, for compliance and consistency with said master plan and development guidelines. 
4.  Should DRC, DRB or ADR staff, as applicable, determine that proposals to develop subsequent phases of a PUD are not in compliance with the approved master plan and development guidelines, the determination may be appealed to the city commission subject to the provisions of division 38.250. 
D.  Phased planned unit development submittal requirements. 
1.  Master plan submittal requirements. Master plans for phased PUDs must consist of a detailed site plan depicting: 
a.  Existing conditions for the entire phased PUD as required by section 38.220.120.A.2 and 3; and 
b.  Proposed conditions pertaining to such elements as building location, open spaces, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and boundaries of the individual phases of the PUD in as much detail as is required by the evaluation of the pre-application review as outlined in this division 38.430. 
2.  Development guidelines submittal requirements. Development guidelines for phased PUDs must be submitted to the community development director as detailed in application forms. Development guidelines for phased PUDs must contain the information as is required by the evaluation of the pre-application review as outlined in this division 38.430. Such information may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of submittal requirements and review procedures for the approval of preliminary and final plans submitted in accordance with the master plan and development guidelines (to be developed with the assistance of staff); 
b.  A description of the coordination with any other applicable review procedures, e.g., subdivision review; 
c.  A complete list of proposed or potential land uses; 
d.  Sign guidelines: type, location, design, illumination, size and height; 
e.  Perimeter buffering guidelines with specific regard to adjoining land uses; 
f.  Landscaping guidelines, including a description of the landscaping theme in relation to the streetscape, the buildings on site, and any proposed signage, open space treatment, parking and circulation areas, display areas and screening; 
g.  Design guidelines for outdoor storage and/or display; 
h.  Protective covenants which may include requirements, property owners' association provisions, provisions for maintenance, etc.; 
i.  Parking: guidelines for design, provision for shared facilities, circulation between lots, coordination with sidewalk system, and service areas; 
j.  Dimensional requirements: building heights, setbacks (interior and perimeter), open space, etc.; 
k.  Lighting; 
l.  Architectural guidelines; 
m.  Provisions for utilities, communications and refuse; 
n.  Guidelines for noise, emissions, glare, hazardous materials, etc.; and 
o.  Improvements schedule. 
E.  Open space provisions for phased PUD developments. If a project is to be built in phases, each phase must include an appropriate share of the proposed recreational, open space, affordable housing and other site and building amenities of the entire development used to meet the requirements of section 38.430.090.E.2. The appropriate share of the amenities for each phase must be determined for each specific project at the time of preliminary approval and may not be based solely upon a proportional or equal share for the entire site. Requirements may be made for off-site improvements on a particular phased project. 
F.  Final plans for phased PUD developments. Final plans for a planned unit development may be submitted in phases. The final plan must conform to the preliminary plan of a planned unit development, as approved. 
G.  Duration of phased PUD development guidelines approval. Within a maximum of five years following the approval of development guidelines for a planned unit development, development must commence or the development guidelines must be reviewed for renewal. Any subsequent approvals of a preliminary plan must conform to the development guidelines.  
Sec. 38.430.080. - Enforcement of approval requirements and conditions. 
The failure to comply with any of the terms, conditions of approval or limitations contained on the site plan, landscape plan, building elevations, other approved documents, or other element pertaining to a planned unit development which has received final approval from the city may subject the applicant or current landowner to the enforcement remedies contained in section 38.200.160.  
Sec. 38.430.090. - Planned unit development design objectives and criteria. 
A.  General. For any planned unit development proposal to be approved it must first be found, by the review authority, after recommendation from the DRC, DRB or WRB (if applicable), to be in compliance with this chapter including any applicable criteria of this section. 
B.  Land use classifications. 
1.  The design objectives and criteria with which a planned unit development proposal must comply are dependent upon the designated growth policy land use classification and zoning district of the site proposed for the planned unit development. 
2.  All planned unit developments are reviewed against the objectives and criteria designated for all development. Each individual planned unit development is then reviewed against the objectives and criteria established for the land use classification of the site on which the proposal is to be located. A planned unit development must satisfy all the objectives and criteria of all applicable groups. 
3.  In evaluating planned unit developments, the city may determine that certain criteria are not applicable or are irrelevant to a particular development proposal and therefore do not apply to that proposal unless those criteria are applicable to a deviation which is being sought by the applicant. Subsection E of this section contains the groups of objectives and criteria against which planned unit developments are reviewed. 
C.  Evaluation process. The acceptability and performance of a planned unit development proposal will be evaluated as follows: Each of the relevant objectives and criteria for the applicable land use classification and for all development contained in subsection E of this section, will be answered "Yes," "No" or "Not Applicable" (NA). A "No response" to any of the applicable objectives and criteria will automatically preclude the development proposal from further consideration and eventual approval, unless a deviation is granted by the review authority. An objective or criterion is applicable if it can reasonably be applied to the development proposal. The applicant must clearly demonstrate how the planned unit development specifically addresses each applicable objective and criterion. 
D.  Responsibility for impact mitigation. To protect the character of new and existing neighborhoods against intrusive and disruptive development, any negative or adverse impacts must be effectively mitigated in the planned unit development plan, per the following guidelines: 
1.  When two adjacent parcels are developed simultaneously, the responsibility for mitigating conflicts is upon the more intense use. 
2.  When a use is the first to develop on two adjacent vacant parcels, the first use must provide the necessary buffer to any reasonable future use as determined by the city. 
3.  The second use to develop must, at the time it develops, take all additional steps necessary to mitigate conflicts. 
4.  When a planned unit development includes a use or uses which are not otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning district, the responsibility for impact mitigation lies exclusively with the planned unit development proposal. 
E.  Design objectives and PUD review criteria. 
1.  The city will determine compatibility of a project based upon the evidence presented during evaluation of the community design objectives and criteria of this chapter. 
2.  In addition to the criteria for all site plan and conditional use reviews, the following criteria will be used in evaluating all planned unit development applications. 
a.  All development. All land uses within a proposed planned unit development must comply with the applicable objectives and criteria of the mandatory "all development" group. 
(1)  Does the development comply with all city design standards, requirements and specifications for the following services: water supply, trails/walks/bike ways, sanitary supply, irrigation companies, fire protection, electricity, flood hazard areas, natural gas, telephone, storm drainage, cable television, and streets? 
(2)  Does the project preserve or replace existing natural vegetation? 
(3)  Are the elements of the site plan (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space and landscaping, etc.) designed and arranged to produce an efficient, functionally organized and cohesive planned unit development? 
(4)  Does the design and arrangement of elements of the site plan (e.g., building construction, orientation, and placement; transportation networks; selection and placement of landscape materials; and/or use of renewable energy sources; etc.) contribute to the overall reduction of energy use by the project? 
(5)  Are the elements of the site plan (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space and landscaping, etc.) designed and arranged to maximize the privacy of residents of the project? 
(6)  Parkland. Does the design and arrangement of buildings and open space areas contribute to the overall aesthetic quality of the site configuration, and has the area of parkland or open space been provided for each proposed dwelling as required by section 38.420.020? 
(7)  Performance. All PUDs must earn at least 20 performance points. Points may be earned in any combination of the following. The applicant must select the combination of methods but the city may require documentation of performance, modifications to the configuration of open space, or other assurances that the options selected will perform adequately. 
(a)  Provision of affordable housing. Exclusive of housing used to satisfy division 38.380: 
(i)  Five points for each percent of dwellings to be constructed in the residential development which are provided by donation to the city or nonprofit Community Housing Development Organization; or three points for each build-ready lot donated to the city or nonprofit Community Housing Development Organization for affordable housing provided by a residential or non-residential development; or 
(ii)  Three points for each percent of dwellings to be constructed in the residential development which are provided by long term contractual obligation to an affordable housing agency, for a period of not less than 20 years, with a written plan assuring ongoing affordability pricing and eligibility monitoring, and annual re-certification. The city's affordability guidelines and subsequent revisions establish affordability and eligibility, 
(b)  Additional open space. 
(i)  One point for each percent of the project area that is provided as non-public open space; or 1¼ points for each percent of the project area that is provided as publicly accessible open space. 
(ii)  The portion of the project to be considered in determining the size of area to be provided for open space will be the gross project area less areas dedicated and transferred to the public, and/or used to meet the parklands requirements of subsection E.2.a.(6) of this section. The area provided for open space must be exclusive of setbacks on individually owned lots and interior parking lot landscaping, and subject to the performance standards of division 38.420 of this chapter. The area may be provided through a combination of one or more of the following means: 
(A)  Open space within the project boundaries and commonly held by the property owners' association for the use of owners, residents and their guests; 
(B)  Open space within the project boundaries and developed as usable recreation space with a corresponding public use easement; 
(C)  Outside of the project boundaries as an addition to an existing off-site park adequate in location and size to meet the recreational needs of the residents; 
(D)  Cash-in-lieu of open space subject to the standards of section 38.420.030; or 
(E)  Open space outside of the project boundaries adequate in size and location to meet the recreational needs of the residential development. The site is subject to the standards of division 38.420 of this chapter and must demonstrate a geographic and service relationship to the residential development. 
(c)  Adaptive reuse of historic buildings. Two points for each ten percent of total number of dwelling units in a residential development which are provided by the adaptive reuse of an individually listed or eligible to be listed historic structure; one point for each ten percent of total commercial and/or industrial floor area which is provided by the adaptive reuse of an individually listed or eligible to be listed historic structure; up to a total of one-third of the performance points required to be earned. 
(d)  Underutilized and brownfield sites. One point for each 50 percent increase in the total square footage of commercial and/or industrial floor area on underutilized sites; one point for each 50 percent increase in the total number of dwelling units on underutilized sites; one point for each acre developed of the environmentally contaminated land; up to a total of one-third of the performance points required to be earned. 
(e)  Designed to meet LEED-ND and be conditionally approved or have pre-certification by the authority (15 points). 
(f)  Inclusion of a low impact development plan (6 points) that includes the following: 
(i)  On-site stormwater treatment systems that exceed the requirements of chapter 40, article 4, Stormwater, including but not limited to: incorporating drainage methods and technologies that treat, detain and/or infiltrate stormwater as close as possible to the source of run-off and the use of natural drainage systems across sites, rather than underground closed-pipe systems to the extent feasible. Natural drainage systems reduce the negative impacts of stormwater runoff by redesigning residential streets to take advantage of plants, trees, and soils to clean runoff and manage stormwater flows. Vegetated swales, stormwater cascades, and small wetland ponds allow soils to absorb water, slowing flows and filtering out many contaminants. 
(ii)  The low impact development plan must be integrated with the snow storage and management plan. 
(iii)  At least 75 percent of new planting should be chosen from the list of Drought Tolerant Plants & Xeriscaping in Montana (2010), produced by the Montana Nursery & Landscape Association, or approved/updated equivalent list approved by the city. Any species listed as noxious or invasive in the state must be avoided. 
(iv)  Inclusion of weather-based irrigation controllers. 
(v)  Limitations in the covenants or design guidelines on the amount and type of sod permitted. 
(g)  Sustainable design and construction. (6 points) 
(i)  Covenants or design guidelines that include a commitment to design the majority of buildings to meet LEED certification requirements or approved equivalent certification approved by the City of Bozeman. Equivalent certification programs will also be considered during preliminary PUD review. 
(ii)  Energy use reduction. Residential covenants or design guidelines must include a commitment to build third party certified homes, which meet guidelines that make them at least 20 percent more efficient than standard homes. Non-residential covenants and design guidelines must include a commitment to build and certify buildings that meet the EPA's Energy Star challenge or approved equivalent program. Equivalent programs will also be considered during Preliminary PUD review. 
(iii)  Water use reduction. Covenants or design guidelines must include a commitment to use EPA's WaterSense certified products for all kitchen, bathroom and irrigation hardware. Equivalent programs will also be considered during preliminary PUD review. 
(iv)  Provision of solar, wind or other alternative energy sources or participation in an approved cash-in-lieu program. A coordinated and detailed plan on how the development will address this component must be submitted. 
(h)  Integrated and coordinated way-finding measures beyond minimum requirements within the overall project (4 points). 
(i)  On-site recycling transfer station (4 points). 
(j)  Public transportation bus station or enhanced covered bus stop. (One point per station or enhanced stop.) 
(k)  Streetscape improvements (6 points): Streetscape design features that exceed the minimum street standards including street furniture, pedestrian lighting, low-impact development techniques, on-street parking standards, crosswalks, landscape and planting, way-finding, public art or other design elements. Such elements must be installed as part of the street infrastructure. 
(8)  Is the development being properly integrated into development and circulation patterns of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods so that this development will not become an isolated "pad" to adjoining development? 
b.  Residential. Planned unit developments in residential areas (R-S, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RMH and R-O zoning districts) may include a variety of housing types designed to enhance the natural environmental, conserve energy, recognize, and to the maximum extent possible, preserve and promote the unique character of neighborhoods, with provisions for a mix of limited commercial development. For purposes of this section, "limited commercial development" means uses listed in the B-1 neighborhood service district (division 38.310 of this chapter), within the parameters set forth below. All uses within the PUD must be sited and designed such that the activities present will not detrimentally affect the adjacent residential neighborhood. The permitted number of residential dwelling units must be determined by the provision of and proximity to public services and subject to the following limitations and considerations: 
(1)  On a net acreage basis, is the average residential density in the project (calculated for residential portion of the site only) consistent with the development densities set forth in the land use guidelines of the city growth policy? 
(2)  Does the project provide for private outdoor areas (e.g., private setbacks, patios and balconies, etc.) for use by the residents and employees of the project which are sufficient in size and have adequate light, sun, ventilation, privacy and convenient access to the household or commercial units they are intended to serve? 
(3)  Does the project provide for outdoor areas for use by persons living and working in the development for active or passive recreational activities? 
(4)  If the project is proposing a residential density bonus as described below, does it include a variety of housing types and styles designed to address community-wide issues of affordability and diversity of housing stock? 
(5)  Is the overall project designed to enhance the natural environment, conserve energy and provide efficient public services and facilities? 
(6)  Residential density bonus. If the project is proposing a residential density bonus (30 percent maximum) above the residential density of the zoning district within which the project is located and which is set forth in division 38.310 of this chapter, does the proposed project exceed the established regulatory design standards and ensure compatibility with adjacent neighborhood development? The number of dwelling units obtained by the density bonus is determined by dividing the lot area required for the dwelling unit type by one plus the percentage of density bonus sought. The minimum lot area per dwelling obtained by this calculation must be provided within the project. Those dwellings subject to division 38.380, must be excluded in the base density upon which the density bonus is calculated. 
(7)  Does the overall PUD recognize and, to the maximum extent possible, preserve and promote the unique character of neighborhoods in the surrounding area? 
c.  Commercial. Planned unit developments in commercial areas (B-1, B-2, B-2M, B-3 and UMU zoning districts) may include either commercial or multi-household development; however, adequate but controlled access to arterial streets is required. Activities may include a broad range of retail and service establishments designed to serve consumer demands of the city area. 
(1)  If the project contains any use intended to provide adult amusement or entertainment, does it meet the requirements for adult businesses? 
(2)  Is the project contiguous to an arterial street, and has adequate but controlled access been provided? 
(3)  Is the project on at least two acres of land? 
(4)  If the project contains two or more significant uses (for instance, retail, office, residential, hotel/motel and recreation), do the uses relate to each other in terms of location within the PUD, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, architectural design, utilization of common open space and facilities, etc.? 
(5)  Is it compatible with and does it reflect the unique character of the surrounding area? 
(6)  Is there direct vehicular and pedestrian access between on-site parking areas and adjacent existing or future off-site parking areas which contain more than ten spaces? 
(7)  Does the project encourage infill, or does the project otherwise demonstrate compliance with the land use guidelines of the city growth policy? 
(8)  Does the project provide for outdoor recreational areas (such as additional landscaped areas, open spaces, trails or picnic areas) for the use and enjoyment of those living in, working in or visiting the development? 
d.  Industrial. Planned unit industrial developments in industrial areas (M-1, M-2, BP and NEHMU zoning districts) may include employment, wholesaling, manufacturing and utility centers for the community. The particular types or combination of uses are determined based upon its merits, benefits, potential impact upon adjacent land uses and the intensity of development. 
(1)  Is the project located adjacent to an arterial or collector street that provides adequate access to the site? 
(2)  Is the project developed such that the least intense uses must be located along the arterial streets, where visibility to the public is likely. More intense uses such as heavy industrial uses and warehousing activities must be located away from the arterial streets, buffered by the other uses. 
(3)  Does the project utilize a landscaping theme that will tie adjacent uses or projects together? 
(4)  Is the project being developed on land substantially surrounded by property approved for development or developed property with existing services and utilities already available? 
e.  Mixed use. Planned unit developments in mixed-use areas (REMU, UMU, and NEHMU zoning districts) may include commercial, light industrial, residential and mixes of various primary and accessory uses. The particular types or combination of uses are determined based upon its merits, benefits, potential impact upon adjacent land uses and the intensity of development. 
(1)  Is the project substantially consistent with the intent and purpose statements for the underlying zoning district? 
(2)  Is the project located adjacent or within proximity to an arterial or collector street that provides adequate access to the site? 
(3)  Is the project on at least two acres of land? 
(4)  Do the uses relate to each other in terms of location within the PUD, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, architectural design, utilization of common open space and facilities, streetscape, etc.? 
(5)  Does the overall project achieve or exceed the FAR "floor area ratios" envisioned for the underlying district? 
(6)  Is it compatible with and does it reflect the unique character of the surrounding area? 
(7)  Is there direct vehicular and pedestrian access between on-site parking areas and adjacent existing or future off-site parking areas which contain more than ten spaces? 
(8)  Does the project encourage infill, or does the project otherwise demonstrate compliance with the land use guidelines of the Bozeman growth policy? 
(9)  Does the project provide for outdoor recreational areas (such as urban plazas, courtyards, landscaped areas, open spaces, or urban trails) for the use and enjoyment of those living in, working in or visiting the development? 
(10)  Does the project provide for private outdoor areas (e.g., private setbacks, patios and/or balconies, etc.) for use by the residents and employees of the project which are sufficient in size and have adequate light, sun, ventilation, privacy and convenient access to the household or commercial units they are intended to serve? 
(11)  Does the project provide for outdoor areas for use by persons living and working in the development for active or passive recreational activities? 
(12)  Is the overall project designed to enhance the natural environment, conserve energy and provide efficient public services and facilities? 
(13)  If the project is proposing a residential density bonus as described below, does it include a variety of housing types and urban styles designed to address community-wide issues of affordability and diversity of housing stock? 
(14)  Residential density bonus. If the project is proposing a residential density bonus (30 percent maximum) above the residential density of the zoning district or building type within which the project is located and which is set forth in division 38.310 of this chapter, does the proposed project exceed the established regulatory design standards (such as for setbacks, off-street parking, open space, etc.) and ensure compatibility with adjacent neighborhood development? The number of dwelling units obtained by the density bonus is determined by dividing the lot area required for the dwelling unit type by one plus the percentage of density bonus sought. The minimum lot area per dwelling obtained by this calculation must be provided within the project. Those dwellings subject to division 38.380 must be excluded from the base density upon which the density bonus is calculated.  
ARTICLE 5. - PROJECT DESIGN  
DIVISION 38.500. - INTRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 38.500.010. - Purpose. 
This article implements the Bozeman's growth policy. Overall, this article: 
A.  Provides clear objectives for those embarking on the planning and design of development projects in Bozeman; 
B.  Preserves and protects the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Bozeman; 
C.  Ensures that new commercial and multi-household development is of high quality and beneficially contributes to Bozeman's character; 
D.  Ensures that new developments within existing neighborhoods are compatible with, and enhance the character of Bozeman's neighborhoods; 
E.  Promotes an increase in walking and bicycling throughout the City; 
F.  Enhances the livability of Bozeman's residential developments; 
G.  Maintains and enhances property values within Bozeman.  
Sec. 38.500.020. - Applicability and compliance. 
The provisions in this article apply to development. However, since each division within it addresses different design and development elements, the applicability of each division is clarified at the beginning of the division. For instance, some divisions may only apply to new commercial and multi-household development, while individual sections in division 38.540 only apply to specific housing types. 
A.  Relationship to other codes and documents. Where provisions of this article conflict with provisions in any other section of the UDC, this article prevails unless otherwise noted. Relationship with other notable design provisions and guidelines: 
1.  For sites within the city's established neighborhood conservation overlay district, the provisions of division 38.340 supersede the provisions of this article. However, the review authority may apply the provisions of this article in the event of a conflict, where the review authority determines that the provisions herein help new development better meet the purpose and intent of neighborhood conservation overlay district per section 38.340.010. 
2.  The director of community development will maintain a design manual to illustrate best practices to implement the design standards of this chapter. The design manual is to assist citizens and design professionals by providing visuals and illustrative examples of the intent of the city's guidelines and regulations. 
B.  For building additions and remodels, three different thresholds have been established to gauge how the project design standards in this article are applied to such projects. See figure 38.500.020 below for examples of site development and the respective types of improvements required under each of the three levels of improvements. 
1.  Level I Improvements include all exterior remodels, building additions, and/or site improvements commenced within a three-year period (based on the date of permit issuance) that affect the exterior appearance of the building/site and/or increase the building's area by up to 20 percent. The requirement for such improvements is that the proposed improvements meet the standards and do not lead to further nonconformance with the standards. For example, if a property owner decides to replace a building façade's siding, then the siding must meet the applicable exterior building material standards, but elements such as building articulation (see section 38.530.040) would not be required. 
2.  Level II Improvements include all improvements commenced within a three-year period (based on the date of permit issuance) that increase the building's area by more than 20 percent, but not greater than 50 percent. All standards that do not involve repositioning the building or reconfiguring site development apply to Level II Improvements. For example, if a property owner of an existing home in the B-2 zoning district wants to convert the home to an office and build an addition equaling 45 percent of the current building's area, then the following requirements apply: 
a.  The location and design of the addition/remodel must be consistent with the block frontage standards (division 38.510), which address building frontages, entries, parking lot location, and front setback landscaping. For such developments seeking additions to buildings where off-street parking location currently does not comply with applicable parking location standards, building additions are allowed, provided they do not increase any current nonconformity and generally bring the project closer into conformance with the standards (see division 38.550, Parking). 
b.  Compliance with applicable site planning and design elements (division 38.520). 
c.  Compliance with all building design provisions of division 38.530, except architectural scale and materials provisions related to the existing portion of the building where no exterior changes are proposed. The entire building must comply with building elements/details, materials, and blank wall treatment standards of section 38.540.070. 
d.  Compliance with the off-street parking, landscaping, signage, and lighting provisions of divisions 38.550-580 that relate to proposed improvements. 
3.  Level III Improvements include all improvements commenced within a three-year period (based on the date of permit issuance) that increase the building's area by more than 50 percent. Such developments must conform to all applicable standards. Site improvements are addressed in sections 38.230.150 and 38.230.160. 
 
Figure 38.500.020. 
Examples of site development and the respective types of improvements required under each of the three levels of improvements. 
  
DIVISION 38.510. - BLOCK FRONTAGE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 38.510.010. - Introduction. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  To provide standards to implement the growth policy and applicable adopted subarea plans; 
2.  To design sites and orient buildings with an emphasis on compatible development and creating a comfortable walking environment; and 
3.  To provide standards that recognize the need for a system of streets and block frontages. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this division apply to all development within Bozeman, except single to four-household dwellings in any configuration. Also: 
1.  For clarification on the relationship between the provisions in this division and other documents and codes, see section 38.500.020.A. 
2.  For the application of building additions, remodels and site improvements, see section 38.500.020.B. 
C.  How to use this division. Block frontage standards for individual properties depend on the zoning designation adjacent that the properties front onto and Community Design Framework map. Take the following steps in using this division: 
1.  Determine the zoning of your property, then see section 38.510.020 to find the block frontage type designation for the street or streets fronting your property. For properties in residential zones, the standards for landscaped block frontages (see section 38.510.030.C) apply. For properties in industrial zones, see section 38.510.030.H. For properties that front onto multiple streets, see provisions in section 38.510.02.F; and 
2.  Go to the appropriate code section in this division for the standards applicable to the block frontage type designation. Table 38.510.030.A includes a summary of the five primary street frontage type designations along with links to the appropriate sections, the intention for each block frontage designation, and key design/use provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2019 , § 3, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.510.020. - Community design framework maps and standards. 
A.  About the maps. The maps, together with the block frontage standards in section 38.510.030, guide the look and feel of development in commercial and multi-household areas throughout Bozeman when viewed from the street. The provisions herein recognize that there is a hierarchy of different streets and block frontage types ranging from pedestrian-oriented storefronts to arterial streets/frontages that warrant greater flexibility in the design of frontages. 
The block frontage standards address streetfront elements including: 
1.  Building location and orientation. 
2.  Parking lot location. 
3.  Window transparency. 
4.  Weather protection. 
5.  Landscaping. 
The community design framework maps also identify high visibility street corner sites that warrant special design treatment. Ultimately, these "form-based" provisions will help to reinforce existing and desired development patterns intended to implement the growth policy, including adopted neighborhood plans. 
B.  All block frontages within residential zones are subject to landscaped block frontage provisions set forth in section 38.510.030.C. 
C.  All block frontages within industrial zones are subject to the provisions of section 38.510.030.H. 
D.  The default block frontage for new or undesignated streets (such as those within annexed land) in commercial and mixed-use zones is Mixed (see the mixed block frontage provisions set forth in section 38.510.030.D), 
E.  The block frontage designations apply to development on both sides of the street except where otherwise specified. 
F.  Multiple frontage situations where a property and building(s) front onto multiple block frontages or internal frontage designations. Where a property fronts onto more than one block frontage, each building must comply with the standards for the block frontage upon which it is located, with the following clarifications: 
1.  When a building or buildings is located such that it faces and is adjacent to multiple block frontages, the orientation of the front of the building must be sited and placed on the property in the following order of precedence: 
a.  Streets (all types, see subsection F.2 below). 
b.  Trail/Park. 
c.  Special residential or internal roadway (parking areas/lots, block separation corridors). 
d.  Departures may be considered provided the location and front orientation of the buildings are compatible with the character of the area and enhance the character of the street. 
2.  When a building(s) is located such that it faces and is adjacent to multiple street block frontages: 
a.  The orientation of the front of the building must be sited and placed on the property in the following order of precedence: 
(1)  Gateway (38.510.030.E). 
(2)  Storefront (38.510.030.B). 
(3)  Landscape (38.510.030.C). 
(4)  Other (38.510.030.G). 
(5)  Departures may be considered provided the location and front orientation of the buildings are compatible with the character of the area and enhance the character of the street. 
b.  For corner sites with landscaped block frontage on one street and storefront or mixed on another, a storefront frontage may wrap around the corner (on the landscaped block frontage side) for up to a half block or no more than 120 feet (whichever is more). 
c.  Each building(s) must address a frontage. 
 
3.  All buildings must be placed and designed to present the front and primary facade to the block frontage or street block frontage that is highest in the order of precedence. 
4.  All buildings on a corner at the intersection of two streets must be placed adjacent to and present a front and primary façade to both street block frontages. 
5.  Entrances: 
a.  A publicly accessible entrance must be provided on the front and primary facade unless not required by the block frontage. 
b.  For buildings on a corner at the intersection of two streets, publicly accessible entrances on both street frontages are encouraged, but only one entrance is required. 
c.  For buildings that front on internal and external block frontages, publicly accessible entrances on both types of block frontages are encouraged, but only one entrance is required. 
d.  The publicly accessible entrance must be provided on the storefront block frontage if one is provided. 
e.  For buildings on a corner at the intersection of two streets with a mix of block frontage designations the publicly accessible entrance must be provided on the block frontage according to the order of precedence in subsection 1 above. 
f.  For buildings on lots or sites that have multiple street block frontages the publicly accessible entrance must be provided on the block frontage according to the order of precedence in subsection 2 above. 
6.  Buildings that face two streets and meet the primary frontage parking location standards are not required to meet building to parking location percentage frontage standards for subsequent building frontages. 
7.  Parking: Surface parking (including ground floor parking in a structure) adjacent to a street corner is not allowed, except: 
a.  Corner lots with non-designated frontages (other) on both streets; 
b.  Other combination of block frontages, except those with a storefront designation, via a departure and subject to the applicable departure criteria. 
G.  Changes to the default block frontage designation for new and existing streets may be made through the Community Design Framework Master Plan per section 38.510.030.L. 
H.  A reference map of approved community design framework master plans and default block frontages is maintained by the department of community development. The map is a visual representation of the text of this section and is for illustrative purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 2019 , § 4, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.510.030. - Block frontage standards. 
A.  Summary chart. Table 38.510.030.A summarizes standards for each of the six designated block frontage types. Specific standards for each of the block frontage types are set forth below: 
 
Table 38.510.030.A. 
Summary of block frontage standards. 
B.  Storefront block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. Storefront block frontages are the most vibrant and active shopping and dining areas within the city. Blocks designated as storefront blocks include continuous storefronts placed along the sidewalk edge with small scale shops and/or frequent business entries. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.B. 
Storefront vision and key standards. 
 
2.  Standards. All development as set forth in UDC 38.510.010.B on sites containing a storefront block frontage designation must comply with the following standards (on applicable block frontages): 
Table 38.510.030.B 
Storefront block frontage standards 
Element 	Standards ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  	Examples & Notes 
Ground floor 
Land use 	Non-residential uses specified in 38.310.040, except for lobbies associated with residential or hotel/motel uses on upper floors. 	
Floor to ceiling height 	13' minimum (applies to new buildings only). 	
Non-residential space depth 	20' minimum (applies to new buildings only).  

Building placement 	Required at front property line/back edge of sidewalk. Additional setbacks are allowed for widened sidewalk or pedestrian-oriented space (38.520.060.D). 	 
Building entrances 	Must face the street. For corner buildings, entrances may face the street corner. 	
Façade transparency 	At least 60% of ground floor between 30" and 10' above the sidewalk for primary facades and 40% of ground floor between 30" and 10' above the sidewalk for secondary facades. Display windows may count for up to 50% of the transparency requirement provided they are at least 30" in depth to allow for changeable displays. Tack-on display cases do not qualify as transparent window areas.  	Window area that is glazed over or covered in any manner that obscures visibility into the storefront space shall not count as transparent window area. 
Weather protection 	Weather protection with 8-15' vertical clearance at least 5' in average depth along at least 60% of façade. Retractable awnings may be used to meet these requirements.  	
Parking location 
Also see division 38.540 of this division for related parking requirements 	New surface and structured parking areas (ground floor) must be placed to the side or rear of structures and are limited to 60' of street frontage. Provide a 6' minimum buffer of landscaping between the street and off street parking areas meeting the performance standards of division 38.550.   
 
Sidewalk width 	12 feet minimum between curb edge and storefront (area includes clear/buffer zone with street trees). Setbacks and utility easements must also be considered and may result in a larger minimum sidewalk width.  	 
 
3.  Departure criteria. Departures to the above standards that feature the symbol will be considered by the review authority (per section 38.250.060) provided the alternative proposal meets the intent of the standards, plus the following criteria:  
a.  Retail space depth. Reduced depths will be considered where the applicant can successfully demonstrate the proposed alternative design and configuration of the space is viable for a variety of permitted retail uses; 
b.  Façade transparency. The proposed alternative design treatment of façade area between ground level windows provides visual interest to the pedestrian and mitigates impacts of any blank wall areas. No less than 40 percent of the façade between 30 inches and ten feet above the sidewalk may be approved with a departure; 
c.  Weather protection. Other proposed alternative design treatments must provide equivalent weather protection benefits; and 
d.  Parking location. There must be an acceptable tradeoff in terms of the amount and quality of storefront area that is integrated with the development and the applicable parking location departure. Plus, the alternative must include design features to successfully mitigate the visual impact of additional parking areas along designated storefront streets. 
e.  Sidewalk width. Alternative designs may be considered where topographical challenges exist. Alternative designs must be able to accommodate safe and comfortable pedestrian traffic anticipated for full block development. 
C.  Landscaped block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. The landscaped block frontage designation emphasizes landscaped frontages and clear pedestrian connections between buildings and the sidewalk. This designation applies to all new and existing streets in applicable residential districts, plus includes residential based streets and other streets in commercial/ mixed-use zoned areas where special landscaped frontages are desired. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.C. 
Landscaped block frontage vision and key standards. 
 
2.  Standards. All development as set forth in section 38.510.010.B on sites containing a landscaped block frontage designation must comply with the following standards (on applicable block frontages): 
Table 38.510.030.C 
Landscaped block frontage standards. 
Element 	Standards ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  	Examples & Notes 
Ground floor: 
Land use 	See Tables 38.310.030-.040 for permitted use details. 	
Building placement 	10' minimum front setback.  
See section 38.510.030.J for special design provisions associated with ground level residential uses adjacent to a sidewalk. 
Building entrances 	Building entrances must be visible and directly accessible from the street. For uses that front on multiple mixed designated block frontages, an entry along both streets is encouraged, but not required.  	
Façade transparency 	For buildings designed with ground level non-residential uses, at least 25% of the ground floor between 4'-8' above the sidewalk. For residential uses, at least 15% of the entire façade (all vertical surfaces generally facing the street). Windows must be provided on all habitable floors of the façade.   	Window area that is glazed over or covered in any manner that obscures visibility into the storefront space shall not count as transparent window area  
Weather protection 	Provide weather protection at least 3' deep over primary business and residential entries. 	 
Parking location 
Also see division 38.540 of this division for related parking requirements 	Parking must be placed to the side, rear, below or above uses. For single and multi-building developments, surface and structured parking areas (ground floor) are limited to no more than 50% of the street frontage. Private or shared garage entries must occupy no more than 50% of façade width.Provide a 10' minimum buffer of landscaping between the street and off street parking areas meeting the performance standards of division 38.550 of this chapter. New parking structures must featurelandscaped setbacks at least 10' in width.    
 
Landscaping 
Also see division 38.550 of this division for related landscaping standards 	The area between the street and building must be landscaped, private porch or patio space, and/or pedestrian-oriented space. 
For setbacks adjacent to buildings with windows, provide low level landscaping that maintains views between the building and the street. 
Also provide plant materials that screen any blank walls and add visual interest at both the pedestrian scale and motorist scale. For extended wall areas, provide for a diversity of plant materials and textures to maintain visual interest from a pedestrian scale. 	 
Sidewalk width 	6' minimum sidewalks are required adjacent to arterial streets and public parks and 5' minimum width in other areas, except the review authority may require wider sidewalks in special areas where called for in adopted plans or where significant pedestrian traffic is anticipated. 	
 
3.  Departure criteria. Departures to the above standards that feature the symbol will be considered by the review authority (per section 38.250.060) provided the alternative proposal meets the intent of the standards, plus the following criteria:  
a.  Building entrances. Block frontages with steep slopes and/or those facing busy arterial streets and very limited pedestrian traffic may warrant some flexibility to this standard (particularly in residential districts); 
b.  Façade transparency. The proposed alternative design treatment of façade area between ground level windows provides visual interest to the pedestrian and mitigates impacts of any blank wall areas. No less than 40 percent of the façade between 30 inches and ten feet above the sidewalk may be approved with a departure; 
c.  Parking location. There must be an acceptable tradeoff in terms of the amount and quality of storefront area that is integrated with the development and the applicable parking location departure. Plus, the alternative must include design features to successfully mitigate the visual impact of additional parking areas along designated landscaped streets. 
D.  Mixed block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. The mixed block frontage designation serves areas that accommodate a mixture of ground floor uses and allows a diversity of development frontages provided they contribute to the visual character of the street and enhance the pedestrian environment. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.D. Mixed block frontage options and standards. 
 
2.  Standards. All development as set forth in section 38.510.010.B on sites containing a mixed block frontage have the option to comply with either the storefront or landscaped block frontage provisions as set forth above, with the following modifications (on applicable block frontages): 
Table 38.510.030.C 
Mixed block frontage standards. 
Element 	Standards ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  	Examples & Notes 
Building placement 	Buildings may be placed up to the sidewalk edge provided they meet storefront standards set forth above.10' minimum front setback for other buildings, except where greater setbacks are specified in the district per division 38.220.  
See section 38.510.030.J for special design provisions associated with ground level residential uses adjacent to a sidewalk. 
Façade transparency 
Generally, the amount of transparency of façades depends on the use and setback from the street. 	Any storefront buildings on these block frontages must meet the storefront block frontage transparency standards above. Other buildings designed with non-residential uses on the ground floor within 10' of sidewalk, at least 40% of the ground floor between 4'-8' above the ground level surface. Other buildings designed with non-residential uses on the ground floor within 20' of the sidewalk, at least 25% of the ground floor between 4'-8' above the ground level surface. Residential buildings, at least 15% of the entire façade (all vertical surfaces generally facing the street). Windows must be provided on all habitable floors of the façade.     	Window area that is glazed over or covered in any manner that obscures visibility into the storefront space shall not count as transparent window area.  
 
3.  Departure criteria. Departures to the above standards that feature the symbol will be considered by the review authority (per section 38.250.060) provided the alternative proposal meets the intent of the standards, plus the following criteria:  
a.  Minimum setback. For residential uses, provide design treatments that create an effective transition between the public and private realm. This could include a stoop design or other similar treatments that utilize a low fence, retaining wall, and/or hedge along the sidewalk. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.D.4. 
Stoop examples. 
 
E.  Gateway block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. The gateway block frontage designation serves strategic areas fronted by highways or other high visibility arterials that feature heavy vehicular traffic, but there is a desire to provide attractive landscaped frontages, limit the extent of visible surface parking, and accommodate the needs of pedestrians. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.E. 
Gateway block frontage vision. 
 
2.  Standards. All development as set forth in section 38.510.010.B on sites containing the gateway block frontage designation must comply with the landscaped block frontage provisions as set forth above, with the following modifications: 
Table 38.510.030.E 
Gateway frontage standards 
Element 	Standards ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  	Examples & Notes 
Building placement 	The minimum setback for buildings is 25'.  

Building entrances 	At least one (publicly accessible for commercial buildings) building entrances must be visible and directly accessible from the street.  

Parking location 	Surface and structured parking must be placed to the side, rear, below or above uses. For multi-building developments, surface and structured parking areas (ground floor) are limited to no more than 60% of the street frontage.  
 
 
3.  Departure criteria. See subsection C.3 of this section for criteria. 
F.  Internal roadway storefront block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. The internal roadway storefront block frontage designation is intended to apply to some existing commercial storefront areas that are located on internal roadways. This designation intends to reinforce and enhance the storefront environment if and when changes occur over time. 
2.  Standards. Development as set forth in section 38.510.010.B on sites containing the internal roadway storefront block frontage designation must comply with the storefront block frontage standards as set forth above, with the following modifications: 
Table 38.510.030.F 
Internal roadway storefront block frontage standards 
Element 	Standards ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  
Façade transparency 	At least 50% of ground floor between 30" and 10' above the sidewalk.  
Landscaping 	A planting strip with a tree must be integrated along the sidewalk every 50' of lineal frontage on average. 
Sidewalk width 	12' minimum walking surface (landscape planter areas may not be counted in the sidewalk width calculations).  
 
3.  Departure criteria. See subsection B.4 of this section for criteria. 
G.  Other block frontages. 
1.  Description/intent. All other block frontages in districts that are not designated in Community Design Framework Maps are provided greater flexibility with regard to the design of development frontages. These block frontages include a combination of side streets (where most uses often front on other adjacent streets) and service oriented streets (often characterized by industrial or service types of uses). While there is greater flexibility in the amount of transparency of façades and the location of surface and structured parking, design parameters are included to ensure that development frontages along these streets provide visual interest at all observable scales and meet the design objectives of the city. 
2.  Standards. All development as set forth in section 38.510.010.B with applicable block frontage designations must comply with standards below: 
Table 38.510.030.G 
Other block frontage standards 
Element 	Standard ( refers to departure opportunities, see subsection 38.510.030 below)  
Ground floor land use 
Land use 	See Tables 38.310.030-.040 for permitted use details. 
Building placement 	Where allowed in the applicable zoning district, buildings may be placed up to the sidewalk edge provided block frontage standards herein are met (except where otherwise noted herein).10' minimum front setback for other buildings, except where greater setbacks are specified in the district per division 38.320.  See section 38.510.030.J for special design provisions associated with ground level residential uses adjacent to a sidewalk.  
Building entrances 	Building entrances facing the street are encouraged. At least one building entry visible and directly accessible from the street is required. Where buildings are set back from the street, pedestrian connections are required from the sidewalk.  
Façade transparency 	For storefronts, at least 60% of ground floor between 30" and 10' above the sidewalk is required. Other buildings designed with non-residential uses on the ground floor within 10' of sidewalk, at least 30% of the ground floor between 4'-8' above the sidewalk. Other buildings, at least 10% of the entire façade (all vertical surfaces generally facing the street). Window area that is glazed over or covered in any manner that obscures visibility into the storefront space must not count as transparent window area.    
Weather protection 	At least 3' deep over primary business and residential entries. 
Parking location 
Also see division 38.540 of this division for related parking requirements 	There are no parking lot location restrictions, except that a 10' buffer of landscaping between the street and off street parking areas meeting the performance standards of division 38.550 of this division is required.  
Landscaping 
Also see division 38.550 of this division for related landscaping standards 	The area between the street and building must be landscaped and/or private porch or patio space. 
For setbacks adjacent to buildings with windows, provide low level landscaping that maintains views between the building and the street. 
Also provide plant materials that screen any blank walls and add visual interest at both the pedestrian scale and motorist scale. For extended wall areas, provide for a diversity of plant materials and textures to maintain visual interest from a pedestrian scale. 
Sidewalk width 	Where storefront buildings are proposed, sidewalks must meet storefront block frontage standards above. Otherwise, 6' minimum sidewalks are required adjacent to arterial streets and public parks and 5' minimum width in other areas, except the review authority may require wider sidewalks in special areas where called for in adopted plans or where significant pedestrian traffic is anticipated. 
 
3.  Departure criteria. Departures to the above standards that feature the symbol will be considered by the review authority (per section 38.250.060) provided the alternative proposal meets the intent of the standards, plus the following criteria:  
a.  Minimum setback. Provide design treatments that create an effective transition between the public and private realm. This could include a stoop design to other similar treatments that utilize a low fence, retaining wall, and/or hedge along the sidewalk. 
b.  Façade transparency. The design treatment of a façade and/or landscape element provides visual interest to the pedestrian and mitigates impacts of any blank wall area. 
H.  Block frontages in the industrial zones are subject to the standards for "Other" streets as set forth in subsection G above except: 
1.  Minimum front setback provisions of division 38.320 supersede the building location provisions set forth in subsection G.2 of this section. 
2.  Planting areas between the sidewalk and the building, outdoor storage, or parking areas must be at least 20 feet in depth and are encouraged to meet the landscaping standards of division 38.550. Departure: Reductions in the landscaping frontage may be considered for low volume and low visibility streets entirely within the industrial zone. Land uses with a higher density of employees warrant standard landscaping and pedestrian access provisions. 
I.  Trail/park frontages. Where a property fronts onto a park or a public trail, such frontages must comply with the mixed block frontage standards set forth in subsection D of this section. For non-residential developments/uses where the review authority determines that an orientation to the trail would not be appropriate based on the context of the site, the development must be subject to the standards for "other block frontages" set forth in subsection G above, with a minimum building setback of 20 feet from the applicable park/trail right-of-way, easement, or property line. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.I. 
Park/trail frontage examples. 
 
J.  Special residential block frontage standards along sidewalks and internal pathways. For residences with ground floor living spaces facing a sidewalk or pedestrian path in a residential or mixed use development, the building must feature at least one of the public/private space transition elements described below. The objective of this standard is to ensure privacy and security for residents, and an attractive and safe pathway that complements the qualities of adjoining residences within a residential complex. 
1.  Raised deck or porch option. Provide at least a 60 square foot porch or deck raised at least one foot above grade. The porch or deck must be at least six feet deep, measured perpendicular to the building face. (The deck may be recessed into the unit floor plan so that deck does not extend from the building face a full six feet.) A low fence, rail or hedge, two feet to four feet high, may be integrated between the sidewalk or internal pathway and deck or porch. 
2.  Front setback options. Provide a minimum ten-foot setback between the sidewalk or internal pathway and the face of the residence. Design options for the front setback: 
a.  Landscaped area, meeting the provisions of division 38.550. 
b.  Semi-private patio space screened by a low fence or hedge (see section 38.350.060). 
3.  Raised ground floor. If the residence's ground floor is a minimum of three feet above the grade adjacent to the building, then the landscaped area in option 2 above may be reduced to four feet wide (except where greater setbacks are specified for the applicable zoning district in division 38.320). 
Other transition design measures that adequately protect the privacy and comfort of the residential unit and the attractiveness and usefulness of the pathway at least as effectively as options 1 through 3 above.  
See figure 38.510.030.J below for examples of the above treatments. 
 
Figure 38.510.030.J. 
Acceptable public/private transitional space design between sidewalk or pathways and ground level residential units. 
 
K.  Reserved. 
L.  Community Design Framework Master Plan. Recently annexed or rezoned commercial or mixed-use properties, as well as strategic large undeveloped sites, necessitate a different approach to applying block frontage standards. The provisions below identify the intent, applicable sites, block frontage designation options, and special standards for developing community design framework master plans. 
1.  Intent. 
a.  To provide a thoughtful and fair process to plan for the development of large and new commercial and mixed-use sites consistent with Bozeman's growth policy. 
b.  To promote an arrangement of streets, buildings, open space, parking and service areas that create a strong sense of community and enhance the character of Bozeman. 
c.  To avoid uncoordinated patterns of development that waste valuable land, compromise vehicular and pedestrian access, and degrade the character of Bozeman. 
2.  Applicable sites. 
a.  Recently annexed sites zoned as one of the commercial or mixed-use zoning districts. 
b.  Sites recently rezoned as one of the commercial or mixed-use zoning districts that are not addressed in the community design framework maps. 
3.  Block frontage designation options. 
a.  Prior to development of applicable sites, a community design framework master plan must be developed, approved and recorded for the property per the procedures set forth in section 38.230.130. The master plans must include: 
(1)  New streets and internal roadways along with block frontage designations (types included in this section). 
(2)  Any designated high visibility street corners. 
(3)  Any planned open spaces, trails, and shared use paths. 
(4)  Any special phasing conditions. 
(5)  Other special design conditions unique to the site and plan that must be implemented with future site plan development. 
b.  Community design framework master plans may utilize any existing block frontage designations that border the site, or include an alternative block frontage designation type or types, subject to master plan approval. 
c.  Alternatively, site plan development may occur on applicable sites without an approved and recorded community design framework master plan, provided all block frontages comply with the standards for mixed block frontages as set forth in subsection D of this section. 
4.  Master plan design standards. Community design framework master plans must meet the intent as set forth above plus the following parameters for specific sites: 
Table 38.510.030.L 
Community design framework master plan design standards 
The provisions below are intended to guide the design of individual community design framework master plans. They are referred to as standards, since all proposed plans must successfully demonstrate how they comply with the provisions herein. 
All Sites 	• Configure site to create a pedestrian-oriented focal point. Such a focal point could be a main street (storefront), a central square surrounded by storefronts or other similar elements. 
• Larger sites have greater expectations in the amount of storefront designated frontages. 
• Goals, policies and concepts from adopted plans must be used to help determine compliance with these standards. 
 
 
Figure 38.510.030.L. 
Development examples. 
 
5.  Community design framework master plans are subject to the application requirements and procedures set forth in section 38.230.130. 
[M.  Structured parking facility development standards. ] [3] 
1.  All above ground structured parking facilities must conform to the design standards herein and the designated block frontage in section 38.510.030. In the event of a conflict between block frontage standards and the standards of this section, the standards of this section will govern. Exceptions: 
a.  Single-household dwellings and individual townhouse and multi-household units with physically separated individual drive aisles. Physical separation is provided when at least one of these options are provided: Individual garage doors for each interior parking space; a vegetated planter not less than four feet in width between the parking spaces in the driveway area; or a wall not less than four feet in height and length, is provided between the parking area in the driveway and dividing the garage entrance; and 
b.  For development in the R-5 and B-2M districts, the applicable structured parking provisions in division 38.500 (Block Frontage Standards) take precedence over any conflicting provisions of division 38.340 or related standards in this section. 
2.  Building standards. 
a.  Intent: To promote an active and diverse streetscape, parking structures should be located behind buildings in the interior of blocks or below grade. Parking garages that front streets must line the parking garage at the street level with an active use. 
(1)  Street designs accommodate on street parking and pedestrian mobility. Parking lots and garages rarely front the streets, and are typically relegated to the rear of the lot and the center of blocks. 
(2)  Parking garages should be located in the interior of blocks. Parking garages that front onto streets must provide a lining of retail, office, or residential use at the street level along the entire street frontage. 
b.  In all districts, all commercial floor space wrapping must provide a minimum 20 foot depth of habitable and conditioned space as defined by the most currently adopted IBC. 
c.  In all districts, commercial space depth will be considered where the applicant can successfully demonstrate the proposed alternative design and configuration of the space is viable for a variety of permitted commercial uses. 
d.  In all districts, residential active use areas must be 12 feet in depth, except for riser room, trash areas and other functional uses that must face the street. 
e.  In all districts, all commercial floor space wrapping a parking structure on the ground floor must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 13 feet. 
f.  Structured parking facilities must provide transparency along at least 50 percent of the linear length of the building's façade. This may be achieved with windows, displays, building lobbies, building entrances, display windows, or windows affording views into the building. This requirement applies to both frontages of a building located on a corner lot. 
(1)  The bottom edge of any window or product display window used to satisfy the transparency standard of this subsection B.3 may not be more than four feet above the adjacent sidewalk. 
(2)  Product display windows used to satisfy these requirements must have a minimum height of four feet and be internally lighted. 
g.  Street-level openings on parking structures must be limited to those necessary for retail store entrances, vehicle entrance and exit lanes, and pedestrian entrances to stairs and elevator lobbies. Parking structures adjacent to streets must have architectural detailing such as, but not limited to, standard size masonry units such as brick, divided openings to give the appearance of windows, and other techniques to provide an interesting and human-scaled appearance on the story adjacent to the sidewalk. 
h.  Buildings must be articulated with modules, architectural detailing, individual floors visually expressed in the façade, and rhythm and pattern of openings and surfaces must be human-scale. 
i.  Buildings must be oriented to the adjacent public or private street. 
j.  If an alley is adjacent to site, access must be taken from that alley. Access to a street may be considered by the review authority. 
k.  A pedestrian safety plan is required for all parking facilities with more than 100 parking spaces and must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may request a pedestrian safety plan for parking facilities with less than 100 parking spaces. 
l.  Parking entrance(s) may not account for more than 25 percent of entire building façade. 
m.  Parking entrance(s) must not be located central to the building façade. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 15, 4-18-2018; Ord. No. 2014 , § 12, 6-3-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to § 38.540.030. 
 
DIVISION 38.520. - SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN ELEMENTS 
 
Sec. 38.520.010. - Purpose. 
A.  Preserve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Bozeman. 
B.  To promote thoughtful layout of buildings, parking areas, and circulation, service, landscaping, and amenity elements that enhances Bozeman's visual character, promotes compatibility between developments and uses, and enhances the function of developments. 
Also see the individual "intent" statements for each section in this division.  
Sec. 38.520.020. - Applicability and compliance. 
The provisions of this division apply to all development within Bozeman, except single to four-household dwellings on individual lots. The excepted dwellings are subject to the form and intensity standards in section 38.360.210. Townhouses and rowhouses are subject to the form and intensity standards in section 38.360.240. Also: 
A.  For clarification on the relationship between the provisions in this division and other documents and codes, see section 38.500.020.A. 
B.  For the application to building additions, remodels see section 38.500.020.B. 
C.  For clarification on how the provisions of this division are applied to site improvements, see sections 38.230.150, 38.230.160, and 38.230.170. 
D.  The review authority may waive or relax these provisions in the industrial zones depending on the type of use, number of anticipated employees and customers, and the site's physical context. A greater number of employees and/or customers and higher visibility levels warrant a greater application of building design standards.  
Sec. 38.520.030. - Relationship to adjacent properties. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To promote functional and visual compatibility between developments. 
2.  To protect the privacy of residents on adjacent properties. 
B.  Balconies alongside and rear property lines adjacent to residentially zoned properties. Balconies or rooftop decks within 15 horizontal feet of a side property line abutting a residentially zoned property must feature a railing system that is at least 50 percent opaque. Specifically, 50 percent of the area below the railing must be a sight-obscuring structure. 
 
Figure 38.520.030.B. 
Privacy Standards for Balconies Within 15 Feet of Side or Rear property lines. 
 
Departures from this standard will be allowed if the balcony will not cause visual or privacy impacts due to its location, orientation, design or other consideration. 
C.  Light and air access and privacy alongside and rear property lines. Buildings or portions thereof containing multi-household dwelling units whose only solar access (windows) is from the applicable side of the building (facing towards the side property line) must be set back from the applicable side or rear property lines at least 15 feet. See figures 38.520.030.B and C. Departures will be allowed where it's determined that, based on the unique site context, the proposed design won't create a compatibility problem in the near or long term. 
 
Figure 38.520.030.C. 
Light and air access and privacy standards for multi-household residential buildings alongside/rear property lines. 
  
Sec. 38.520.040. - Non-motorized circulation and design. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To improve the pedestrian and bicycling environment by making it easier, safer, and more comfortable to walk or ride among residences, to businesses, to the street sidewalk, to transit stops, through parking lots, to adjacent properties, and connections throughout the city. 
2.  To enhance access to on- and off-site areas and pedestrian/bicycle paths. 
B.  Access to sidewalk. All buildings must feature pedestrian connections to a sidewalk per applicable block frontage standards in division 38.510. See subsection D below for access design requirements. 
 
Figure 38.520.040.B. 
Examples of direct pedestrian access to buildings from the street. 
 
C.  Internal circulation. 
1.  For sites with multiple buildings, pedestrian paths or walkways connecting businesses and residential entries on the same development site must be provided. Routes that minimize walking distances must be utilized to the extent practical. Departures will be allowed where steep slopes prevent a direct connection or where an indirect route would enhance the design and/or use of a common usable open space. See subsection D below for walkway design standards. 
 
Figure 38.520.040.C.1. 
Internal and external pedestrian connections are important. 
 
2.  Sites with residential units. Provide direct pedestrian access between all ground related unit entries and a public street or to a clearly marked pathway network or open space that has direct access to a public street. Residential developments must provide a pedestrian circulation network that connects all main entrances on the site to other areas of the site, such as: 
a.  Parking areas; 
b.  Recreational areas; 
c.  Common outdoor areas; and 
d.  Any pedestrian amenities; 
For townhouses or other residential units fronting the street, the sidewalk may be used to meet this standard. 
 
Figure 38.520.040.C.2.a. 
Direct pathways between the street and dwelling units are required. 
 
 
Figure 38.520.040.C.2.b. 
Examples of attractive pathway connection through a residential development. 
 
3.  Crosswalks are required when a walkway crosses an on-site paved area accessible to vehicles. Crosswalks must contain contrasting material (such as concrete) and/or patterns (such as stamped asphalt), excluding painted surfaces. 
4.  Pedestrian paths through parking lots. Developments must provide specially marked or paved sidewalks through parking areas. At least one walkway must be provided every four rows of parking or at a maximum spacing of 200 feet. The pathways must provide a safe connection to the building entrance and meet the pathway design standards set forth in subsection D below. See examples below. 
 
Figure 38.520.040.C.4. 
Parking area pathway standards and examples. 
 
5.  Connections to adjacent properties (including parks and trails). Provide pathways that connect to adjacent properties, except in one of the following circumstances: 
a.  When adjacent properties are residential developments of fewer than five dwelling units. 
b.  Departures are permitted where it is determined that internal connections aren't necessary due to shallow lot depths, steep slopes, or other contextual challenges. 
6.  Barriers that limit future pedestrian access are prohibited. Gates that limit access to employees are permitted. See subsection D below for walkway design standards. 
7.  Provide easements for non-motorized access to facilitate the future extension of paths when adjoining properties are improved. 
D.  Pathway design. 
1.  All internal pathways must have a minimum five-foot-wide unobstructed surface, except where wider pathways are prescribed in this division or where the applicable uses and context dictate wider pathways. 
2.  Where a pathway is adjacent to perpendicular or angled parking, an extra two feet of walkway width must be provided to mitigate for parked vehicles overhanging the walkway. 
3.  Pathways must be separated from structures by at least three feet of landscaping except where the adjacent building façade meets the Storefront block frontage standards per section 38.510.030.B. Departures are permitted for other landscaping and/or façade design treatments to provide attractive pathways will be considered. Examples include sculptural, mosaic, bas-relief artwork, or other decorative treatments that meet the intent. Figure 38.520.040.D.3 below provides one example. 
 
Figure 38.520.040.D.3. 
Standards for internal walkways adjacent to buildings. 
 
4.  Pathway design where multi-tenant commercial or mixed-use buildings 100 feet or more in length abut parking lots. Such pathways must feature a 12-foot wide sidewalk with: 
a.  Eight feet minimum unobstructed width: 
b.  Trees, as approved by the review authority, placed at an average of 50 feet on-center and placed in grates or in planting strips as set forth in subsection C below. Departure: Breaks in the tree coverage will be allowed near major building entries to enhance visibility. 
c.  Planting strips may be used between any vehicle access or parking area and the pathway, provided that the trees required above are included and the pathway meets the applicable width standards herein, and the combined pathway and planting strip is at least 12 feet wide; 
 
Figure 38.520.040.D.4. 
Example of a successful pedestrian sidewalk between parking lot and storefront. 
 
d.  Light pathways in accordance with division 38.570; 
e.  See also section 38.520.050.D, internal roadway design; 
f.  Hard surface. 
E.  Bicycle facilities. Provide bicycle racks, lockers, or other means of safely and conveniently parking bicycles at the rate specified in section 38.540.050.  
Sec. 38.520.050. - Vehicular circulation and parking. 
The standards herein supplement the provisions of divisions 38.400 and 540. Where there is a conflict, these provisions apply. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To create a safe, convenient, and efficient network for vehicle circulation and parking. 
2.  To enhance the visual character of interior access roads. 
3.  To minimize conflicts with pedestrian circulation and activity. 
B.  Driveway provisions. Drive aisles must meet the standards set forth in section 38.400.090. Supplemental provisions: 
Minimize parking lot entrances, drive aisles, and other vehicle access routes onto private property from a public right-of-way through the following means: 
1.  Driveway lanes crossing a public sidewalk must be no wider than the minimum required per entry or exit lane. The city may impose additional restrictions to parking lot and vehicle access points to reduce impacts to public safety, pedestrian movement, on-street vehicle circulation, and visual qualities. 
2.  Minimize the number of driveway entrances. Comply with the provisions of section 38.400.090. 
3.  The review authority may require joint drive aisles serving adjacent developments when joint access is physically and legally available. 
4.  Minimize conflicts between entries and vehicle parking and maneuvering areas. 
5.  At street corner sites, drive aisles must be located on the lowest classified roadway and as close as practical to the property line most distant from the intersection, unless the review authority finds there is a compelling reason to the contrary. 
C.  Inter-site connectivity. The provision of through vehicle access connections between commercially or non-residentially zoned properties is required except where the review authority determines it is unfeasible or undesirable (e.g., where it is determined that such a vehicle connection would impact safe pedestrian movement). See section 38.410.040 for specific block standards. Vehicle access may be in the form of a dedicated or private alley, connected or shared parking lots, shared drive aisles, or similar features. 
D.  Internal roadway design. 
1.  To increase the function and appearance of internal roadways on large sites (greater than two acres), street trees and sidewalks must be provided on all internal access roadways, except access roads designed solely for the purpose of service (e.g. waste pick-up) and loading. 
2.  In some instances where traffic speed and volume are low, the review authority may approve a street where vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian movement are mixed such as in a "woonerf" or "shared street." Woonerf streets must feature traffic calming and safety measures as well as landscape and amenity features as determined by the review authority. 
 
Figure 38.520.050.D. 
Good internal roadway examples. 
 
3.  Drive-through facilities. Where allowed, drive through facilities (e.g., drive-up windows) must comply with the following. 
a.  Drive-through lanes, including waiting and holding lanes, must be separated from public view and internal sidewalks by a planting strip (at least five feet wide with continuous plantings of evergreen shrubs and/or trees that will provide continuous evergreen screen at least four feet tall at maturity) and/or a masonry wall at least three feet high. Alternative landscaping schemes may be approved provided they include the masonry wall and a substantial vegetative screen. The landscaping must comply with division 38.560.  
b.  Drive-through lanes must not restrict pedestrian access between a public sidewalk and on-site buildings. Walkways must not be located within required stacking space as set forth in section 38.540.020.N. 
c.  Also see sections 38.360.100 and 38.540.020.N for related standards.  
Sec. 38.520.060. - On-site residential and commercial open space. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To create useable space that is suitable for leisure or recreational activities for residents. 
2.  To create open space that contributes to the residential setting. 
3.  To provide plazas that attract shoppers to commercial areas. 
4.  To provide plazas and other pedestrian oriented spaces in commercial areas that enhance the employees' and public's opportunity for active and passive activities, such as dining, resting, people watching, and recreational activities. 
5.  To enhance the character and attractiveness of commercial development. 
B.  Usable residential open space. 
1.  All multi-household development, including multi-household portions of mixed-use development, must provide minimum usable open space equal to 100 square feet per dwelling unit for studio and one bedroom dwellings and 150 square feet per dwelling unit for dwellings with two or more bedrooms. All group living developments must provide minimum usable open space equal to 37 square feet per person. The required open space may be provided in a combination of ways: 
a.  Shared open space. One hundred percent of the required open space may be in the form of shared open space available to all residents and meeting the requirements of subsection B.2 below. Shared open space may be in the form of courtyards, front porches, patios, play areas, gardens or similar spaces. 
b.  Ground level private outdoor space. One hundred percent of the required open space may be provided by ground level outdoor space that is adjacent and directly accessible to the subject unit. Such open spaces must be enclosed by a fence and/or hedge at least 32 inches in height to qualify. [4] Departures to this standards are permitted. 
c.  Balconies. Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be provided by private balconies provided they meet the requirements of subsection B.3 below.* 
d.  Common indoor recreation areas. Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be provided by common indoor recreation areas meeting the requirements of subsection B.4 below. 
e.  Shared roof decks. For mixed-use buildings, up to 100 percent of the required open space may be provided by shared roof decks located on the top of buildings which are available to all residents and meet the requirements of subsection B.5 below. 
2.  Shared open space. Shared open space can include landscaped courtyards or decks; entrance plazas; gardens with pathways; children's play areas; pools; and water features provided they are accessible to all residents of the development. Accessible areas used for stormwater retention or other multipurpose recreational and/or green spaces that meet the design criteria herein may qualify as shared open space. 
Special requirements for common usable open spaces include the following: 
a.  Shared open space must be located in centralized areas that are visible from units within the development. 
b.  Required setback areas does not count as shared open space unless the design of the space meets the standards herein. 
c.  Shared open space must feature no dimension less than 15 feet in order to provide functional leisure or recreational activity (unless otherwise noted herein). 
d.  Shared open space must feature paths or walkable lawns, landscaping, seating, lighting, and play structures, sports courts, or other pedestrian amenities to make the area more functional and enjoyable for a range of users. 
e.  Shared open space must be separated from ground level windows, streets, service areas and parking lots via landscaping, fencing, and/or other acceptable treatments that enhance safety and privacy for both the shared open space and dwelling units. 
f.  When possible the space should be oriented to receive sunlight, facing east, west or preferably south. 
g.  Stairways and service elements located within or on the edge of shared open space must not be included in the open space calculations. 
h.  Shared porches may qualify as shared open space provided they are at least eight feet in depth and 96 square feet in total area. 
i.  The space must be accessible to all residents of the development. 
 
Figure 38.520.060.B.2. 
Shared open space examples. 
 
3.  Private balconies and decks. Such spaces must be at least 36 square feet, with no dimension less than six feet, to provide a space usable for human activity. 
4.  Indoor recreational areas. Such spaces must meet the following conditions: 
a.  The space must be located in a visible area, such as near an entrance, lobby, or high traffic corridors; 
b.  The space must be designed specifically to serve interior recreational functions and not merely be leftover unrentable area used to meet the open space requirement. Such space must include amenities and design elements that will encourage use by residents. 
5.  Shared rooftop decks. Such spaces must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Space must feature hard surfacing, providing and amenities such as seating areas, landscaping, and/or other features that encourage use; 
b.  Space must integrate landscaping elements that enhance the character of the space and encourage its use; 
c.  Space must incorporate features that provide for the safety of residents, such as enclosures, railings, and appropriate lighting levels. 
 
Figure 38.520.060.B.5. 
Rooftop deck examples. 
 
C.  Usable commercial open space. New developments with non-residential uses (except for development within the industrial zones) on sites with a total site area greater than one acre must provide open space.  
1.  Commercial only sites. An area equal to at least two percent of the site area. For this specific standard, "site area" includes all land needed for the non-residential portion of the project including parking, service areas, access and required landscaping. The open space may be in the form of pedestrian-oriented open space per subsection D below, garden, play area or other open space feature that serves both as a visual amenity and a place for human activity. Portions of sidewalks that are wider than 12 feet and which meet the standards of pedestrian-oriented open space may be counted toward this requirement. 
2.  Mixed use sites. When determining the "site area" for mixed-use buildings, areas solely used for residential use may be omitted. To be omitted, areas must be specifically restricted to residents (e.g. parking spaces signed for residential parking only, open space areas gated off or only accessible from internal residential areas, internal lobbies without access to commercial spaces). When the omission of solely residential areas results in the site area being less than one acre, no commercial open space is required. 
Reduced open space area will be considered by the review authority for projects that include exceptional design features and elements that meet the intent of the standards. This includes open spaces that feature a combination of design (site materials, amenities, and configuration) and location/context that clearly exceed typical plaza designs found in the region. All departures must feature usable open space no less than one percent of the development envelope.  
 
Figure 38.520.060.C. 
Example of site development integrating usable commercial open space. 
 
 
Figure 38.520.060.C.2 
Illustration of mixed-use building open space calculation 
 
D.  Pedestrian-oriented open space design criteria. This subsection describes the requirements and desired characteristics of pedestrian oriented open space (which may be used to meet the requirements of subsection C above). 
1.  Required pedestrian-oriented open space features. 
a.  Visual and pedestrian access into the site from a street, private access road, or non-vehicular courtyard; 
b.  Paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved unit paving; 
c.  Lighting must conform to division 38.570; 
d.  The spaces must be located in or adjacent to areas with significant pedestrian traffic to provide interest and security, such as adjacent to or visible from a building entry; 
e.  At least two feet of seating area (a bench or ledge at least 16 inches deep and appropriate seating height) or one individual seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space; 
f.  Landscaping components that add visual interest and do not act as a visual barrier. This could include planting beds, raised planters, and/or potted plants. 
2.  Desirable pedestrian-oriented open space features: 
a.  Pedestrian amenities, such as site furniture, artwork, drinking fountains, shade structures or other similar features; 
b.  Adjacent buildings with transparent windows and doors covering at least 50 percent of the façade between 30 inches and ten feet above the ground level; 
c.  Pedestrian weather protection, alcoves, seating, or other features along building edges to allow for outdoor gathering. 
3.  Features prohibited within a pedestrian-oriented open space: 
a.  Asphalt pavement; 
b.  Adjacent service areas (e.g., trash areas) that are not separated with landscaping, as required in section 38.520.070. 
c.  Adjacent chain-link fences; 
d.  Adjacent "blank walls" without "blank wall treatment" (see 38.530.070.C); 
e.  Outdoor storage. 
 
Figure 38.520.060.D.1. 
Example of a small pedestrian-oriented open space. 
 
 
Figure 38.520.060.D.2. 
Desirable examples of pedestrian-oriented open space. 
 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 10, 6-3-2019; Ord. No. 2019 , § 8, 6-3-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014 , § 10, adopted June 3, 2019, amended the title of § 38.520.060 to read as herein set out. The former § 38.520.060 title pertained to on-site residential open space. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— Individual private open space (as defined in subsections B.1.b and c in excess of minimum requirements must not be used in the calculations for determining the minimum usable open space requirements for other units in the development. 
 
Sec. 38.520.070. - Location and design of service areas and mechanical equipment. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To minimize adverse visual, odor, and noise impacts of mechanical equipment, utility cabinets and service areas at ground and roof levels. 
2.  To provide adequate, durable, well-maintained, and accessible service and equipment areas. 
3.  To protect residential uses and adjacent properties from impacts due to location and utilization of service areas. 
B.  Location of ground related service areas and mechanical equipment. 
1.  Service areas (loading docks, trash dumpsters, compactors, recycling areas, electrical panels, and mechanical equipment areas) must be located for convenient service access while avoiding negative visual, auditory, olfactory, or physical impacts on the streetscape environment and adjacent residentially zoned properties. Service areas must be sited for alley access if available. 
The review authority may require evidence that such elements will not significantly impact neighboring properties or public areas. (For example, the review authority may require noise damping specifications for fans near residential zones.) 
2.  Exterior loading areas. Exterior loading areas for commercial uses must not be located within 20 feet of a residentially zoned property unless the review authority finds such a restriction does not allow feasible development, and alternative design measures can successfully mitigate potential negative impacts. For example, areas and drives may be required by the review authority to be separated from the residential lot by a masonry wall at least eight feet high. 
3.  Service areas must not be visible from the sidewalk and adjacent properties. Where the review authority finds that the only option for locating a service area is an area visible from a public right-of-way, internal pathway or pedestrian area, or from an adjacent property, the area must be screened with structural and landscaping screening measures provided in subsection C below and division 38.550. Service elements accessible from an alley are exempt from screening requirements. 
4.  Design for safety. Other provisions of this section notwithstanding, service areas used by residents must be located to avoid entrapment areas and other conditions where personal security is potentially a problem. The review authority may require pedestrian-scaled lighting or other measures to enhance security. 
5.  Locate and shield noise producing mechanical equipment such as fans, heat pumps, etc., to minimize sounds and reduce impacts to adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
 
Figure 38.520.070.B. 
Service element location. 
 
C.  Screening of ground related service areas and mechanical equipment. 
1.  Where screening of ground level service areas is required (see subsection B above), the following applies: 
a.  A structural enclosure must be constructed of masonry, heavy-gauge metal, or decay-resistant material that is also used with the architecture of the main building. The review authority may allow materials other than those used for the main building if the finishes are similar in color and texture or if the proposed enclosure materials are more durable than those for the main structure. The walls must be sufficient to provide full screening from the affected roadway, pedestrian areas or adjacent use. The enclosure may use overlapping walls to screen dumpsters and other materials (see figure 38.520.070.C below); 
b.  Gates must be made of heavy-gauge, site-obscuring material. Chain link or chain link with slats is not an acceptable material for enclosures or gates; 
c.  Where the inside of service enclosures is visible from surrounding streets, pathways, and buildings, an opaque or semi-opaque horizontal cover or screen must be used to mitigate unsightly views. The horizontal screen/cover should be integrated into the enclosure design and compatible with adjacent development; 
d.  Collection points must be located and configured so the enclosure gate swing does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not require that a hauling truck project into any public right-of-way. Ensure that screening elements allow for efficient service delivery and removal operations. 
e.  The service area must be paved. 
2.  The sides and rear of service enclosures must be screened with landscaping at least five feet wide in locations visible from the street, parking lots, and pathways to soften views of the screening element and add visual interest. 
Departures to the provisions of subsections B.1, 2, and 3 above will be considered per section 38.250.060 provided the enclosure and landscaping treatment meet the intent of the standards and add visual interest to site users. 
 
Figure 38.520.070.C. 
Acceptable screening enclosures. 
 
D.  Utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service utility apparatus. 
1.  These elements must be located and/or designed to minimize their visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, shared open space, or shared auto courtyards, they must be screened with vegetation and/or integrated into the building's architecture. 
 
Figure 38.520.070.D. 
Utility meter location and screening—Good and bad examples. 
 
E.  Location and screening of roof mounted mechanical equipment. 
1.  All rooftop mechanical equipment, including air conditioners, heaters, vents, and similar equipment must be fully screened from public view both at grade and from higher buildings with the exception of solar panels and roof-mounted wind turbines. Screening must be located so as not to interfere with operation of the equipment. 
2.  For rooftop equipment, all screening devices must be well integrated into the architectural design through such elements as parapet walls, false roofs, roof wells, clerestories, or equipment rooms. Screening walls or unit-mounted screening is allowed but less desirable. Wood must not be used for screens or enclosures. Louvered designs are acceptable if consistent with building design style. Perforated metal is not permitted. 
3.  The screening materials must be of material requiring minimal maintenance, and must be as high as the equipment being screened. 
4.  Locate and shield noise producing mechanical equipment such as fans, heat pumps, etc. to minimize sounds and reduce impacts to adjacent properties. 
 
Figure 38.520.070.E. 
Examples of how to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment. 
  
DIVISION 38.530. - BUILDING DESIGN 
 
Sec. 38.530.010. - Purpose. 
See the individual "intent" statements for each section in this division.  
Sec. 38.530.020. - Applicability and compliance. 
The provisions of this division apply to all development within Bozeman, except single, two, three, and four-household dwellings on individual lots unless otherwise noted. Specifically: 
A.  For clarification on the relationship between the provisions in this division and other documents and codes, see section 38.500.020.A. 
B.  For the application of building additions and remodels and site improvements, see section 38.500.020.B. 
C.  For clarification on how the provisions of this division are applied, see section 38.500.030. 
D.  The review authority may waive or relax these provisions in the industrial zones depending on the type of use, number of anticipated employees and customers, and the site's physical context. The greater number of employees and/or customers and higher visibility levels warrant a greater application of building design standards. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 16, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.530.030. - Building character. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To promote regionally appropriate architecture that is based on human scaled design details, durable high quality materials, sustainable design measures, and that responds uniquely to the site's context. 
2.  To emphasize high quality design in Bozeman's built environment. 
3.  To avoid generic, corporate architectural designs that are not readily reusable or convert to another use that lessens the character and identity of Bozeman. For example, some franchise convenience uses have very specific architectural features (such as a distinctive roofline design that functions as a sign) that reinforce their identity. 
B.  Building character standards and guidelines. 
1.  Developments within the Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District (NCOD) are subject to section 38.340.050.  
Sec. 38.530.040. - Building massing and articulation. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To articulate building elements in order to achieve an appropriate perceived scale and add visual interest. 
2.  To create clear and welcoming building entries. 
B.  Façade articulation--Storefronts and other buildings with non-residential uses on the ground level must include a minimum of three of the following articulation features every 60 feet (maximum) to create a human scaled façade pattern:   
1.  Windows. 
2.  Entries. 
3.  Use of weather protection features. 
4.  Use of structural expression. 
5.  Change in roofline per subsection F below. 
6.  Change in building material or siding style. 
7.  Articulation of a single building material through varying colors, textures, or incorporating joints or an integrated trim pattern. 
8.  Other design techniques that effectively reinforce a human-scaled pattern compatible with the building's surrounding context. 
9.  Providing vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green wall, art element. 
10.  Providing vertical building modulation of at least 12 inches in depth if tied to a change in roofline per subsection F below or a change in building material, siding style, or color. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Only two articulation features are required on building façades in the BP district; 
b.  Only one articulation feature is required on building façade s in the M-1 district; 
c.  Buildings in the M-2 district are exempt from these standards. 
d.  Building walls facing alleys, rear or side yards are not subject to the standards herein, except for zone edge properties, when adjacent to a lower-intensity zoning district. 
 
Figure 38.530.040.B. 
Façade articulation examples. 
 
C.  Façade articulation--Residential buildings must include articulation features at appropriate intervals relative to the scale of the façade in order to reduce the perceived massing of the building and add visual interest. At least three of the following features must be employed at intervals relative to the individual dwelling units or at a maximum of every 30 feet. The scale of the façade articulation should be compatible with the surrounding context.   
1.  Use of windows. 
2.  Entries. 
3.  Use of weather protection features. 
4.  Use of vertical piers/columns. 
5.  Change in roofline per subsection F below. 
6.  Change in building material and/or siding style. 
7.  Articulation of a single building material through varying colors, textures, or incorporating joints or an integrated trim pattern. 
8.  Providing vertical building modulation if tied to a change in roofline modulation per subsection F below or a change in building material, siding style, or color. 
9.  Other design techniques that effectively break up the massing at no more than 30-foot intervals. 
10.  Providing vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green wall, and/or art element. 
 
Figure 38.530.040.C. 
Residential façade articulation examples. 
 
D.  Departure criteria associated with articulation standards. Proposals must meet the intent of the standards. The following criteria will be considered in determining whether the proposed articulation treatment meets the "intent." 
1.  The type and width of the proposed articulation treatment and how effective it is in meeting the intent given the building's current and desired context (per Bozeman's growth policy or applicable adopted subarea plan). 
2.  The applicable block frontage designation. Undesignated block frontages warrant more flexibility than block frontages designated as mixed or landscaped. 
3.  The size and width of the building. Smaller buildings warrant greater flexibility than larger buildings. 
4.  The quality of façade materials in concert with doors, windows, and other façade features and their ability to add visual interest to the street from a pedestrian scale and more distant observable scales. 
 
Figure 38.530.040.D. 
Façade articulation departure examples. 
 
E.  Maximum façade width. Building façades wider than 150 feet must include at least one of the following features to break up the massing of the building and add visual interest. Building walls facing alleys, rear or side yards are not subject to the standards herein, except for zone edge properties, when adjacent to a lower intensity zoning district. Existing buildings are exempt from subsection E. 
1.  Provide vertical building modulation at least six feet deep and ten feet wide. For multi-story buildings, the modulation must extend through more than one-half of the building floors. 
2.  Use a contrasting vertical modulated design component that: 
a.  Utilizes a change in building materials that effectively contrast from the rest of the façade; 
b.  Is modulated vertically from the rest of the façade by an average of six inches. 
3.  Façade employs building walls with contrasting articulation that make it appear like multiple distinct buildings. To qualify for this option, these contrasting façades must employ all of the following: 
a.  Different building materials and/or configuration of building materials; 
b.  Contrasting window design (sizes or configurations). 
Departures will be considered provided the design meets the intent of the standards. Supplemental consideration for approving alternative designs: 
• Width of the façade. The larger the façade, the more substantial articulation/ modulation features need to be. 
• Block frontage designation. Storefront designated block frontages warrant the most scrutiny, while undesignated streets warrant more flexibility. 
• The type of articulation treatment and how effective it is in meeting the intent given the building's context. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 38.530.040.E. 
Illustrating maximum façade width standards and good and bad examples. 
 
F.  Roofline modulation. In order to qualify as a façade articulation feature in subsections B, C, and E above, rooflines must employ one or more of the following: 
1.  For flat roofs an extension of the parapet or a break in the parapet of at least one foot measured from the adjacent roof or adjacent parapet. If no parapet is present a horizontal roof edge/eave extension of at least two feet. 
2.  A pitched roofline segment(s) scaled appropriately to the façade. 
3.  A combination of the above. 
Departures will be considered provided the roofline modulation design effectively reduces the perceived scale of the building and adds visual interest. 
 
Figure 38.530.040.1. 
Acceptable examples of roofline modulation. 
 
 
Figure 38.530.040.1. 
Acceptable examples of roofline modulation. 
  
Sec. 38.530.050. - Building details. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To encourage building façades with attractive design details at an appropriate pedestrian scale relative to the overall composition of the building. 
2.  To integrate window design that adds depth, richness, and visual interest to the façade. 
B.  Window design standards. 
1.  All windows (except storefront windows and curtain walls) must include trim or other design treatment, or alternately be recessed at least two inches from the façade. Understated or trim-less windows without additional design treatment are permitted provided the placement and design is integrated into the overall composition of the building. 
2.  Prohibited windows: 
a.  Mirrored glass is prohibited. 
 
Figure 38.530.050.C. 
Acceptable and unacceptable window design examples. 
 
C.  High visibility street corner and gateway sites. All development proposals located at designated high visibility street corners and gateway sites must locate a building or structure within 20 feet of the street corner and include design features that accentuate the street corner. Alternatively, the building could be configured with a corner plaza. Corner design features could include a cropped building corner with an entry feature, decorative use of building materials at the corner, distinctive façade articulation, a sculptural architectural element, or other elements that meet the intent of the standards. Figure 38.530.050.D below illustrates acceptable examples. 
 
Figure 38.530.050.D. 
Acceptable high visibility street corner/gateway site examples. 
 
 
Figure 38.530.050.D. 
Acceptable high visibility street corner/gateway site examples. 
 
D.  Active Solar Collection Units (electronic and hydronic) are permitted. 
E.  Articulated building entries. Primary building entrance(s) must be clearly defined and scaled proportionally to the building. See Figure 38.530.050.F below for examples. 
 
Figure 38.530.050.F. 
Acceptable building entry examples. 
F.  Departures to building detail standards will be considered if they are determined to meet the intent of the standards in section 38.530.050, Building Details.  
Sec. 38.530.060. - Building materials. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To encourage the use of durable materials to provide visual interest from vehicular and pedestrian vantage points with the highest priority at locations susceptible to damage from maintenance and weathering. 
B.  Durable building materials. Applicants must use durable materials. Where façades are located directly adjacent to a city sidewalk, impact resistant materials must be used (excluding window and door areas) for a minimum of the first 18 inches above the walking surface. 
C.  Special conditions and limitations for the use of certain cladding materials. 
1.  Concrete block (a.k.a. CMU) when used as a primary cladding material, must be treated or articulated to provide visual interest above and beyond natural (uncolored, untreated) block with (matching) natural colored grout. Examples of such treatments include: 
(a)  using ground, polished or split face units; 
(b)  creating patterns/texture with different block sizes, face treatments, or colors; creating patterns/textures by modulating the finish plane of units; 
(c)  utilizing contrasting grout color; 
(d)  or utilizing sealers or painted treatments that enhance the finish of natural concrete block. Industrial zoning districts are exempt from subsection C. 
 
Figure 38.530.060.C.1. 
Acceptable concrete block use/design. 
 
2.  Metal siding. 
a.  Metal siding must be a minimum 24 gauge thickness. Re-purposed metal siding is exempt from minimum thickness requirements provided its material integrity is intact. 
b.  Metal siding must feature appropriate molding, trim, or hemming at all exposed edges and corners. 
c.  Metal siding must be factory finished, or alternately purposefully designed to naturally patina. Highly reflective galvanized finished are prohibited. Re-purposed or re-claimed metal siding is permitted. 
 
Figure 38.530.060.C.2. 
Acceptable metal siding examples. 
 
3.  Standards for the use of exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS). Such material/finishes may be used as a decorative accent cladding material if it is incorporated with other permitted materials and it complies with the following: 
a.  On buildings of three or more stories or 5,000 square feet in footprint or greater EIFS is limited to no more than 25 percent of the total façade area and is not the primary cladding material. On buildings of two stories or less or less than 5,000 square feet in footprint, EIFS is limited to 60 percent of the total façade area; 
b.  Highly textured EIFS finishes are prohibited; 
c.  EIFS must include an integrated joint or trim pattern; 
d.  EIFS must not be used on the ground floor when directly adjacent to a sidewalk, pedestrian or vehicular pathway. 
Departures will be considered provided the material's integration and overall façade composition meets the intent of the standards. 
 
Figure 38.530.060.C.3. 
Acceptable and unacceptable EIFS examples. 
 
4.  Cementitious wall board paneling/siding may be used provided it meets the following provisions: 
a.  Cement board paneling/siding may not be used on the ground floor of non-residential or mixed-use buildings where adjacent to a sidewalk or other pedestrian path; 
b.  Where cement board paneling/siding is the dominant siding material, the design must integrate a mix of colors and/or textures that are articulated consistent with windows, balconies, and modulated building surfaces and are balanced with façade details that add visual interest from the ground level and adjacent buildings. Departures will be considered provided the material's integration and overall façade composition meets the intent of the standards. 
D.  Departures to building materials standards will be considered if they are determined to meet the intent of 38.530.060, Building Materials.  
Sec. 38.530.070. - Blank wall treatments. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  To avoid untreated blank walls. 
2.  To retain and enhance the character of Bozeman's streetscapes. 
B.  Blank wall definition. A wall (including building façades and retaining walls) is considered a blank wall if it is over ten feet in height, has a horizontal length greater than 15 feet, and does not include a transparent window or door. 
 
Figure 38.530.070.B. 
Blank wall definition. 
 
C.  Untreated blank walls visible from a public street, pedestrian-oriented space, common usable open space, or pedestrian pathway are prohibited. Methods to treat blank walls may include: 
1.  Display windows with at least 16 inches of depth to allow for changeable displays. Tack on display cases do not qualify as a blank wall treatment. 
2.  Landscape planting bed at least five feet wide or a raised planter bed at least two feet high and three feet wide in front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or screen at least 60 percent of the wall's surface within three years. 
3.  Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with climbing vines or plant materials. 
4.  Installing a mural as approved by the review authority. 
5.  Special building detailing that adds visual interest at a pedestrian scale. Such detailing must use a variety of surfaces; monotonous designs will not meet the purpose of the standards. 
For large visible blank walls, a variety of treatments may be required to meet the intent of the standards. 
Departures to the provisions in this section will be considered, provided the design whole façade and applicable blank wall treatment methods meet the intent of the standards. 
 
Figure 38.530.070.C. 
Acceptable and unacceptable blank wall treatments. Note in the far right example, the display cases don't meet the 16" depth requirement, nor does the design meet the intent of the standards. 
  
DIVISION 38.540. - PARKING 
 
Sec. 38.540.010. - General provisions. 
A.  Parking is one part of the overall multimodal transportation system. Individual choice of travel mode and development characteristics influence the need for parking. The purpose of this division 38.540 in requiring parking spaces is to ensure provision of off-street motor vehicle parking, bicycle parking, and other transportation access facilities in rough proportion to the generalized parking and transportation demands of different land uses which locate at a site. Some sites, such as those that are located in close proximity to transit, have good access to pedestrian facilities or have off-set peak uses may require less on-site parking. The purpose of these standards is to provide functional parking areas adequate to the needs of users, create shaded areas within parking lots, reduce glare and heat build-up, reduce stormwater surges, provide visual relief within paved parking areas, emphasize circulation patterns, avoid the negative impacts associated with spillover parking into adjacent neighborhoods (while at the same time avoiding the negative environmental and urban design impacts that can result from excessive parking lots and other vehicular use areas) and enhance the visual environment. The provisions of this division are also intended to help protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by: helping avoid and mitigate traffic congestion; encouraging multimodal transportation options and enhanced pedestrian safety; providing methods to reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in parking areas and adequate drainage structures in order to reduce the environmental impacts of stormwater runoff; encouraging paving or alternate means of surfacing of parking areas in order to address dust abatement and improve air quality; and providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the city. In achieving these purposes this division interacts with the requirements of division 38.550 of this chapter. The design of off-street parking is the responsibility of the developer and must consider traffic circulation, intended landscaping, pedestrian access and circulation, and other purposes of this chapter. 
1.  Floor area. 
a.  The term "floor area," for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required, means 85 percent of the gross floor area, as defined in section 38.700.070 of this chapter. However, at the election of the property owner, floor area means the gross floor area, as defined in section 38.700.080 of this chapter, minus the following: 
(1)  Window display areas; 
(2)  Storage areas; 
(3)  Areas used for incidental repair of equipment used or sold on the premises; 
(4)  Areas occupied by toilets and restrooms, kitchens or break rooms; 
(5)  Areas occupied by public utility facilities; 
(6)  Areas occupied by dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms incidental to the sale of clothing; 
(7)  Areas occupied by stairways and elevators; 
(8)  Corridors connecting rooms or suites of rooms; and 
(9)  Enclosed areas used for parking vehicles. 
Such election must be made in writing to the community development director, must be signed and acknowledged by the owner, and must be filed with the community development director prior to the issuance of a building permit for such building. The owner is also responsible for certifying other information upon which parking requirements may be based, such as seats, and the number of employees on maximum working shift. 
b.  Where applicable, the number of spaces required in section 38.540.050 will be the total of the spaces required for the component activities of certain uses, each calculated separately. 
2.  Change of use or occupancy of buildings. With any change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings an occupancy permit is required. When the change in use or occupancy requires more than a ten percent cumulative increase in parking over that required with the initial building construction, an occupancy permit may not be issued until such additional parking spaces, in the amount required by this chapter, are provided for. 
3.  Improvement schedule. All parking area improvements to include surfacing, drainage, walkways, lighting, landscaping, screening, traffic control, etc., must be installed according to the provisions of division 38.270 of this chapter. 
4.  Stacking of off-street parking spaces. Required parking spaces must be located so as to preclude stacking of off-street parking spaces, with the exception of single-household dwellings and individual townhouse, rowhouse, and multi-household units, and two unit structures with physically separated individual drive aisles. Physical separation is provided when at least one of these options are employed: individual garage doors for each interior parking space; a vegetated planter not less than four feet in width between the parking spaces in the driveway area, or a wall not less than four feet in height and length, is provided between the parking area in the driveway and divides the garage entrance. Generally, not more than two cars may be stacked. When stacking is allowed, not more than two vehicles may be stacked within an enclosed parking area. 
5.  No parking permitted in required front or side setbacks. Required parking spaces may not be located in any required front or side setback, except that detached single-household dwellings and townhouses, and two unit structures with physically separated individual drive aisles, may have one space located within a driveway area in the required front setback for each parking space located directly in front of the driveway area and outside of the required front setback. 
6.  Parking is permitted within required rear setbacks.  
Sec. 38.540.020. - Stall, aisle and driveway design. 
A.  Parking dimensions. The following are minimum parking space dimensions: 
Table 38.540.020 
Dimensions of Parking Spaces and Modules 
Parking Angle 	Stall Length (A) 	Stall Width (B) 	Projection (C) 	Parking Aisle One-Way/Two-Way (D) 	Module One-Way/Two-Way (E) 	Interlock Reduction (F) 
Standard Parking Space—Surface and structured parking facilities 
30° 	18' 	9' 	16.79' 	13'/21' 	44.58'/51.58' 	2' 
45° 	18' 	9' 	19.09' 	13'/21' 	51.18'/58.18' 	2' 
60° 	18' 	9' 	20.09' 	16'/21' 	56.18'/61.18' 	1'-6" 
75° 	18' 	9' 	19.72' 	16'/21' 	55.44'/60.44' 	1' 
90° 	18' 	9' 	18.0' 	—/24' 	—/60.0' 	— 
Compact Parking Space—Surface and structured parking facilities 
30° 	16' 	8' 	15.79' 	13'/21' 	42.58'/49.58' 	2' 
45° 	16' 	8' 	17.69' 	13'/21' 	48.38'/55.38' 	2' 
60° 	16' 	8' 	18.36' 	16'/21' 	52.72'/52.72' 	1'-6" 
75° 	16' 	8' 	17.78' 	16'/21' 	51.56'/56.56' 	1' 
90° 	16' 	8' 	18.0' 	—/24' 	—/56.0' 	— 
Individual Residential Garage Dimensional Standards—Subject to 38.540.010.A.4 
Number of Stalls 	Stall Length (A) 	Stall Width (B) 	Special Conditions 
1 	20' 	9' 	Additional one foot on all exterior sides of the stall 
2 or more 	20' 	9' 	Additional one foot on all exterior sides of the stalls 
 
Notes: 
1 Unless otherwise approved, all parking spaces must be of standard width and length. In any parking facility containing 20 or more parking spaces, a maximum of 25 percent of the provided parking spaces may be reduced in size for small cars, provided these spaces must be clearly identified with a sign permanently affixed immediately in front of each space containing the notation, "Compacts Only." Where feasible, all small car spaces must be located in one or more contiguous areas and/or adjacent to ingress and egress points within parking facilities. Location of compact car parking spaces must not create traffic congestion or impede traffic flows. 
 
Figure 38.540.020 A. 
Parking stall dimensions. 
 
 
Figure 38.540.020 B. 
Parking aisles from Table 38.540.020. 
 
B.  Within structures. The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing spaces so designated within the principal building or accessory parking structure. However, no building permit may be used to convert the parking structures into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Circulation between bays. Except in the case of one to four-household dwellings and individual townhouse/rowhouse units, parking areas must be designed so that circulation between parking bays occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Turning radii between bays and additional back-up length for dead end aisles must conform to requirements of the International Fire Code. 
D.  Backing requirements. All required parking must have adequate back-up maneuverability as specified in Table 38.540.020. The aisle width calculation may incorporate the width of the public right-of-way. Except in the case of one- to four-household dwellings and individual townhouse/rowhouse-style units with individual garages, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited. With the exception of residential development, parking area design which requires backing into the public alley is prohibited. An exception to the prohibition to backing into the alley by non-residential development may be granted by the review authority when function of the alley will not be impeded and when necessary due to local site conditions. 
E.  Parallel parking spaces. Parallel parking spaces must be a minimum of 24 feet in length and seven feet in width measured from the inside edge of a curb or the inside edge of the asphalt if curbing is not present. 
 
Figure 38.540.020 C. 
Parallel parking layout. 
 
F.  Surfacing. Except for one-household development on individual lots, all areas intended to be utilized for permanent parking space and drive aisles must control dust and drainage. All proposed parking areas and driveway improvements must require a grading and drainage plan approved by the review authority. Areas must be paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete or approved pavers; an alternative surfacing method such as pervious pavement may be used, subject to review and approval by the review authority. Surfacing methods which minimize stormwater runoff and provide for functional parking and circulation are encouraged. 
1.  However, paving is not required for permitted and conditional uses in the R-S zoning districts when all of the following circumstances exist: 
a.  The use is required to provide fewer than 15 parking spaces and no loading spaces under the provisions of this section; 
b.  The lot or tract on which the use is located is not adjacent to a paved street or road; and 
c.  The applicant must enter into an improvements agreement with the city agreeing that the lot must be paved within nine months of the time an adjacent roadway is paved. 
G.  Striping. All parking stalls must be marked with white or yellow painted lines not less than four inches wide, except for one- to four-household dwellings and individual townhouse/rowhouse units. An exception to this requirement may be approved by the city when the striping would otherwise be applied to an area that does not have a permanent and durable wearing surface. 
H.  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area must comply with the lighting standards of division 38.570. 
I.  Signs. No sign may be so located that it restricts the sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking area. All signs must conform to the requirements of division 38.560 of this chapter. 
J.  Parking lot curbing. 
1.  All open off-street parking areas and drive aisles must have perimeter concrete curb around the entire parking lot, including driving access ways, except for individual townhouse/rowhouse units and one- to four-household dwellings. Continuous concrete curbing must be built according to standards provided by the review authority. Unless otherwise approved, the perimeter curb must be six-inch by six-inch concrete. 
2.  Concrete pindown wheel stops may be permitted as an alternative to continuous concrete curbing in front of parking spaces which front on the perimeter of the parking lot. However, continuous concrete curbing as described above must be provided in all situations where deemed necessary by the review authority to control drainage and soil erosion. 
3.  Alternative perimeter treatment may be permitted subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
4.  Requirements for perimeter curbing do not preclude shared access between adjacent parking lots. 
K.  Protruding vehicles. All on-site parking stalls which abut property lines must be designed and constructed such that parked vehicles do not protrude over property lines. 
L.  Pedestrian facilities in parking lots. Concrete sidewalks a minimum of five feet in width must be provided between any existing or proposed building and adjacent parking lot. Where sidewalk curbs serve as wheel stops, an additional two feet of sidewalk width is required. 
 
Figure 38.540.020 D. 
Curb stops. 
 
M.  Snow removal storage areas. Snow removal storage areas must be provided sufficient to store snow accumulation on site. Such areas may not cause unsafe ingress/egress to the parking areas, may not cause snow to be deposited on public rights-of-way, may not include areas provided for required parking access and spaces, and may not be placed in such a manner as to damage landscaping. All snow removal storage areas must be located and designed such that the resultant stormwater runoff is directed into landscaped retention/detention and water quality improvement facilities as required by the engineering department, or in compliance with the storm drainage provisions of chapter 40 article 4, and/or best practices manual. 
N.  Parking and stacking for drive-in/drive-through facilities. Required parking and stacking spaces for waiting automobiles must provide a minimum of two stalls and six spaces for stacking per lane unless a traffic summary shows that fewer spaces may be required. These spaces may not in any manner inhibit on-site or off-site vehicular circulation. 
O.  Ownership/leasehold. Required parking lots must be owned or leased by the owner or lessee of the building or use being served by such parking. Such parking lots must be maintained as a parking lot so long as the building and/or use served is in operation or until another approved parking area is established for such building or use. 
P.  Stormwater drainage. Stormwater drainage from parking lots must be directed into landscaped detention/retention facilities and water quality improvement facilities as required by the engineering department, or in compliance with the storm drainage provisions of chapter 40 article 4, and/or best practices manual adopted by the city. 
Q.  Mechanical automobile lifts. Mechanical automobile lifts may be used to meet required parking when the mechanical automobile lift design allows for access to a specific car on demand. Parking spaces within the lift may be counted towards the required parking requirement. The mechanical automobile lift must be fully enclosed in a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014 , § 11, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 38.540.030. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014 , § 12, adopted June 3, 2019, renumbered the former section 38.540.030 as subsection 38.510.030.M. The former section 38.540.030 pertained to structured parking facility development standards.  
Sec. 38.540.040. - Maintenance of parking areas. 
A.  It is the joint and separate responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, accessways, striping, landscaping and required fences or screening. 
1.  Use of required parking areas for parking only. Required off-street parking spaces in any district may not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, or storage of inoperable vehicles, except when permitted as a temporary use. 
2.  Parking spaces identified and maintained. All residential occupancies must provide required off-street parking spaces. When enclosing a carport or garage for storage or living purposes, an affidavit must be submitted to the community development director identifying the required parking spaces necessary to comply with section 38.540.050.  
Sec. 38.540.050. - Number of parking spaces required. 
A.  The following minimum number of off-street, paved parking spaces for motor vehicles and bicycles must be provided and maintained by ownership, easement and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth. When calculation of the required parking results in a fraction of a parking space being required, the fractional space is not required to be provided. 
1.  Residential uses. 
a.  Minimum requirements. The number of spaces shown in Table 38.540.050-1 must be provided subject to the adjustments allowed in this subsection 1. Parking stalls required pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act or other similar federal or state law may be provided from the minimum number of required parking stalls. All site plans submitted for permit purposes must identify parking space allocations. Fees may be charged by the landowner for the use of required parking spaces. 
(1)  One parking space for each 24 uninterrupted linear feet of available street frontage usable for on-street parking directly adjacent to a lot may be deducted from the total parking spaces required for a development. The number of on-street spaces calculated may not exceed the number of dwellings on the lot. The width of drive accesses, designated non-parking areas, vision triangles, and similar circumstances may not be considered to be available for the purpose of on-street parking space. 
Table 38.540.050-1 
Dwelling Types 	Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling 
Accessory dwelling unit 	1 
Lodginghouse 	0.75 spaces per person of approved capacity 
Efficiency unit 	1.25 (1.0 in R-5) 
One-bedroom 	1.5 (1.25 in R-5) 
Two-bedroom 	2 (1.75 in R-5) 
Three-bedroom 	3 (2.5 in R-5) 
Dwellings with more than three bedrooms 	4 (3 in R-5) 
Group homes and community residential facilities 	0.75 spaces per person of approved capacity 1 
Bed and breakfast 	1 space/rental unit 
Manufactured home 	2 
All types of dwellings within the B-3 district 	1 
Group living /cooperative household/fraternity/sorority 	1 space per resident 1 
Transitional and emergency housing 	0.25 spaces per person of approved capacity 1, 2 
 
1 A facility may request to provide fewer parking spaces if the applicant provides evidence that some or all residents are prohibited from operating motor vehicles. Under no condition may less than two parking spaces be provided. If the use of the facility is altered to serve a different population who may operate motor vehicles, then the additional required parking must be provided before the change in use may occur. 
2 Additional services and facilities to serve non-residents must provide parking in accordance with this Table 38.540.050-3. 
b.  Adjustments to minimum requirements. 
(1)  Affordable housing. When calculating the amount of required parking for affordable housing, as defined in section 38.700.020 of this chapter, if the project is guaranteed for use as affordable housing for a minimum period of 20 years and the use as affordable housing is subject to long term monitoring to ensure compliance and continued use as affordable housing, required parking spaces must be calculated based on number of bedrooms outlined in Table 38.540.050-1, but may not exceed two spaces per unit. 
(2)  Residential uses in mixed-use projects. In order to utilize this section, the long term availability of the non-residential parking spaces upon which the use of this section was based must be ensured to the residents of the project. For the purpose of this section a building is considered mixed-use if the non-residential portion of the building is at least one-quarter of the gross square feet not used for parking. Residences in mixed-use buildings may count on-street parking per subsection 1.a.(1) of this section even if the area is subject to occupancy time limits. The use of this section does not preclude the use of other sections of this chapter which may have the effect of reducing the required amount of parking. When calculating the amount of required parking for residential uses within a mixed-use project the amount of parking may be reduced subject to Table 38.540.050-2. 
Table 38.540.050-2 
Reduction 
Allowed 	Ratio of Required Non-residential to Required Residential Parking Spaces 
50% 	Greater than 1:1 but less than 3:1 
100% 	Equal to or greater than 3:1 
 
(3)  A car-sharing agreement meeting the criteria established by the community development director may be used to meet the required number of parking spaces. To use this option the development must have more than five dwelling units. Each vehicle provided through a car sharing agreement counts as required parking at a ratio of one dedicated car-share space to five standard spaces, up to a maximum of 50 percent of the total required residential parking. 
(4)  Transit availability. A residential development subject to site plan review may take a ten percent reduction in required parking spaces where the development is within 800 feet of a developed and serviced transit stop. For the purpose of this subsection a transit stop is eligible when it has a shelter installed which meets the standards of and is approved by the transit provider, and service is provided on not less than an hourly schedule a minimum of five days per week. 
2.  Non-residential uses. 
a.  Minimum requirements. The number of spaces shown in Table 38.540.050-3 must be provided subject to the adjustments allowed by this division 38.540. Spaces are not required to be provided free to the user. The required number of disabled parking stalls required by the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) may be provided from the minimum number of required parking stalls. Accessible spaces count towards satisfying minimum parking requirements. All site plans submitted for permit purposes must identify parking space allocations. When a use is not included in Table 38.540.050-2, the review authority will determine the appropriate classification for the purpose of required parking. 
b.  Maximum parking. Provision of parking spaces in excess of 125 percent of the minimum number of spaces required for the net floor area in this subsection 2 is not permitted. 
Table 38.540.050-3 
Use Type 	Off-Street or Off-Road Parking Spaces Required 
Automobile sales 	1 space per 200 square feet of indoor floor area; plus 1 space per 20 outdoor vehicle display spaces 
Automobile service and/or repair station 	2 spaces per service stall, but no less than 4 spaces 
Automobile washing establishment 	
	Automatic 
drive-through 	3 spaces or 1 for each employee on maximum shift; plus stacking space 
	Self-service 	2 spaces per stall not including washing or drying spaces 
Bank, financial institutions 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 
Bowling alley 	2 spaces per lane; plus 2 spaces per billiard table; plus 
Church 	1 space per six persons of maximum occupancy load (as identified in the International Building Code) for main assembly hall, public assembly areas and classrooms 
Community or recreation center 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area 
Community residential facility with more than 9 residents or age restricted housing 	1 space per unit 
Health and exercise establishment 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area; plus 3 spaces per court 
Day care centers 	1 space per staff member plus 1 space per 15 children permitted 
Furniture stores over 20,000 square feet 	3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area 
Golf courses 	1 space per 200 square feet of main building floor area; plus 1 space for every 2 practice tees in driving range; plus 4 spaces per each green in the playing area 
Hospitals 	1 space per bed. 
Medical and dental offices 	4 spaces for each full-time equivalent doctor or dentist; plus 1 space for each full-time equivalent employee 
Manufacturing and industrial uses 	1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per 2 employees on maximum working shift 
Motels, Hotels 	1.1 spaces per each guest room; plus 1 space per employee on maximum shift; plus spaces for accessory uses as follows: 
	Restaurants, bars, dining rooms 	1 space per 60 square feet of indoor public serving area; plus 1 space per 120 square feet of outdoor (patio) area 
	Commercial area 	1 space per each 400 square feet of floor area 
	Public assembly areas 	1 space for each 5 seats based upon design capacity, except that total off-street parking for public assembly may be reduced by 1 space for every 4 guest rooms 
Nursing homes, rest homes or similar uses 	4 spaces; plus 1 space for each 3 beds; plus 1 space for each employee on maximum shift 
Offices (except medical and dental) 	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area 
Outdoor sales (plant nurseries, building materials, equipment rental and similar) 	1 space per 500 square feet of sales and/or display area. The size of the sales and/or display area will be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
Restaurants, cafes, bars and similar uses 	1 space per 50 square feet of indoor public serving area; plus 1 space per 100 square feet of outdoor (patio) area 
Retail store and service establishments 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 
Sales sites; model homes 	1 space per 250 square feet of model floor areas; plus 1 space per employee 
Schools 	
	Elementary and/or junior high 	1.5 spaces for each classroom, library, lecture hall and cafeteria; plus 1 space for each 3 fixed seats in the area of public assembly, or 1 space for each 25 square feet of area available for public assembly if fixed seats are not provided 
	Senior high 	1.5 spaces for each classroom or lecture hall; plus 1 space per each 5 students; plus 1 space for each nonteaching employee; plus 1 space per each 3 fixed seats in the area of public assembly, or 1 space per 25 square feet of area available for public assembly if fixed seats are not provided 
	Business or similar school 	1 space for each 1.5 students 
Theater, auditorium or similar 	1 space per 4 seats based upon place of assembly design capacity 
Warehousing, storage or handling of bulk goods 	1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to storage of goods; plus appropriate spaces to support accessory office or retail sales facilities at 1 space per 350 square feet of floor area 
 
c.  Adjustments to minimum requirements. To implement the city's adopted growth policy, adjustment of parking requirements within certain areas of the city is desired. Use of this section may not be considered as joint use of parking or off-site parking regulated by sections 38.540.060 and 38.540.070, nor does the use of this section preclude the use of other sections of this chapter which may have the effect of reducing the required amount of on-site parking. More than one adjustment may apply. Multiple adjustments are added together to modify the minimum required parking from Table 38.540.050-3 in a single operation. Multiple adjustments are not applied sequentially. 
(1)  Neighborhood commercial. Within the B-1 and R-O zoning districts implementing a small scale Community Commercial Mixed Use growth policy designation or the B-3 zoning district, the parking requirements for non-residential uses may be reduced. 
Table 38.540.050-4 
Use 	Allowable Reduction 
Retail 	40 percent 
Restaurant 	50 percent 
Office 	20 percent 
All others 	30 percent 
 
(2)  Community commercial and residential emphasis mixed use. Within zoning districts lying within a commercial node, as defined in section 38.700.040 of this chapter, and the REMU district the parking requirements for non-residential uses may be reduced. 
Table 38.540.050-5 
Use 	Allowable Reduction 
Retail 	20 percent 
Restaurant 	30 percent 
Office 	10 percent 
All others 	10 percent 
 
(3)  Transit availability. Required parking may be reduced by ten percent in circumstances where the development is within 800 feet of a developed and serviced transit stop. For the purpose of this subsection a transit stop is eligible when it has publicly available cover from weather approved by the transit provider to be equivalent to a transit shelter, and service is provided on not less than an hourly schedule a minimum of five days per week. 
(4)  Structured parking. An additional 15 percent reduction may be taken when the site is within 800 feet of a parking structure of at least 200 spaces, which is available to the general public, and for which a fee for parking is charged. 
(5)  The first 3,000 gross square feet of a non-residential building within the B-3 district or adjacent to designated storefront block frontage per section 38.500.010 is not included in the calculation of required parking. 
(6)  Property owners' have the option of requesting the reduction of up to ten percent of the required parking spaces for non-residential uses if: 
a.  In addition to the minimum otherwise required by this chapter, two covered bicycle parking spaces are provided for each automobile space not provided; and 
b.  For each ten or fraction of ten automobile parking stalls reduced, a non-residential shower, changing area, and five clothing lockers are provided on-site. 
3.  Exceptions to these parking requirements. Because some situations (i.e., existing lots which have no landscaping, irregular lots, lots with topographic difficulties, etc.) would benefit from an alternative to the required maximum parking areas; because the community's appearance could benefit from additional landscaping, streetscaping and sculptural elements; and because parking exceptions and/or landscaping would encourage development within existing city boundaries; the following alternatives may be permitted. These alternatives may be proposed by the developer for review by the ADR staff. Such proposals may be approved based on a determination that such alternatives meet the following requirements and will not create a congested on-street parking situation in the vicinity of the proposal: 
a.  Landscaping in lieu of parking. Except in the B-3 district, property owners' have the option of requesting the deletion of up to five required spaces or ten percent of the required parking spaces, whichever is less, if 350 square feet of landscaping, trees or streetscaping is installed on the property for each space so deleted. This does not decrease the amount of landscaping that would have been required with full parking, but is in addition to such landscaping. This option must be approved by the ADR staff. These improvements must be placed in the public right-of-way or setbacks directly facing the right-of-way. 
b.  Cash-in-lieu modifications to parking requirements in B-3 district. Where all or part of the required parking spaces cannot be provided for a proposed use in the B-3 District, either through ownership or lease of the necessary land, the petitioner may satisfy the parking requirements by providing an equivalent cash-in-lieu payment according to the following provisions: 
(1)  No building permit must be issued, nor must any use of property be initiated, unless a satisfactory cash-in-lieu payment is received by the department of administrative services; 
(2)  The parking commission must review and consider all requests for cash-in-lieu payments and furnish a written and dated certificate, signed by the parking commission chair, authorizing cash-in-lieu payments. A copy of this certificate must be presented to the chief building official and community development director before a building permit is issued or the use instituted; 
(3)  For each required parking space not provided, payment must be made to the city administrative services department as specified by standard payment requirements established by the parking commission; 
(4)  All real property assessed by special improvement district (SID) No. 565, or other similarly adopted improvement districts designed to provide additional parking spaces within the B-3 district, will not be required to provide additional parking spaces beyond those required at the time of the SID adoption, provided the use of the real property and improvements remains unchanged from the initial assessments of SID No. 565, or other similarly adopted improvement districts; 
(a)  In the event that a new use or an expansion is initiated on any portion of real property or improvements are made subsequent to the assessments for SID No. 565 or other similarly adopted improvement districts, then parking space requirements must be satisfied prior to initiation of those new or expanded uses. 
4.  Bicycle parking required. All site development, exclusive of those qualifying for sketch plan review per division 38.230 of this chapter, must provide bicycle parking facilities to accommodate bicycle-riding residents and/or employees and customers of the proposed development. The number of bicycle parking spaces must be at least ten percent of the number of automobile parking stalls required by Tables 38.540.050-1 and 38.540.050-3 before the use of any special exception or modification, but must in no case be less than two. 
a.  Required bicycle parking must be provided in a safe, accessible and convenient location. Directional signage must be installed when bicycle parking facilities are not readily visible from the street, sidewalk, or main building entrance. Installation of bicycle parking must allow for adequate clearance for bicycles and their riders. 
b.  Bicycle parking may be provided in a common area to serve multiple buildings. The common area must be within 100 feet of each served building. 
c.  Covered bicycle parking is encouraged. 
d.  Bicycle parking is permitted in required front or rear setbacks. Covered parking may be integrated with required weather protection features. Alternate designs will be considered by the review authority provided the alternate design meets or exceeds the intent of this standard 
5.  Bicycle parking standards. The intent of this sub section is to ensure required bicycle racks are designed so bicycles may be securely locked to them without undue inconvenience and will be reasonably safeguarded from accidental damage. 
a.  Bicycle racks must hold bicycles securely, and meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Support the frame of the bicycle and not just one wheel. 
(2)  Allow the frame and one wheel to be locked to the rack when both wheels are left on the bike. 
(3)  Allow the frame and both wheels to be locked to the rack if the front wheel is removed. 
(4)  Allow the use of either a cable or U-shaped lock. 
(5)  Be permanently anchored to an all season surface such as pavement, patio stones, or other similar surface, and be located such that it will not become buried by snow removal operations. 
(6)  Be usable by bikes with no kickstand. 
(7)  Be usable by bikes with water bottle cages. 
(8)  Be usable by a wide variety of sizes and types of bicycle. 
b.  Preferred bike rack styles are inverted U, coat hanger, or post and loop racks. Other styles which meet the standards above are acceptable, including enclosed bicycle lockers. Comb and wave style racks do not meet the required standard. 
c.  Bicycle parking location: 
(1)  Bicycle parking must be located within 50 feet on an entrance to the building the bicycle parking is required to serve. 
(2)  Covered bicycle parking is recommended wherever possible. 
(3)  Bicycle parking may be provided within a building, but the location must be easily accessible. 
(4)  Up to 50 percent or 12 spaces, whichever is less, of required bicycle parking may be located in a required setback(s). Parking area may not interfere with any functional aspect of the site including stormwater facilities, pedestrian circulation, landscaping requirements, etc. 
(5)  Bicycle parking may be located in required front setbacks, but may not occupy more than one-quarter of the total area of a required front setback on an individual street frontage. Departures will be considered (per section 38.250.060) for covered bicycle parking or exceptional design. 
(6)  Screening with landscaping or other means of bicycle parking is not required. 
(7)  Bicycle parking is not permitted within a public street ROW unless prior written authorization is granted by the city engineer for a perpetual encroachment easement. 
(8)  Bicycle racks and the area required for parking and maneuvering must meet the following standards: 
(a)  Bicycle parking spaces must be at least six feet long and two feet wide, and in; 
(b)  Covered situations the overhead clearance must be at least seven feet. 
(c)  An aisle for bicycle maneuvering must be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking. This aisle must be at least five feet wide. 
(d)  Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle. 
(e)  Areas set aside for bicycle parking must be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only. 
6.  B-2M district. 
a.  Minimum requirements. The number of spaces shown in Table 38.25.040-6 shall be provided subject to the adjustments and exceptions allowed in this subsection. 
b.  Maximum parking. Provision of parking spaces in excess of the minimum number of spaces required in Table 38.25.040-3 is not permitted. 
Table 38.540.050-6 
Use 	Minimum Parking Spaces Required 	Minimum Bicycle Parking Spaces Required 
Residential 	1 per unit 	1 per unit 
Commercial 	2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Restaurant 	5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Hotels, Motels 	0.8 per guest room 	2 per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Arts and/or Entertainment Center 	5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Manufacturing 	2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2 per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area 
 
c.  Adjustments to minimum requirements. No reductions in required parking spaces may be taken for any development within the B-2M zoning district, except pursuant to 38.540.060, Joint use of parking facilities. 
d.  Requirements within the Midtown Urban Renewal District in the B-2M zoning district. The minimum parking requirements of this section do not apply within the Midtown Urban Renewal District the boundary of which is described in the Midtown Urban Renewal Plan adopted pursuant to Ordinance 1925 and incorporated herein. All other requirements of this section, including bicycle parking, maximum parking and standards when parking is provided, are applicable. 
e.  Off-site parking. Any off-site parking used to meet the requirements of this chapter for development in the B-2M zoning district must comply with 38.540.060, except that off-site parking for multiple household dwellings may not be located more than 1,000 feet from any commonly used entrance of the principle use served. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 4, 3-19-2018; Ord. No. 2014 , §§ 13, 14, 6-3-2019; Ord. No. 2029 , § 10, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.540.060. - Joint use of parking facilities. 
Up to 80 percent of the non-residential parking spaces required by this division 38.540 may be provided through shared parking, subject to the requirements in subsections A and B of this section. 
A.  Shared parking may be requested if parking can be provided to serve two or more individual land uses without conflict or encroachment. The review authority may make a determination for shared parking arrangements based on a traffic survey or traffic impact study for the site based on the following: 
1.  At a minimum, a traffic survey or traffic impact study must examine for all potential uses: trip generation, hours of operation, quantity of required parking spaces, quantity of spaces that will be filled during peak hour periods, and any unusual events that may occur during the year that will exceed the average parking requirement. The study must indicate that adequate parking exists to meet the demand of potential uses served as well as meet technical requirements as specified by the review authority. 
2.  The parties sharing parking spaces must enter into a long-term joint use agreement revocable with review authority approval, running with the term of the designated uses. 
B.  Conditions required for joint use. 
1.  The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use must be located within 1,000 feet of such parking facilities as measured by the route of travel from the nearest parking space to the commonly used entrance of the principal use served; 
2.  The applicant must show that there is no substantial overlap in the operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed; and 
3.  A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the city attorney, must be filed with the city clerk and recorded with the county clerk and recorder.  
Sec. 38.540.070. - Off-site parking. 
A.  Any off-site parking used to meet the requirements of this chapter must be reviewed by the community development director for compliance with this chapter and will be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Off-site parking must be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this chapter; 
2.  Reasonable continuous pedestrian and vehicle access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served must be provided; 
3.  Off-site parking for one-household and two-household dwellings is not permitted; 
4.  Off-site parking for multiple household dwellings may not be located more than 300 feet from any commonly used entrance of the principal use served; 
5.  Off-site parking for non-residential uses may not be located more than 1,000 feet from the entrance of the principal use. The distance is measured on a pedestrian route of travel such as a sidewalk or city standard trail from the nearest parking space to the entrance of the principal use served; and 
6.  Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this chapter must maintain ownership or provide evidence of a long-term lease agreement, revocable with review authority approval, running with the term of the designated use, for parking utilization of the off-site location. 
(Ord. No. 1994 , § 8, 3-31-2018)  
Sec. 38.540.080. - Off-street loading berth requirements. 
A.  Affected uses. Every hotel/motel with restaurant, conference center, restaurant, department store, freight terminal or railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing establishment, retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale establishment, and all other structures devoted to similar mercantile or industrial pursuits, which has an aggregate gross floor area of 15,000 square feet or more must provide off-street truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following Table 38.540.080: 
1.  Any office building 100,000 square feet or larger must have at least one off-street loading berth. 
Table 38.540.080 
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area Devoted to Such Use 	Number of Berths 
15,000 square feet up to and including 40,000 square feet 	1 
40,001 square feet up to and including 100,000 square feet 	2 
For each additional 100,000 square feet 	1 additional 
 
B.  Standards for off-street loading facilities. All off-street loading facilities must conform to the following standards: 
1.  The first loading berth must be at least 70 feet in length. Additional berths required must be at least 45 feet in length unless certified by the property owner in writing that additional loading activity will take place exclusively with small delivery vans, in which case the berth must be at least 25 feet in length. All loading berths must be at least 12 feet in width and 14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space. 
2.  Such space may occupy all or any part of any required setback space, except front and exterior side setbacks, and may not be located closer than 50 feet to any lot in any residential zone unless separated from such zone, except at the accesses, by screening not less than eight feet in height. 
3.  Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles must be provided on the site so that vehicles can cross a property line only by driving forward. 
4.  Each loading berth must be accessible from a street or alley or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley, without traversing a residential district. 
5.  The loading area, aisles and access drives must be paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and must be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public properties, streets or alleys. 
6.  Bumper rails must be provided at locations where needed for safety or to protect property. 
7.  No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles may be conducted in a loading area. 
8.  Off-street loading facilities must be located on the same site with the use for which the berths are required. 
9.  If more than one use is located on a site, the number of loading berths provided must be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in this chapter for each use. If more than one use is located on a site, and the gross floor area of each use is less than the minimum for which loading berths are required, but the aggregate gross floor area is greater than the minimum for which loading berths are required, off-street loading berths must be provided as if the aggregate gross floor area were used for the use requiring the greatest number of loading berths. 
10.  Off-street loading facilities for a single use will not be considered as providing required off-street loading facilities for any other use. 
11.  At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or enlargement of a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of a major alteration or enlargement of a structure, off-street loading berths subject to the provisions of division 38.270 of this chapter must be provided. The number of loading berths provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure must be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration or enlargement. 
12.  Space allocated to any off-street loading berth may not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facility.  
DIVISION 38.550. - LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 38.550.010. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The process of development, with its alteration of the natural topography and vegetation, and creation of impervious cover can have a negative effect on the ecological balance of an area by causing or accelerating the processes of runoff, erosion and sedimentation. The economic base of the city can and should be protected through the preservation and enhancement of the area's unique natural beauty and environment. Recognizing that the general objectives of this division are to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, these landscaping regulations are adopted as part of this chapter for the following specific purposes: 
1.  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff retardation, and improvement of water quality, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement; 
2.  To provide visual buffering between land uses of differing character by placing screening vegetation; 
3.  To enhance the beauty of the city by expanding and strengthening the urban forest and providing a diversity of vegetation within the city; 
4.  To protect the character and stability of residential, business, institutional and industrial areas by establishing minimum landscaping standards; 
5.  To preserve the value of land and buildings by protecting and enhancing the aesthetic character of the community; 
6.  To conserve energy by providing windbreaks, shade and temperature moderation; 
7.  To retard the spread of noxious weeds by encouraging a vigorous desirable plant community within the city; 
8.  To enhance the appearance of the entryways into the city by providing high-quality landscaping which complements architecture; 
9.  To encourage a pleasant and safe environment for pedestrians by placement of boulevard trees and other interesting visual features; and 
10.  To encourage the conservation of water by rewarding the use of low water demand landscaping.  
Sec. 38.550.020. - Interpretation and scope. 
A.  The provisions of this division apply to a lot or site when an application is being made for: 
1.  Site development approval pursuant to division 38.230 of this chapter; 
2.  Signs pursuant to division 38.560 of this chapter where landscaping is required; or 
3.  Restoration of a building that has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy or accident of any kind. For purposes of this subsection A, "restoration" means the act of putting back into a former or original state, only. 
B.  Notwithstanding the application of subsection A of this section, the provisions of this division 38.550 do not apply to the following: 
1.  Lots containing residential uses subject to sketch plan review, except when such lots are subject to sections 38.550.050.A and E, 38.550.070 and 38.550.100; 
2.  Lots or sites within a planned unit development which has been approved with its own landscape plan. However, these provisions must be used as the basis for determining the landscaping plans for future planned unit developments and such planned unit development landscaping plans must meet or exceed the standards of these landscape regulations; or 
3.  Lots or sites which are designed, reviewed and approved according to the deviation provisions specified in section 38.550.080.  
Sec. 38.550.030. - General landscaping provisions. 
A.  Landscape plans must include the information required by section 38.220.100. 
B.  Vegetation may only be used to satisfy the requirements of this division 38.550 when it is located on the same zone lot as the development depicted on the landscape plan.  
Sec. 38.550.040. - Landscape plan review. 
A.  The review authority established in division 38.200 must review each landscape plan to determine whether or not it complies with the requirements of this section. 
B.  All landscape plans must comply with the mandatory landscape provisions in section 38.550.050. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 3, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.550.050. - Mandatory landscaping provisions. 
A.  Setback landscaping required. For all uses in all districts, unless otherwise provided by specific approval through design review procedures, all front, side and rear setbacks, and those areas subject to section 38.550.050.E, exclusive of permitted access drives, parking areas and accessory structures, must be landscaped as defined in this chapter. All landscaped areas must be perpetually maintained in a healthy condition. 
1.  For purposes of defining setback landscaping requirements, the terms "setback," "front setback," "side setback" and "rear setback" mean the space between the actual building, parking lot, or other structure (not the building setback line) and the adjacent lot line, which is open and unoccupied from the ground upward or from the ground downward other than by steps, walks, terraces, drive aisles, lamp posts and similar structures, and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
 
Figure 38.550.050.A.1. 
Setbacks. 
 
B.  Drought tolerant species required. A landscape plan must provide 75 percent or greater of the proposed trees and shrubs as drought tolerant species as defined in the latest edition of the Montana Nursery and Landscape Association's Drought Tolerant Plants for the Montana Landscape or on a list adopted by the city of drought tolerant species for purposes of this section. 
C.  Parking lot landscaping. 
1.  For purposes of defining parking lot landscaping requirements, the term "parking lot" means the area within the perimeter of the paved portion of the parking lot, including drive aisles but not including drive accesses and parking stalls in front of garages where the use of one or more spaces within the garage is assigned to a particular dwelling. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to parking areas, provided within a building or parking structure, as defined in section 38.700.150 of this chapter. 
2.  All surface parking lots on the building site must be landscaped in accordance with this subsection C.2. 
a.  Parking lot screening required 
(1)  All parking lots located on a lot with a residential adjacency must be screened from that residential adjacency; 
(2)  All parking lots located between a principal structure and a public street, must be screened from the public street; 
(3)  The screening required under this subsection must be continuous and not less than four feet in width unless a different width is specified in 38.510.030; and 
(4)  Screening must be maintained at a height of four to six feet except as otherwise restricted by fence and hedge height limits within required front setbacks and street vision triangles. 
 
Figure 38.550.050.C.2.a 
Parking lot landscape screening. 
 
b.  Large canopy trees, large non-canopy trees or small trees must be provided in, or within 20 feet of, the parking lot at a minimum average density of: 
(1)  One large canopy tree; or 
(2)  One large non-canopy tree and one small tree; or 
(3)  Three small trees for each nine parking spaces required or provided. 
c.  No parking space shall be located more than 70 feet from the trunk of a tree. 
d.  No tree shall be planted closer than three feet to the back of the curb or edging equivalent. 
 
Figure 38.550.050.C.2.d. 
 
e.  Additionally, any parking lot providing 15 or more parking spaces must have a minimum of 20 square feet of landscape area within the parking lot for each off-street parking space in the lot provided as follows: 
(1)  The interior parking lot landscaping must be designed to facilitate, control and denote proper vehicular circulation patterns; 
(2)  Internal parking lot landscaping provided must be proportionately dispersed so as to define aisles and limit unbroken rows of parking to a maximum of 100 feet, with landscaped areas provided in an appropriate scale to the size of the parking lot; and 
(3)  The minimum width and/or length of any parking lot landscaped area is eight feet. No landscape area may be less than two feet wide. 
(4)  All parking lots under this subsection must include at least one large canopy or non-canopy tree. 
(5)  Individual internal parking lot landscaping areas with minimum dimensions of six feet by 16 feet must include large canopy or non-canopy tree(s). 
D.  Screening of off-street loading spaces. 
1.  All off-street loading spaces are subject to sections 38.520.070 and 38.540.080.B. 
E.  Street frontage landscaping required. 
1.  Except in R-S districts, all street rights-of-way contiguous to or within the proposed development site not used for street pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or drive aisles must be landscaped, as defined in this chapter, and must include one large canopy tree for each 50 feet of total street frontage rounded to the nearest whole number. When this requirement conflicts with other requirements of this chapter or other portion of this Code the review authority may relax this standard to reach an optimal balance in public interests. 
a.  Acceptable large canopy shade trees for use in public rights-of-way are those accepted by the forestry department. Street trees must meet the arboricultural specifications and standards of chapter 16, article V, division 3. The forestry department, in cooperation with the city tree advisory board, publishes a pamphlet listing acceptable species and proper planting methods. Prior to planting street trees, a permit from the forestry department is required. 
2.  Where it may be impractical or difficult to plant large canopy trees within the public right-of-way (due to the presence of overhead power lines, for instance) the requirement for one large canopy tree for each 50 feet of street frontage may be substituted with two small ornamental trees per 50 feet of total street frontage. Acceptable small ornamental trees for use in public rights-of-way are those accepted by the forestry department. 
3.  The minimum quantity of trees and other landscaping required and provided in the public right-of-way as described herein must be designed to complement on-site landscaping and to enhance the proposed development project and the streetscape. 
4.  Montana Department of Transportation (MDT) review and approval of street frontage landscaping for areas of a project included within or adjacent to rights-of-way subject to MDT jurisdiction must be demonstrated at time of landscape plan submittal to the city. When MDT, in writing, denies street frontage landscaping required by this section the applicant must propose and the director may approve an alternative street frontage landscaping through a departure. 
F.  Street median island landscaping. All street median islands approved through a plan review process must be landscaped according to requirements determined through the plan review process. 
G.  Acceptable landscape materials. 
1.  Acceptable plant materials are those identified as hardy in Zones 1 through 4. The characteristics of the zones are described in The Western Garden Book, Sunset Publishing Corporation as amended. Alternatives may be considered upon a case-by-case basis. However, in the case of street frontage landscaping as required in subsection E of this section, acceptable tree species are limited to those approved by the city forestry division. 
2.  No artificial plant materials may be used to satisfy the requirements of this division 38.550. 
3.  Plant materials used to satisfy the requirements of this division 38.550 must comply with the following minimum size requirements at the time of installation (depending on the standard measuring technique for the species): 
a.  Large canopy and non-canopy trees must have either: 
(1)  For deciduous trees a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches to two inches; or 
(2)  For evergreen trees a minimum height of eight feet. 
b.  Small canopy and non-canopy trees must have either: 
(1)  For deciduous trees a minimum caliper of one inch; or 
(2)  For evergreen trees a minimum height of six feet. 
c.  All other non-turf plantings must meet American Nursery and Landscape Association standards. 
4.  For purposes of subsection G.3 of this section, height is measured from the top of the root ball or, if the plant is in a container, from the top soil level in the container. 
 
Figure 38.550.050.
Dimensions of acceptable landscape materials. 
 
H.  Protection of landscape areas. 
1.  Perimeter parking lot treatment as required in section 38.540.020.J must be installed to protect landscape areas adjacent to parking lots. 
2.  Landscaped areas within parking lots (i.e., landscape islands or peninsulas) must be protected from vehicular traffic through the use of continuous concrete curbs, or other permanent barriers approved by the review authority. Railroad ties, rolled asphalt, pin down wheel stops or similar methods of curbing are not acceptable methods of landscape protection within parking lots. 
I.  Irrigation standards. 
1.  Permanent irrigation systems must be provided to all landscaped areas. The use of hose bibs on the exterior of existing or proposed structures is not an acceptable method of landscape irrigation unless the landscaped area is adjacent to the existing or proposed structure. 
2.  All irrigation systems and landscaped areas must be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to promote water conservation and prevent water overflow or seepage into the street, sidewalk or parking areas. 
J.  Required use of trees with residential adjacency. All landscape plans must include, for each setback with a residential adjacency, at least one canopy or non-canopy tree for each 50 lineal feet of the adjacent area. 
K.  Coordination with utilities. In order to prevent damage to both vegetation and public utility lines, all trees and other large vegetation may planted no closer than the minimum distance specified in the city design standards and specifications policy. When the City verifies it is not possible to meet minimum separation distance from utilities and no other arrangement can be approved, such tree or large vegetation is not required. 
L.  Maximum allowable slope or grade. 
1.  The finish grade of all landscaped areas, including, but not limited to, required setbacks, parking lot landscape islands, open space areas, plaza areas, watercourse corridors, landscaped areas adjacent to sidewalks, public trails or pathways, and any stormwater facilities proposed in required setbacks, dedicated parkland, or open space areas may not exceed a slope of 25 percent grade (four run to one rise). 
2.  The slope percent is computed by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance multiplied by 100. The degree of slope is equal to the tangent of vertical distance over horizontal distance (refer to figure 38.550.050). 
3.  The review authority may vary the maximum allowable slope of 25 percent grade to protect existing topographical or natural features (i.e., watercourse, wetlands, mature vegetation) associated with a site. Alternatives to enable exceeding the maximum allowable slope of 25 percent may include terracing, retaining walls, architectural appurtenances, landscape features, or a combination thereof that will achieve a greater design quality and enhanced landscape features. 
4.  All landscaped areas to be finished in grass that exceed a maximum allowable slope of 25 percent grade must be installed as turf sod, or hydro-seed. If hydro-seed is utilized, additional erosion control fabric (i.e., matting or blanket or equivalent thereof) must be provided to ensure a stable slope for a minimum of one calendar year while the vegetation becomes established. 
M.  Planned unit development open spaces. Planned unit development non-site-specific open space plans must meet or exceed the standards of these landscaping regulations. For each 5,000 square feet of total landscape open space area between 5,000 and 25,000 square feet and for each 10,000 square feet of total landscape areas in excess of 25,000 square feet a landscape plan must include three of the elements in table 38.550.050-1 from each column A and B unless the review authority grants a relaxation. When the preceding calculation results in a fraction the amount of landscaping required is rounded up to the next whole number. 
Table 38.550.050-1 
Column A 	Column B 
1 large canopy tree 	3 evergreen shrubs and 3 deciduous shrubs 
1 large non-canopy tree 	2 small ornamental trees 
2 small ornamental trees 	2 large evergreen trees 
	6 evergreen shrubs 
	6 deciduous shrubs 
 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 4, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.550.060. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2029 , § 6, adopted Dec. 18, 2019, repealed § 38.550.060, which pertained to landscape performance standards and derived from Ord. No. 1978 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 4, 2018.  
Sec. 38.550.070. - Landscaping of public lands. 
A.  City rights-of-way and parks. 
1.  General. 
a.  Tree planting permits must be obtained from the forestry department prior to installation of trees in city rights-of-way or parks. 
b.  Drought tolerant grass seed must be planted in these areas. 
2.  External streets, open space, and parks. The developer must at the time of initial development for installing vegetative ground cover, boulevard trees and an irrigation system in the public right-of-way boulevard strips along all external perimeter development streets and adjacent to public parks or other open space areas. 
a.  Prior to installing landscaping in city rights-of-way or parks, the developer must submit a landscaping plan to the facilities manager for review and approval. The landscaping plan must be prepared by a qualified landscaping professional meeting the requirements of this division 38.550. Tree planting permits must be obtained before any tree is placed on public land. 
b.  Wells must be used to irrigate landscaping in these areas. 
3.  Adjacent to individual lots. When individual parcels are developed, the individual property owners' must install landscaping and street trees within the public right-of-way boulevard strips adjacent to their property, and providing for irrigation, in compliance with section 38.550.050.E.1. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Maintenance of landscaping installed within the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way, with the exception of tree trimming and tree removal, is the responsibility of adjacent property owners'. 
2.  A developer must irrigate and maintain landscaping along external streets and landscaping adjacent to parks or other open space areas until 50 percent of the lots are sold. Thereafter, the property owners' association is responsible for maintaining and irrigating these landscaped areas. The property owners' association may, with the city's approval, establish an improvement district to collect assessments to pay for the irrigation and maintenance. 
3.  The city is responsible for the maintenance of all other required landscaping installed in accordance with approved site plans within the public right-of-way or on other public lands. 
C.  State rights-of-way. Landscaping must be installed along state rights-of-way, in the same manner described in this section, provided that the state department of transportation has reviewed and approved the proposed landscaping plan. Maintenance of landscaping installed within the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way is the responsibility of adjacent property owners' unless a different responsibility is established by the encroachment permit.  
Sec. 38.550.080. - Departure from landscaping requirements. 
A.  To achieve the optimal landscape design on individual sites, or to coordinate the landscape design in an area, it may be necessary to depart from the strict application of landscaping requirements. An application for such departure must be processed per section 38.250.060. 
B.  The application for departure must be accompanied by written and graphic material sufficient to illustrate the conditions that the modified standards will produce, so as to enable the review authority to determine that the departure will produce an environment, landscape quality and character superior to that produced by the existing standards, and will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this division 38.550. Upon such a finding, the review authority may authorize departures of up to 20 percent from landscape design standards contained herein.  
Sec. 38.550.090. - Landscaping completion. 
All Landscaping must be completed or secured in accordance with the provisions of division 38.270 of this chapter. The applicant must demonstrate satisfactory establishment of all seeded areas or guarantee establishment for a minimum two year period following occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 5, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.550.100. - General maintenance. 
A.  Required landscaping must be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning and other maintenance of all plantings as needed. However, the city forestry department is responsible for pruning or removing any tree in a city right-of-way or park. Any plant that dies must be replaced with another living plant that complies with the approved landscape plan. Failure to maintain required landscaping in a healthy growing condition at all times may result in revocation of an occupancy permit. When enforcing this provision of this chapter, external factors such as seasonality and availability of landscape stock must be considered before any action to revoke an occupancy permit is taken. 
B.  Any damage to utility lines, resulting from the negligence of the property owner or the owner's agents or employees in the installation and maintenance of required landscaping in a utility easement, is the responsibility of the property owner. If a public utility disturbs a landscaped area in a utility easement, it must make every reasonable effort to preserve the landscaping materials and return them to their prior locations after the utility work. If, nonetheless, some plant materials die, it is the obligation of the property owner to replace the plant materials.  
DIVISION 38.560. - SIGNS[5] 
 
Figure 38.560. Signs. 
 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Information signs, MCA 60-5-501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38.560.010. - Findings and purpose. 
A.  Findings. 
1.  Signs obstruct views, distract pedestrians and motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and may create hazards that threaten the public health and safety. Such a safety threat is particularly significant for signs that are structurally inadequate, confuse drivers or pedestrians, or interfere with official directional or warning signs. 
2.  Signs may also threaten the public welfare by harming property values and creating aesthetic concerns, especially where the accumulation of signs creates visual clutter or obstruct scenic vistas. 
3.  The ability to erect signs serving certain functions, such as address signs and directional signs, are important because they enable residents and visitors to efficiently and safely reach their intended destinations. 
4.  The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs in the city has a positive impact on the safety and appearance of the community. 
5.  The purposes described in this section are compelling interests and the regulations in this division 38.560 are narrowly tailored to serve those interests while allowing adequate alternative avenues for speech. 
B.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this division 38.560 to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the city by regulating and controlling the size, location, type, quality of materials, height, maintenance and construction of all signs and sign structures not located within a building, or within a building and visible from the exterior for the following reasons: 
1.  To ensure that pedestrians and motorists are protected from damage or injury caused by or partly attributable to the distractions and obstructions which are caused by improperly situated or dangerously distracting signs; 
2.  To preserve the Bozeman area's natural scenic beauty and character as expressed in adopted city plans and policies; 
3.  To contribute to inviting entrances into the city by eliminating clutter associated, in part, with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, lights and stringed devices; 
4.  To encourage area beautification through creative, interrelated design of signage, landscaping, buildings, access and parking that enhances the community's built and natural environment; 
5.  To give all persons, organizations and businesses an equal opportunity to have a sign that will help people find the goods and services they need; and 
6.  To encourage economic development. 
C.  The provisions of this division 38.560 provide a reasonable balance between a person's right to identify their organization or business, or to freely express thoughts and ideas, and the interest of the public to be protected from the visual discord and distraction that results from the unrestricted proliferation of signs. Section 34.340.070 establishes certain exemptions, and alternative procedures utilizing design review. The deliberations and decisions of the design review must be directed to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
D.  This division 38.560 must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the Federal and State Constitution's guarantee of free speech. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 17, 4-18-2018; Ord. No. 2020 , § 1, 6-24-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020 , § 1, adopted June 24, 2019, amended the title of § 38.560.010 to read as herein set out. The former § 38.560.010 title pertained to intent and purpose.  
Sec. 38.560.020. - Sign permit requirements. 
If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this division 38.560 is to be placed, constructed, erected or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot must obtain a sign and building permit prior to the construction, placement, erection or modification of such a sign. Furthermore, the property owner must maintain in force, at all times, a permit for such sign. No permit of any kind may be issued for an existing sign or proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this division 38.560. Murals as defined in section 38.700.120 of this chapter are not subject to this division 38.560 but may be subject to the provisions of division 38.340 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.560.030. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  All signs not expressly permitted under this division 38.560, or exempt from the provisions of this division 38.560, are prohibited in the city. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Portable signs (except as allowed under chapter 34, article 5); 
2.  Roof signs; 
3.  Revolving signs, except as permitted in section 38.560.060; 
4.  Beacons, spotlights; 
5.  Flashing, blinking, or animated signs; 
6.  LED or other electronic messaging signs except for incidental signs as defined in section 38.700.100 of this chapter; 
7.  Pennants, streamers, wind socks, pinwheels, or similar items; 
8.  Stringed flags; 
9.  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons (except as permitted per section 38.560.040); 
10.  Signs located in public rights-of-way (except for those specifically permitted in this division 38.560); and 
11.  Signs that (a) contain structural components such as size, location, movement, coloring, or manner of illumination that are similar to or which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control or hazard warning device or (b) interfere with the travelling public's view of a traffic or hazard warning sign or signal. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 2, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.560.040. - Temporary signs; permit required. 
A.  Excluding those signs subject to section 38.560.050, temporary signs as defined in 38.700.180 may be permitted only as follows: 
1.  Temporary signs may be-permitted only with an approved temporary sign permit. 
2.  All temporary signs must comply with size, height, and location requirements of this division 38.560. 
3.  A property may have temporary sign(s) on display for no more than 30 cumulative days per calendar year (January 1 to December 31). A new business or nonprofit organization, during its initial calendar year in business or in existence, may display temporary sign(s) for a maximum of 60 consecutive days. 
4.  Itinerant vendors as defined in section 12.01.010.A will receive information about allowable temporary signs at the time the vendor applies for a business license, but a temporary sign permit is not required if the itinerant vendor is operating for seven days or less. 
5.  A person who conducts seasonal operations, such as garden greenhouses, boat showrooms, or ski rental facilities, may apply for a longer term temporary sign permit which may be approved for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 3, 6-24-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020 , § 3, adopted June 24, 2019, repealed the former § 38.560.040, and enacted a new § 38.560.040 as set out herein. The former § 38.560.040 pertained to permitted temporary and special event signs and derived from Ord. No. 1978 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 4, 2018.  
Sec. 38.560.050. - Signs exempt from permit requirements. 
A.  The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this division 38.560 but must comply with the criteria for signs allowed by this division 38.560, except section 38.560.060. In order to be exempt from sign permit requirements, such signs must not be internally illumined, cause glare, cast light onto adjacent property, be placed in sight vision triangles, or otherwise impede or obstruct the view of the traveling public: 
1.  All zones. 
a.  Government and public utility signs. Directional, warning, street, traffic control, informational or temporary signs that are erected, installed or placed by or on behalf of or required by any transportation agency of a federal, state, county or city government. Public utility signs showing locations of underground facilities or public telephones, and safety signs on construction sites are included within this exemption. 
b.  Incidental signs as defined in section 38.700.100. 
c.  Ghost signs. A ghost sign as defined in division 38.700 may be, but is not required to be, stabilized, rehabilitated or preserved to its original condition, design and size. A ghost sign may not be altered in any way that changes its original design, wording, or size. 
d.  Sign on property that is for sale, rent, or lease. One temporary sign in addition to that otherwise allowed by this section 38.560.050 may be located on property when the owner consents and the property is being offered for sale, rent, or lease for a period not exceeding 15 days following the closing date. The sign may not exceed nine square feet in total area and may be no more than five feet high. 
2.  Residential zones (R-S, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RMH, REMU [single-household, two- to four-household, townhouse, and apartments]). 
a.  Non-commercial temporary signs that do not exceed nine square feet per individual sign in total area at any particular time and, if freestanding, five feet in height. A total sign area of not more than 32 square feet may be displayed at the same time. 
b.  Businesses working at a residentially zoned lot, such as landscapers or window treatment installers, may post a temporary commercial sign only during the period the business is actively working on the site and up to three days after the business' work on the site is completed. Each such sign on a single lot at any particular time may not exceed nine square feet per individual sign in total area and, if freestanding, may not exceed five feet in height. A total sign area of not more than 32 square feet may be displayed at the same time. Such signs are not considered off-premises advertising so long as the identified business is actively engaged on the site. 
3.  Commercial and manufacturing zones (R-O, B-1, B-2, B-2M, B-3, UMU, M-1, M-2, BP, PLI, NEHMU, REMU [mixed-use, non-residential]). 
a.  Window signs, provided that such signs do not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the window in which it is displayed. If the window sign(s) exceeds 25 percent of the area of the window, it will be classified as a wall sign. For the purposes of this section, a window is a transparent glass opening in a wall separated from other glass openings by mullions or other dividers of four inches or less in width. 
b.  Signs within a structure or building or other enclosed area of property when such signs are not legible when viewed from outside the structure or property. 
c.  Non-commercial temporary signs; such signs must not exceed 32 square feet in total area, must be no more than five feet high and must be at least five feet from the property line when the required setback is in excess of five feet. 
d.  Businesses working at a construction site may post temporary commercial signs on the site with the property owner's permission. Each such sign on the site may not exceed 32 square feet in total area, may be no more than five feet high and must be at least five feet from the property line. Such signs are not considered off-premises advertising so long as the business is actively engaged on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 4, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.560.060. - Signs permitted upon the issuance of a sign permit. 
A.  The following on-premises signs may be permitted in the indicated zones with an approved sign permit: 
Table 38.560.060 
Non-Residential Sign Standards 
Zoning District 	B-1 	B-2, B-2M 	B-3 	UMU 	M-1 	M-2 
Maximum sq. ft. area 	80 per
building 	400 per lot 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 
Allowed sq. ft. sign area per linear foot of building frontage first 25 feet 	1.5 or 2 1 	2 or 3 1 	2 	2 or 3 1 	2 or 3 1 	2 or 3 1 
Allowed sq. ft. sign area per linear foot of building frontage > 25 feet 	1 	1.5 	1.5 	1.5 	1.5 	1.5 
Monument max. size sq. ft. 	32 	32 	32 	32 	32 	32 
Monument max. height 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Monument setback 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Pole style max. height 	Prohibited 	13' 	13' 	13' 	13' 	13' 
Pole style setback 	Prohibited 	15' 	15' 	15' 	15' 	15' 
Pole style clearance 	Prohibited 	8' 	8' 	8' 	8' 	8' 
Pole sign max. sq. ft. 	Prohibited 	32 	32 	32 	32 	32 
Projecting sign max. area 	8' 	8' 	12' 	8' 	8' 	8' 
Projecting sign max. distance 	4' 	4' 	6' 	4' 	4' 	4' 
Rotating sign max area 	2.5 sq. ft. 	2.5 sq. ft. 	2.5 sq. ft. 	2.5 sq. ft. 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 
 
				Non-Residential Uses 
Zoning District 	BP 	PLI 	HMU 	REMU 	RO 
Maximum sq. ft. area 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 	250 per lot 	80 per
building 
Allowed sq. ft. sign area per linear foot of building frontage first 25 feet 	2 or 3 1 	2 or 3 1 	2 or 3 1 	2 or 3 1 	1 or 1.25 1 
Allowed sq. ft. sign area per linear foot of building frontage > 25 feet 	1.5 	1.5 	1.5 	1.5 	0.5 
Monument max. size sq. ft. 	32 	32 	32 	32 	12 
Monument max. height 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Monument setback 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Pole style max. height 	13' 	13' 	13' 	13' 	Prohibited 
Pole style setback 	15' 	15' 	15' 	15' 	Prohibited 
Pole style clearance 	8' 	8' 	8' 	8' 	Prohibited 
Projecting sign max. area 	8' 	8' 	8' 	8' 	8' 
Projecting sign max. distance 	4' 	4' 	4' 	4' 	4' 
Rotating sign max. area 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 	2.5 sq. ft. 	Prohibited 	Prohibited 
 
1 The larger value of the two listed applies when a building is located on a lot such that there is no parking or other vehicular use area between the building façade and the street right-of-way or between the building façade and a public pedestrian right-of-way adjacent to a street. 
1.  A comprehensive sign plan pursuant to section 38.560.080 must be approved prior to installation of signage for all commercial centers or buildings consisting of two or more tenant spaces on a lot and must comply with section 38.560.080. 
2.  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign may be permitted per zoned lot as defined in section 38.700.070 of this chapter. Signage area used for freestanding signs is counted towards the maximum allowed signage area. 
3.  Wall signs. 
a.  Regardless of the allowance for additional area, the maximum area may not exceed the amount allowed for the district. 
b.  Lots fronting on two or more streets may be allowed signage area for each building frontage. 
c.  Canopy, window and awning signs are considered wall signs. Wall signs may not project above the top of a wall or parapet. 
4.  Projecting signs. One projecting sign per tenant may be permitted, unless otherwise approved through a comprehensive sign plan. Projecting signs must provide a minimum sidewalk clearance of eight feet. 
a.  A rotating sign located within the building does not need to provide the minimum sidewalk clearance height. A rotating sign exceeding a rotational speed of one full rotation in two seconds are prohibited. 
5.  Ghost signs as defined in division 38.700 do not apply toward the maximum square foot signage areas of Table 38.560.060. 
B.  Residential zones (R-S, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RMH, R-O, REMU). The following on-premises signs may be permitted in the indicated zones with an approved sign permit: 
1.  Subdivision and residential complex signs. For residential subdivisions consisting of more than four residential lots and for residential complexes with more than four dwellings and more than one building, one low profile, freestanding, sign per development entrance may be permitted. No sign may exceed 16 square feet in area or five feet in height from the finished grade. The sign must be set back at least five feet from the property line. 
2.  Residential building signs. For properties used for multi-household residential, one wall sign per street frontage may be permitted. No sign may exceed eight square feet in area. 
3.  Signs appurtenant to residential principal, special and conditional uses, and home occupations. 
a.  Signs not to exceed four square feet in total area may be permitted for principal residential uses and permitted home occupations; however, such signs may not be located in any required setback area. In addition, home occupations may be permitted a single one-square foot sign on a mailbox or lamppost or one and one-half square feet of freestanding signage located a minimum of five feet from the property line. 
b.  Principal residential uses may be permitted non-commercial signs if such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in total area nor five feet in height. Such signs must be set back at least five feet from the property line. 
c.  Permitted non-residential type uses, such as churches, community centers, veterinary uses, golf courses, day care centers and schools may be permitted signage as if the underlying zoning were B-1. 
d.  Permitted conditional and special residential type uses such as homes used as bed and breakfasts and fraternity and sorority houses may be permitted signage as if the underlying zoning were R-O. Such signs may be illuminated only during the hours of operation. 
4.  Planned unit developments. Commercial establishments within planned unit developments where the underlying zoning is residential may be permitted signage as if the lot were in a B-1 zone. 
C.  Special districts and zones. The provisions of this division 38.560 apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise addressed below: 
1.  Neighborhood conservation overlay district. Within this district, prior to the installation of a sign, the city must approve a certificate of appropriateness for all non-temporary signage after review for compliance with the design guidelines for the neighborhood conservation overlay district. 
2.  Downtown business district. Permits for signs in the downtown business district as defined in section 34.05.020.A that encroach into the public right-of-way must be obtained in accordance with chapter 34, article 5 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 5, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.560.070. - Wayfinding signage. 
A.  Purpose. Wayfinding signs serve to assist travelers in navigating the larger community and identifying defined districts. Wayfinding signs or kiosks are not intended to serve as off-premises advertising for individual entities. 
B.  Defined districts. To qualify as a district an area must have a significant commonality of purpose and identity, and shared functions serving the larger community. Designation as a district is at the discretion of the city and will only be granted when found to be consistent with the intent of this division 38.560 and the city's other adopted regulations, policies and plans. Approval of district designation is the duty of the review authority, who must make written findings of the decision. 
C.  Wayfinding signage is intended to add to the district's "sense of place" and may include district identification signs, directory signs to designate shared or common spaces such as parking facilities, parks, trails and open space. It may also include pedestrian-scale informational kiosks to announce district events and/or to list a directory that corresponds with a map presented in the kiosk. Wayfinding signs may not advertise specific businesses or otherwise constitute off-premises signs. Wayfinding signage is permitted within districts only after approval of a comprehensive wayfinding signage plan. 
D.  Submittal of a comprehensive signage plan for wayfinding must be made by a single individual or entity legally authorized to represent the area within the plan and with the consent of the relevant governing authority. In addition to the requirements of section 38.560.180, a comprehensive signage plan for wayfinding must: 
1.  Include a description of the installation and maintenance program for the signs including, but not limited to: who is responsible for installation and maintenance; identified reliable funding for installation and maintenance; contact plan for the responsible individual; and a description of how the sign program will be kept updated or removed. If the signs are to be illuminated, a description of how the power source may be removed and made safe must be included. 
2.  Demonstrate how it will enhance the streetscape by promoting a unified and enhanced visual aesthetic consistent with the streetscape design elements in the district; coordinate information for pedestrians and drivers in a clear, consistent, and understandable format, and reduce visual clutter. 
3.  Include information on how the district stakeholders were given opportunity to collaboratively participate in the selection of the sign types and designs. 
4.  Clearly describe the hierarchy of signs and include the criteria for determining sign placement and size. Any signs intended to be read from the right-of-way must comply with the lettering standards of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices for the road type and speed. 
5.  Include signage elevations and plans with corresponding map, designating sign types and locations. 
E.  Design standards. The wayfinding signs must include and meet the following standards and provisions: 
1.  Color schemes, fonts and materials. Coordinated color schemes, fonts and materials, including base supports, cabinet details and mounting methods, must serve to distinguish wayfinding signage within the district from other districts. 
2.  Lighting. Lighting is not required. If any lighting is proposed, the wayfinding signage plan must include cut-sheets and lighting details in accordance with the standards established in division 38.570. 
a.  Photovoltaic panels to provide power, where appropriate, are encouraged. 
3.  Size and location. Signage may be located within required setbacks and may be located within the right-of-way, with approval from the applicable review agencies including the city and/or the state department of transportation. Restrictions for signs within the public right-of-way may be more strict than those on private property in order to avoid conflict or confusion with official regulatory and warning signs or interference with travel. 
4.  Wayfinding signs must comply with the following standards: 
a.  Wayfinding signs that are affixed to a light post, traffic post or sign within the right-of-way may not exceed four square feet in area and are limited to one sign per block face (or equivalent). 
b.  Any signs intended to be located within the right-of-way must comply with the construction standards of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
c.  Freestanding wayfinding kiosks or signs are limited to one sign per two blocks (or equivalent), may not exceed 30 square feet in area per face and may not exceed seven feet in height. 
d.  Wayfinding signage may be located within the street-vision triangle at intersections controlled by a traffic light. 
e.  Decorative features including but not limited to post caps may extend an additional two feet for a total of nine feet in height. 
f.  Photovoltaic panels are exempt from the height requirement. 
g.  Business names, logos, or other marks identifying specific parties may be on a directory list or map in a kiosk but may not exceed one inch in height. 
h.  Wayfinding signage may not interfere with the clear passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or otherwise cause safety hazards. 
i.  Wayfinding signs may not obscure or obstruct any existing regulatory, warning, or parking control signs. 
5.  Wayfinding signs are allowed for parks, or for districts containing more than 30 acres of platted lots. 
6.  A performance bond or other surety acceptable to the city may be required for the maintenance, replacement, updating, and/or removal of signs in an amount acceptable to the city.  
Sec. 38.560.080. - Comprehensive sign plan. 
A.  A comprehensive sign plan must be submitted for all commercial, office, industrial and civic uses consisting of two or more tenant or occupant spaces on a lot, or two or more lots subject to a common development permit or plan. A comprehensive sign plan will not be approved unless it is consistent with this division 38.560, the underlying zoning regulations applicable to the property and any discretionary development permit or plan for the property. The plan should include the size and location of buildings and the size and location of existing and proposed signs. The purpose of the plan is to coordinate graphics and signs with building design. The coordination must be achieved by: 
1.  Using the same type of cabinet supports or method of mounting for signs of the same type; using the same type of construction for components, such as sign copy, cabinet and supports; or using other integrating techniques, such as common color elements, determined appropriate by the review authority. 
2.  Using the same form of illumination for all signs, or using varied forms of illuminations determined compatible by the review authority.  
Sec. 38.560.090. - Multi-tenant complexes with less than 100,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
A.  The guidelines for the underlying zoning districts apply unless otherwise addressed in this section: 
1.  The maximum permitted wall sign area allowed for each tenant space is the percentage of the total floor area on the zoned lot that the tenant occupies multiplied by the wall area allowed by section 38.560.060.A.2 or section 38.560.060.B.2, unless otherwise allocated in an approved comprehensive sign plan per section 38.28.070. If the lot has more than one building frontage, the individual tenant space may derive sign area only from the frontage(s) which the space faces. Lots under this section are allowed a low profile sign that identifies the complex, which conforms to this division 38.560, in addition to the sign area already permitted under section 38.560.060.A.2 or section 38.560.060.B.2.  
Sec. 38.560.100. - Multi-tenant complexes with more than 100,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
A.  The guidelines for the underlying zoning districts apply unless otherwise addressed in this section: 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Pole-style signs. One pole-style sign per street frontage not to exceed 48 square feet in area or 16 feet in height is permitted. The signage area computed for a pole-style sign may not be subtracted from the maximum allowable wall signage permitted for the entire complex. 
b.  Low profile signs. One low profile sign is permitted at each secondary entrance of the complex, provided each sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area, nor five feet in height, and is set back a minimum of five feet from the property lines. All low profile signs may only identify the complex and must display the street number address in figures which are at least six inches high. Low profile signs complying with these regulations will not be factored when calculating the maximum permitted wall sign area. 
2.  Wall signs. Each tenant is permitted wall signage square footage calculated from 1.5 times the linear store frontage. For the maximum allowable total signage, please see section 38.560.060.1 or 2.  
Sec. 38.560.110. - Indoor shopping mall complexes with more than 100,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
A.  The guidelines for the underlying zoning districts apply unless otherwise addressed in this section: 
1.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Pole-style signs. One pole-style sign per street frontage not to exceed 48 square feet in area or 16 feet in height is permitted. The signage area computed for a pole-style sign may not be subtracted from the maximum allowable wall signage permitted for the entire complex. 
b.  Low profile signs. One low profile sign is permitted at each secondary entrance of the complex, provided each sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area, nor five feet in height, and is set back a minimum of five feet from the property lines. All low profile signs may only identify the complex and must display the street number address in figures which are at least six inches high. Low profile signs complying with these regulations will not be factored when calculating the maximum permitted wall sign area. 
2.  Wall signs. Each anchor tenant occupying 20,000 square feet or more is permitted 300 square feet of wall signage. Each tenant with an exclusive outdoor customer entrance is permitted wall signage square footage calculated from five percent of the ground floor area.  
Sec. 38.560.120. - Illumination. 
A.  Illumination, if any, must be provided by artificial light which is constant in intensity and color. Internally illuminated "can signs" are acceptable provided background and copy are coordinated to avoid excessive light output. Neon and other gas type transformers are limited to 60 milliamperes and fluorescent transformers are limited to 800 milliamperes to soften light output. The output of lumens from lighting provided by other types of light emitters may not exceed that emanating from gas type transformers as regulated in this subsection A. Additionally, neon and other gas type signs with exposed tubing must be equipped with dimmers. 
B.  Externally illuminated, wall-mounted, and pole signs must be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of the sign and aimed downward; ground-mounted sign lighting must only be used for monument style signs. Fixtures used to illuminate signs must be aimed so as not to project their output beyond the sign.  
Sec. 38.560.130. - Street vision triangles. 
Signs may not be placed in sight vision triangles as they are established in section 38.400.100, unless specifically authorized in this division 38.560.  
Sec. 38.560.140. - Required address signs. 
Street numbers are required for all residential, commercial, industrial, and civic uses in all zones. All building numbering must comply with article 7 of chapter 10.  
Sec. 38.560.150. - Billboards and other off-premises advertising. 
A.  Off-premises commercial advertising signs are not permitted within the city limits except as permitted by state or federal law. 
1.  Exception: 
a.  Transit shelters: Off-premises signs may be placed on the interior of transit shelters reviewed and approved by the city and served by an active fixed route transit service. Signage within a transit shelter may not distract drivers of vehicles nor be legible from the driving lanes. 
b.  Ghost signs: Ghost signs are not considered to be off-premises signage.  
Sec. 38.560.160. - Signs erected in conjunction with nonprofit activities on public property. 
A.  Signs erected on public property by or on behalf of nonprofit organizations are allowed only with the prior consent of the director of the department of the city or other government agency responsible for the property only as follows: 
1.  The sign may be permitted only on structures in public parks or other publicly owned lands. 
2.  The sign may be erected two weeks prior to the commencement of the activity and must be removed within two weeks after the cessation of the activity for which the sign was erected. 
3.  Each individual sign may be no larger than 32 square feet. Freestanding signs must be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the property line and have a maximum height of five feet. Signs attached to walls or scoreboards are not subject to the five foot height limitation. However, signs attached to walls or scoreboards may not exceed the height of the wall or scoreboard to which they are attached. All signs must be oriented towards spectators attending the activity. 
4.  The sign may not: 
a.  Be individually illuminated; nor 
b.  Be placed in sight vision triangles or otherwise impede or obstruct the view of the traveling public. 
5.  Applicants for such signs must apply for, and have approved, a temporary sign permit detailing the physical characteristics of the sign to be erected and the duration of the activity or date of the event. Applications and review procedures must be made per section 38.560.180. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 6, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.560.170. - Historic or culturally significant signs. 
Signs which have historical or cultural significance to the city but do not conform to the provisions of this division 38.560 may be permitted, provided that the city commission adopts findings supporting the historical or cultural significance of the sign and issues a sign permit. Such findings must be adopted by resolution.  
Sec. 38.560.180. - Application. 
A.  An application for a sign must be made on forms provided by the community development department. The application must contain sufficient information and plans to permit review pursuant to this division 38.560 including, but not limited to, building elevations; photographs; proposed locations of signs on building elevations; sign design layout showing number, types and dimensions of all signs; and a site plan showing proposed location of all signs. 
B.  Acceptability and adequacy of application. 
1.  The community development department must review the application for acceptability within five working days to determine that the application does not omit any of the submittal elements required by this chapter. If the application does not contain all of the required elements, the application and a written explanation of what the application is missing must be returned to the property owner or their representative. The five-working-day review period will be considered met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the five-day review period. 
2.  After the application is deemed to contain the required elements and to be acceptable, it will be reviewed for adequacy. A determination of adequacy means the application contains all of the required elements in sufficient detail and accuracy to enable the city to make a determination that the application either does or does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable regulations under the jurisdiction of the city. Determination of adequacy will be made by the community development department. The adequacy review period begins on the next working day after the date that the community development department determines the application contains all the required elements and must be completed within not more than 15-working-days. The 15-working-day review period will be considered met if the letter is dated, signed and placed in the outgoing mail within the 15 working day review period. If the application is inadequate, a written explanation of why the application is inadequate will be returned to the property owner or their representative. Upon a determination of adequacy the review of the development will be scheduled. 
a.  In the event the missing information is not received by the city within 15 working days of notification to the property owner of inadequacy, all application materials will be returned to the property owner or their representative. Subsequent resubmittal will require payment of a review fee as if it were a new application. 
b.  A determination that an application is adequate does not restrict the city from requesting additional information during the review process. 
3.  Should the property owner choose not to provide the required information after an application has been found unacceptable, nor to accept return of the application, the application may be processed by the city with the recognition by the property owner that unacceptability is an adequate basis for denial of the application regardless of other merits of the application. 
4.  Action. 
a.  After an application is deemed adequate, the review authority must act to approve or deny the application within ten working days; or 
b.  After the application is determined to be adequate for review, if the application includes a request for a deviation or variance the city will schedule the application to be considered by the review authority at the next available opportunity that allows for required public notice to be given; or 
c.  If the sign application is submitted in conjunction with a site plan or other similar review, then the review process and final review authority must be coordinated. 
5.  An applicant may appeal the denial of a permit request pursuant to the provisions of division 38.250 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.560.190. - Maintenance of permitted signs. 
A.  All signs must be continuously maintained in a state of security, safety and repair. Abandoned signs and sign support structures must be removed. If any sign is found not to be so maintained, or is in need of repair or has been abandoned, the owner and the occupant of the premises must repair or remove the sign within 14 calendar days after receiving written notice to do so from the city. If the sign is not so repaired or removed within such time, the city may cause the sign to be removed at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
1.  Exceptions: Ghost signs are not required to be maintained or preserved, nor are they required to be removed, unless the City determines such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.  
Sec. 38.560.200. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  The intent of this section is to eliminate existing signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this division 38.560. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided within this section, the owner of any zone lot or other premises on which a sign exists that does not conform with the requirements of this division 38.560 and for which there is no prior, valid sign permit must remove such sign. 
C.  All signs which were legally permitted prior to June 22, 1997 are considered legal, permitted signs under this division 38.560. Except as provided for in subsection D of this section, such signs, if nonconforming with this division 38.560, must not be: 
1.  Replaced, except with a conforming sign; 
2.  Changed in copy (except for signs specifically designed to be changed in copy, such as reader boards with changeable letters); 
3.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; or 
4.  Expanded, moved or relocated except as allowed below. 
D.  No legal, nonconforming sign may be altered or enlarged in any way which increases its nonconformity, but any existing signage, or portions thereof, may be altered by decreasing its nonconformity. 
E.  Any lot with a nonconforming sign may not add, relocate, or replace signage, except as provided below, until all signs on the lot are brought into conformance with this division 38.560. The exceptions listed below do not apply to off-premises signs. 
1.  Any site modification reviewed only as a permit type described in section 38.230.060, 38.230.070, 38.230.080, 38.230.150, or 38.230.160. 
2.  A sign legally permitted prior to June 22, 1997 which must be relocated due to a physical alteration to or expansion of a public right-of-way.  
Sec. 38.560.210. - Substitution. 
Any sign allowed under this division 38.560 may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful non-commercial message, so long as the sign complies with the size, height, area and other requirements of this division 38.560. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 7, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.560.220. - Severability. 
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section or other part of this division 38.560 is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction by express inclusion in the decision to be invalid, such judgment will affect only that part held invalid and such decision will not affect, impair or nullify this chapter as a whole or any other part thereof.  
DIVISION 38.570. - LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 38.570.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Provide lighting in outdoor public places where public health, safety and welfare are potential concerns; 
B.  Protect drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians from the glare of non-vehicular light sources that shine into their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; 
C.  Protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and stray light from poorly aimed, placed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources; 
D.  Protect and maintain the character of the city; 
E.  Prevent excessive lighting and conserve energy; and 
F.  Provide adequate lighting for safe pedestrian and bicycle travel.  
Sec. 38.570.020. - General. 
A.  With the exception of street lighting, lighting is not required. If installed, all lighting must comply with the requirements of this section. 
B.  Unless otherwise approved through a planned unit development, this section applies to all lighting for subdivisions, land uses, developments and buildings. In addition, any site modification that requires a certificate of appropriateness, site plan review or reuse application will necessitate compliance for all existing and proposed lighting on the site. 
C.  The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed herein, provided any such alternate has been approved by the review authority. Prior to approval the review authority must make findings that: 
1.  The lighting provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this section; and 
2.  The lighting is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this section.  
Sec. 38.570.030. - Street lighting. 
Street lighting consists of street lighting and pathway intersection lighting, and must comply with the City of Bozeman Design Standards and Specifications Policy.  
Sec. 38.570.040. - Site lighting. 
A.  Parking lot lighting. 
Table 38.570.040-1 
	Basic 1 	Security 2 
Minimum horizontal illuminance in maintained footcandles 	0.2 	0.5 
Minimum vertical illuminance in maintained footcandles 	0.1 	0.25 
Uniformity ratio, maximum: minimum 	20:01 	15:00 
 
Source: Parking Lot Lighting, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 1998. 
1 Basic lighting provides for the safety of customers and employees during business hours, and for the security of on-site, outside storage of goods and/or materials. 
2 Security lighting provides for the safety of employees during nonbusiness hours, and for the security of on-site, outside storage of goods and/or materials. 
B.  Building entrances. Illuminance for building entrances (including commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal) must average 5.0 maintained footcandles. 
C.  Car dealership lighting. 
Table 38.570.040-2 
Area 	Maximum Illuminance on Pavement (in Maintained Footcandles) 	Uniformity Ratio 
Maximum: minimum 
Main business districts 
	Adjacent to roadway 	10—20 	5:01 
	Other rows 	5—10 	10:01 
	Entrances 	5—10 	5:01 
	Drive aisles 	2—3 	10:01 
Secondary business districts 
	Adjacent to roadway 	5—10 	5:01 
	Other rows 	2.5—5 	10:01 
	Entrances 	2.5—5 	5:01 
	Drive aisles 	1—2 	10:01 
 
Source: Lighting for Exterior Environments, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 1998. 
D.  Service station or gas pump area lighting. 
Table 38.570.040-3 
Area Description 	Average Illuminance on Described Area (in Maintained Footcandles) 
Approach with dark surroundings 	1.5 
Driveway with dark surroundings 	1.5 
Pump island area with dark surroundings 	5 
Building façades with dark surroundings 	2 
Service areas with dark surroundings 	2 
Landscape highlights with dark surroundings 	1 
Approach with light surroundings 	2 
Driveway with light surroundings 	2 
Pump island area with light surroundings 	10 
Building façades with light surroundings 	3 
Service areas with light surroundings 	3 
Landscape highlights with light surroundings 	2 
 
Source: Lighting for Exterior Environments, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 1998. 
E.  Site lighting support structures. The ballasts; pole type, strength and anchor bolts; and pole foundation must be appropriate for the proposed lighting and must be installed per the manufacturer's recommendations. Height must be measured from grade. Except as allowed in sections 38.570.050 and 38.570.070 of this division, light poles for parking lot lighting may not exceed 25 feet. 
F.  Site lighting installation and maintenance. 
1.  For new installations, electrical feeds for fixtures mounted on poles must be run underground, not overhead. 
2.  Poles supporting lighting fixtures for the illumination of parking areas and located directly behind parking spaces must be placed a minimum of five feet outside the paved area or on concrete pedestals at least 30 inches high above the pavement, or suitably protected by other approved means. 
3.  Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment must be maintained so as always to meet the requirements of this section. 
G.  Miscellaneous site lighting specifications. Except as otherwise allowed in subsections E and G of this section, all lighting must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this section, must be aimed, located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property. 
2.  All outdoor lighting fixtures must be shielded in such a manner that no light is emitted above a horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the light emitting element, so that direct light emitted above the horizontal plane is eliminated. 
3.  Except for residential lighting, street lighting, pathway intersection lighting and security lighting, all lighting must be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Exceptions will be granted to those businesses which operate during these hours; such lighting may remain illuminated only while the establishment is actually open for business. 
4.  Vegetation screens may not serve as the primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control must be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement. 
5.  All outdoor lighting must be designed and located such that the maximum illumination measured in footcandles at the property line may not exceed 0.3 onto adjacent residential properties and 1.0 onto adjacent commercial properties and public rights-of-way. 
6.  Externally illuminated wall-mounted and pole signs must be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of the sign and aimed downward; ground-mounted sign lighting may be used only for monument style signs. Fixtures used to illuminate signs must be aimed so as not to project their output beyond the sign. 
7.  Floodlights, spotlights or any other similar lighting may not be used to illuminate buildings or other site features unless approved as an integral architectural element on the development plan. On-site lighting may be used to accent architectural elements but not to illuminate entire portions of buildings. Where accent lighting is used, the maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface may not exceed 5.0 average maintained footcandles. Building façade and accent lighting will not be approved unless the light fixtures are carefully selected, located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building façade and spillover light is eliminated. 
(1)  Directional fixtures used to illuminate flagpoles (state, United States and/or foreign nations) may project their output beyond the flagpole. 
8.  Lights that flash, move, revolve, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation are prohibited. 
9.  Translucent awnings and canopies used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., may not be internally lit (i.e., from underneath or behind). 
10.  Searchlights, laser source lights or any similar high-intensity light are not permitted, except in emergencies by police and fire personnel or at their direction, for meteorological data gathering purposes, or for special events if a permit is obtained from the review authority.  
Sec. 38.570.050. - Sports and athletic field lighting. 
Lighting for sports and athletic fields may need to exceed illumination standards for general recreational needs in order to meet higher standards required for play. The city commission may approve relaxations of these lighting standards provided that the following minimum standards are met: 
A.  Fixtures must be at least 70 feet in mounted height measured from grade; 
B.  If floodlights are used, they must not be aimed above 62 degrees and should use internal louvers and external shields to help minimize light pollution; 
C.  Fixtures must be designed and aimed so that their beams fall within the primary playing area and the immediate surroundings, so that off-site direct illumination is significantly restricted (spillover levels at the property line must not exceed 0.3 footcandles); and 
D.  Lighting must be extinguished no later than one hour after the event ends.  
Sec. 38.570.060. - Lighting specifications for all lighting. 
Light fixtures and standards must be compatible with the surrounding area, the subdivision or site design, and the development's character and/or architecture. 
A.  Luminaires (light fixtures). Except as otherwise allowed in 38.570.050 and 38.570.070, all luminaires must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  In all light fixtures, the light source and associated lenses may not protrude below the edge of the light fixture, and may not be visible from adjacent streets or properties. 
2.  Fixtures must be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting application. 
3.  For lighting horizontal areas such as roadways, sidewalks, entrances and parking areas, fixtures must meet IESNA "full-cutoff" criteria (no light output emitted above 90 degrees at any lateral angle around the fixture). 
4.  As needed, fixtures must be equipped with or be modified to incorporate light directing and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, internal louvers or hoods to redirect offending light distribution and/or reduce direct or indirect glare.  
Sec. 38.570.070. - Historic lighting. 
The city may relax lighting standards and requirements, with the exception of illumination levels, for the provision of historic lighting in the neighborhood conservation overlay district. Historic lights must be proposed as an integrated part of an overall development plan. The historic preservation planner will review and approve the proposed lighting for historic appropriateness.  
Sec. 38.570.080. - Post installation inspection. 
The city reserves the right to conduct post-installation nighttime inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and if appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to the city.  
Sec. 38.570.090. - Compliance monitoring. 
If the city finds that a lighting installation creates a safety or personal security hazard, the person responsible for the lighting will be notified in writing and required to take remedial action within 30 days.  
Sec. 38.570.100. - Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels. 
When the city finds that a lighting installation produces unacceptable levels of nuisance glare, skyward light, excessive or insufficient illumination levels, or otherwise varies from this section, the city may notify the person responsible for the lighting and require appropriate remedial action within 30 days.  
Sec. 38.570.110. - Nonconforming lighting. 
Nonconforming lights can only be replaced with conforming lights. Site plans, conditional use permits, and special use permits require lighting to become compliant. The city may require nonconforming lights to be replaced with modifications/reuse applications. 
 
Figure 38.570.010. 
Lighting. 
  
ARTICLE 6. - NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
DIVISION 38.600. - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Floodplain and floodway management, MCA 76-5-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38.600.010. - Title. 
These regulations are known and may be cited as the city floodplain regulations. This division 38.600 is in accordance with the authority of the laws of the state exercised by the city, and other authority as may be possessed by the city.  
Sec. 38.600.020. - Purpose. 
A.  This chapter has established regulations to prohibit development within floodplains in order to protect public health and safety, safeguard water quality, provide for wildlife habitat and accomplish other public purposes. However, there are certain limited circumstances where development within the floodplain either currently exists or may be permitted from time to time to advance a public purpose. This division 38.600 provides standards which must be met in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to minimize flood losses in areas subject to flood hazards, and to promote wise use of the floodplain when those limited circumstances occur. This division 38.600 has been established with the following purposes: 
1.  To guide development of the 100-year floodplain within the city limits consistent with the enumerated findings by: 
a.  Establishing zoning regulations coincident with and applicable to those areas at risk of flooding with special requirements and regulations to protect the public welfare; 
b.  Recognizing the right and need of watercourses to periodically carry more than the normal flow of water; 
c.  Participating in coordinated efforts of federal, state and local management activities for 100-year floodplains; 
d.  Ensuring the regulations and minimum standards adopted, insofar as possible, balance the greatest public good with the least private injury; and 
e.  Carrying out the provisions of this division 38.600 in a fashion consistent with the remainder of this chapter and the public policies set forth in the city's growth policy consistent with the authority of title 76, chapter 5, part 3 (MCA 76-5-301 et seq.). 
2.  Specifically, it is the purpose of this division 38.600 to: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety and property in times of flood, or that cause increased flood heights and velocities; 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Identify lands unsuitable for certain development purposes because of flood hazards; 
d.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
e.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is within a 100-year floodplain and subject to the provisions of these regulations; 
f.  Ensure that those who occupy 100-year floodplains assume responsibility for their actions; and 
g.  Protect water quality and persons and property located downstream.  
Sec. 38.600.030. - Jurisdictional area. 
This division 38.600 applies to all lands within the boundaries of the city, shown on the official floodplain maps, including any amendments or revisions, as being located within a 100-year floodplain district or that may otherwise be identified as lying within a 100-year floodplain through additional floodplain delineation, engineering analysis, topographic survey, or other objective and factual basis.  
Sec. 38.600.040. - Floodplain regulation establishment and applicability. 
These floodplain regulations are hereby established and are applicable in all areas defined by the base flood elevations and 100-year floodplains as delineated in the flood insurance study, or other means specified in section 38.600.030. The basis for the flood insurance study is a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood Insurance Study of Gallatin County, Montana, and Incorporated Areas," dated September 2, 2011 (FEMA FIS No. 30031CV000A), with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary/floodway maps. The official floodplain maps, together with the flood insurance study are on file in the office of the city floodplain administrator. The floodplain regulations are hereby established in all areas subject to flooding. Depiction on the official zoning map of the city is not required for this district.  
Sec. 38.600.050. - Abrogation and greater responsibility. 
It is not intended by this division 38.600 to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or underlying zoning. However, where this division 38.600 imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this division 38.600 prevail.  
Sec. 38.600.060. - Floodplain administrator. 
The city floodplain administrator is designated in 38.200.010. The responsibilities of this position are outlined in 38.600.130.  
Sec. 38.600.070. - Regulation interpretation. 
The interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations are considered minimum requirements and liberally construed in favor of the governing body and not deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute or self-government status.  
Sec. 38.600.080. - Compliance with regulations. 
No structure or land use may be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, these specific regulations, and other applicable regulations. These regulations meet or exceed the minimum floodplain development requirements as set forth by the state department of natural resources and conservation and the National Flood Insurance Program.  
Sec. 38.600.090. - Flood hazard evaluation. 
A.  General. Land subject to being flooded by a flood of 100-year frequency as defined by title 76, chapter 5, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-5-101 et seq.), or land deemed to be subject to flooding by the city, may not be subdivided or developed for building or residential purposes, or other uses that may increase or aggravate flood hazards to life, health or welfare, or that may be prohibited by state or local floodplain or floodway regulations. 
B.  Requirement for study. 
1.  If any portion of a proposed subdivision or other development is: 
a.  Within 1,000 horizontal feet and less than ten vertical feet of a watercourse draining an area of 25 square miles or more; and 
b.  No official floodplain or floodway delineation study of the watercourse has been made; then 
c.  The subdivider or other developer must provide a floodplain analysis report establishing the calculated 100-year frequency water surface elevations and 100-year floodplain boundaries. The analysis and report must be prepared by a licensed professional engineer qualified in this field of work. 
2.  If any portion of a proposed subdivision or other development is: 
a.  Within 1,000 horizontal feet and less than ten vertical feet of a watercourse draining an area less than 25 square miles; and 
b.  No official floodplain or floodway delineation study of the watercourse has been made; then 
c.  The subdivider or other developer must: 
(1)  Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineering department that the 100-year peak runoff of the watercourse will not affect the subdivision; or 
(2)  Delineate the existing and proposed 100-year flood limits of the stream or streams within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision and specify any mitigation that may be required to protect the proposed subdivision and adjacent properties from potential flooding and erosion damage due to any proposed changes within the delineated flood limits. 
d.  The developer's professional engineer, licensed in the state, must provide written certification to the city that the mapped flood locations and proposed mitigation must protect against damage by the 100-year flood. 
3.  Submission of report. The report must be submitted at the time of preliminary plat or plan application. The report may be submitted, upon the request of the city commission or development review committee, to the floodplain management section, water resources division, state department of natural resources and conservation, for review and concurrence. 
4.  Contents of report. The required report must include the following information: 
a.  Certification. Certification of the report by a registered professional engineer. 
b.  Overall plan view. An overall scaled plan view (project map) with identified scale for vertical and horizontal distance showing the following: 
(1)  Watercourse; 
(2)  Floodplain boundaries; 
(3)  Location of property; 
(4)  Contours; 
(5)  Cross sections; 
(6)  Bridges or other constrictions in the floodplain; and 
(7)  USGS gauging stations (if any). 
c.  Benchmark. The location and elevation of a temporary benchmark established within the subdivision and referenced to mean sea level with appropriate elevation adjustment. 
d.  Cross sectional information. 
(1)  Cross sections must follow the applicable guidelines established by the state department of natural resource conservation. If applicable guidelines are not available, cross section information must be as follows: 
(a)  Cross section elevations and stations should be determined at points representing significant breaks in ground slope and at changes in the hydraulic characteristics of the floodplain (e.g., points where ground cover, soil or rock conditions change). Elevations must be reported in NAVD88. 
(b)  Each cross section must cross the entire floodplain. The cross section alignment should be perpendicular to the general flow of the watercourse, the slope of the channel and the hydraulic characteristics of the reach. A minimum of four cross sections are required over the entire reach with at least two cross sections at the property where the elevations are desired. Additional cross sections must be taken at bridges, control structures or natural constrictions in topography. 
 
Figure 38.600.090. 
Section view of floodplain. 
 
(2)  Photogrammetric methods may be used in lieu of cross sections whenever appropriate and when reviewed and approved by the floodplain administrator. 
e.  Bridges. Descriptions and sketches of all bridges within the reach, showing unobstructed waterway openings and elevations. 
f.  Water surface. Elevations of the water surface determined by survey as part of each valley cross section. 
g.  Supporting documentation. Engineering report of computer computations, calculations and assumptions that may include: 
(1)  Hydrology (research of published hydrology or calculations showing how hydrology was derived); 
(2)  Input files (hard copy and on diskette or CD-ROM); and 
(3)  Output files (hard copy and on diskettes or CD-ROM). 
C.  Waiver of requirement. The floodplain administrator may waive this requirement where the subdivider contacts the water resources division, state department of natural resources and conservation, and that agency states in writing that the data indicate that the proposed subdivision is not in the flood hazard area as defined in this division 38.600.  
Sec. 38.600.100. - Rules for interpretation of floodplain district boundaries. 
The boundaries of the 100-year floodway must be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain maps and using the floodway data table contained in the flood insurance study report. The maps may be used as a guide for determining the 100-year floodplain boundary, but the exact location of the floodplain boundary must be determined where the base flood elevation intersects the natural ground. The floodplain administrator may require an on-site survey and staking of the floodplain boundary prior to issuance of any permit or any development undertaken following issuance of a permit.  
Sec. 38.600.110. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
This division 38.600 does not imply that areas outside the delineated floodplain boundaries or permitted land uses will always be totally free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations do not create a liability or cause of action against the city or any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that may result from reliance upon these regulations.  
Sec. 38.600.120. - Disclosure provision. 
All owners of property in an identified 100-year floodplain as indicated on the official floodplain maps must notify potential buyers or their agents that such property is subject to the provisions of this division 38.600.  
Sec. 38.600.130. - Administration of regulations. 
A.  As provided in section 38.200.010, the city floodplain administrator has been designated by the city commission, and has the responsibility of such position as outlined in this division 38.600. 
B.  Section 38.410.100 has established a public policy to avoid development within floodplains, along with certain exceptions. The administration of these regulations must be done in a fashion consistent with both the letter and spirit of that section. 
C.  The city floodplain administrator is appointed with the authority to review floodplain development permit applications, proposed uses and construction to determine compliance with these regulations. The city floodplain administrator is required to ensure all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal and state law and local codes, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, 33 USC 1334, and under the provisions of the Natural Streambed and Land Preservation Act. 
1.  Additional factors. Floodplain development permits will be granted or denied by the city floodplain administrator on the basis of whether the proposed establishment, alteration or substantial improvement of an artificial obstruction meets the requirements of this division 38.600 and other requirements of this chapter. Additional factors that will be considered for every permit application are: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights, increased floodwater velocities or alterations in the pattern of flood flow caused by encroachments; 
b.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 
d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual owner; 
e.  The importance of the services provided by the facility to the community; 
f.  The requirement of the facility for a waterfront location; 
g.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 
h.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and anticipated development in the foreseeable future; 
i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the growth policy and floodplain management program for the area; 
j.  The safety of access to property in times of flooding or for ordinary and emergency services; and 
k.  Such other factors as are in harmony with the purposes of this chapter, these regulations, the Montana Floodplain and Floodway Management Act and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
D.  A floodplain development permit application is considered to have been automatically granted 60 days must be reviewed and acted upon within 180 working days after the date of receipt of the complete application by the city floodplain administrator. Unless the applicant has been notified that the permit is denied, conditionally approved or If additional information pertinent to the permit review process is required the time for review must stop and restart with submittal of the additional information. A floodplain permit must not act as a waiver or variance from the other requirements of this chapter. 
E.  The city floodplain administrator must adopt such administrative procedures as may be necessary to efficiently administer the provision of these regulations. 
F.  The city floodplain administrator must maintain such files and records as may be necessary to document nonconforming uses, base flood elevations, floodproofing and elevation certifications, fee receipts, the issuance of permits, agenda, minutes, records of public meetings, and any other matters related to floodplain management in the city. Such files and records must be open for public inspection. In matters of litigation, the city attorney may restrict access to specific records. 
G.  The city floodplain administrator may require whatever additional information is necessary to determine whether the proposed activity meets the requirements of these regulations. Additional information may include hydraulic calculations assessing the impact on base flood elevations or velocities, level survey or certification by a registered land surveyor, professional engineer or licensed architect that the requirements of these regulations are satisfied. 
H.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit or a variance, the city floodplain administrator must prepare a notice according to the requirements of division 38.220 of this chapter. 
I.  Copies of all permits granted must be sent to the state department of natural resources and conservation in Helena, Montana. 
1.  In riverine situations, notifications by the city floodplain administrator must be made to adjacent communities, the floodplain management section (DNRC) and FEMA prior to any alteration or relocation of a stream. The flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any stream must be maintained. Erosion control measures must be incorporated to ensure stability of altered channels and stream banks.  
Sec. 38.600.140. - Permit applications. 
A.  Activities or uses that require the issuance of a permit, including the expansion or alteration of such uses, may not be initiated, established or undertaken until a permit has been issued by the city floodplain administrator. 
B.  Permit applicants must be required to furnish the following information as deemed necessary by the city floodplain administrator for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use: 
1.  Three sets of plans drawn to scale (including dimensions) showing the nature, location and elevation of the lot; existing and proposed structure locations; fill, storage or materials site; floodproofing measures; mean sea level elevation of first floor of proposed structures; and location of the channel and limits of 100-year floodplain boundary; 
2.  A plan view of the proposed development indicating external dimensions of structures; street or road finished grade elevations; well locations; individual sewage treatment and disposal sites; excavation and/or fill quantity estimates; and site plan and/or construction plans; 
3.  Specifications for floodproofing, filling, excavating, grading, bank stabilization, storage of materials and location of utilities; 
4.  A professional engineer's or registered architect's design calculations and certification that the proposed activity has been designed to be in compliance with these regulations; 
5.  Certification of floodproofing and/or elevation must be provided on a standard form available from the city floodplain administrator; and 
6.  Adjoining owners. Names and addresses of record owners of lots and tracts immediately adjoining the proposed floodplain permit. 
C.  To determine that the permit specifications and conditions have been completed, applicants who have received permits must furnish the following at the time of an on-site conformance inspection: 
1.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor of the actual mean sea level elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new, altered or substantially improved buildings; 
2.  If floodproofing techniques were used for buildings, the mean sea level elevation to which the floodproofing was accomplished must be certified by a structural engineer or licensed architect in the same manner; 
3.  Certification is also required for artificial obstructions other than buildings, that the activity was accomplished in accordance with these regulations and the design plans submitted with the application for the permit activity. This certification may be waived by the city floodplain administrator if it can be clearly ascertained by a site inspection that the activity was accomplished in accordance with these regulations; and 
4.  Certification of floodproofing and/or elevation must be provided on a standard form available from the city floodplain administrator.  
Sec. 38.600.150. - Emergency waiver. 
A.  Emergency repair and replacement of severely damaged public transportation facilities, public water and sewer facilities, public utility electricity and natural gas distribution facilities, and flood control works may be authorized. Floodplain development permit requirements may be waived if: 
1.  Upon notification and prior to emergency repair and/or replacement, the city floodplain administrator determines that an emergency condition exists warranting immediate action; and 
2.  The city floodplain administrator agrees upon the nature and type of proposed emergency repair and/or replacement. 
B.  Authorization to undertake emergency repair and replacement work may be given verbally if the city floodplain administrator feels that such a written authorization would unduly delay the emergency works. Such verbal authorization must be followed by a written authorization describing the emergency condition, and the type of emergency work agreed upon and stating that a verbal authorization had been previously given.  
Sec. 38.600.160. - Review; variances; appeals. 
Appeals and variances from this division 38.600 may be taken as set forth in division 38.250 of this chapter. The city floodplain administrator must maintain records of the variance notification and actions, including justification for their issuance, and forward copies of all variance actions to the state department of natural resources and conservation and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  
Sec. 38.600.170. - Floodplain development; compliance. 
Any use, arrangement or construction not in compliance as authorized by permit, will be deemed a violation of this division 38.600 and punishable as provided in division 38.200 of this chapter. An applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, architect, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by the city floodplain administrator that finished fill and lowest building floor elevations, floodproofing, hydraulic design or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with these regulations.  
Sec. 38.600.180. - Emergency preparedness; planning. 
In formulating community development goals, the community must consider the development of a plan for evacuating users of all development located within floodprone areas. This plan should be developed, filed with, and approved by appropriate community emergency management authorities.  
Sec. 38.600.190. - Applications; specific standards. 
The minimum floodplain development standards listed in this division 38.600 apply to the floodway and floodway fringe portions of the 100-year floodplain as delineated on the flood hazard area maps or other flood hazard areas as may be determined by section 38.600.040.  
Sec. 38.600.200. - Floodway—Uses allowed without floodplain permits. 
A.  When a site specific exemption or relaxation of the standards of section 38.410.100 allow utilization of a portion of the floodplain, the following uses are allowed without a permit within the floodway, provided that such uses conform to the provisions of sections 38.600.350 through 38.600.390; are not prohibited by any other ordinance, resolution or statute; and do not require fill, excavation, permanent storage of materials, or equipment or structures other than portable structures: 
1.  Agricultural uses; 
2.  Accessory uses such as loading and parking areas associated with industrial and commercial facilities; 
3.  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat-launching ramps, parks, wildlife management and natural areas, fish hatcheries, fishing areas, and hiking or horseback riding trails; 
4.  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas; 
5.  Irrigation and livestock supply wells, provided that they are located at least 500 feet from domestic water supply wells; and 
6.  Fences, except permanent fences crossing channels.  
Sec. 38.600.210. - Floodway—Uses requiring floodplain permits. 
A.  When a site specific exemption or relaxation of the standards of section 38.410.100 allow utilization of a portion of the floodplain, the following artificial obstructions may be permitted in the floodway subject to the issuance of a permit by the city floodplain administrator: 
1.  Excavation of material from pits and pools provided that: 
a.  A buffer strip of undisturbed land is left between the edge of the channel and the edge of the excavation. This buffer strip must be of sufficient width to prevent flood flows from channeling into the excavation; 
b.  The excavation meets all applicable laws and regulations of other local and state agencies; and 
c.  Excavated material is disposed of or stockpiled outside the floodway; 
2.  Railroad, highway and street stream crossings provided the crossings are designed to offer minimal obstruction to flood flow. Stream crossings may not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than one-half foot nor cause a significant increase in flood velocities; 
3.  Limited filling for highway, street and railroad embankments not associated with stream crossings, provided that: 
a.  Reasonable alternate transportation routes outside the designated floodway are not available; and 
b.  Such floodway encroachment is located as far from the stream channel as possible and may not result in a cumulative increase in base flood elevations, after allowable encroachments into the floodway fringe, exceeding one-half foot; 
4.  Buried or suspended utility transmission lines, provided that: 
a.  Suspended utility transmission lines are designed so the lowest point of the suspended line is at least six feet higher than the base flood elevation; 
b.  Towers and other appurtenant structures are designed and placed to withstand and minimally obstruct flood flows; and 
c.  Utility transmission lines carrying toxic or flammable materials are buried to a depth of at least twice the calculated maximum depth of scour for a 100-year flood. The maximum depth of scour must be determined by hydraulic engineering methods acceptable to the city floodplain administrator; 
5.  Storage of materials and equipment, provided that: 
a.  The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by flooding and is properly anchored to prevent floatation or downstream movement; or 
b.  The material or equipment is readily movable within the limited time available after flood warning. Storage of flammable, toxic, hazardous or explosive materials is prohibited; 
6.  Domestic water supply wells, provided that: 
a.  They are driven or drilled wells located on ground higher than the surrounding ground to ensure positive drainage from the well; 
b.  Well casings are watertight to a distance of at least 25 feet below the ground surface; 
c.  Water supply and electrical lines have a watertight seal where the lines enter the casing; 
d.  All pumps, electrical lines and equipment are either submersible or adequately floodproofed; and 
e.  Check valves are installed on main water lines at wells and at all building entry locations; 
7.  Substantial improvements to any structure provided that the provisions of subsections C, D or E of section 38.600.260 are met. In the floodway, the structure must be floodproofed or elevated on a permanent foundation rather than on fill; and 
8.  All other artificial obstructions, substantial improvements or nonconforming uses not specifically listed or prohibited by these regulations.  
Sec. 38.600.220. - Same—Permits for flood control works. 
A.  It is desired that flood control be primarily accomplished by on-site stormwater management, protection of bank stabilizing vegetation, preserving an unobstructed floodplain and keeping development away from areas prone to flooding. In the event that adequate flood control cannot be achieved by these methods, flood control works are allowed within floodways subject to the issuance of a permit by the city floodplain administrator with the following conditions: 
1.  Levees and floodwalls are permitted if: 
a.  The proposed levee or floodwall is designed and construed to safely convey a 100-year flood; and 
b.  The cumulative effect of the levee or floodwall combined with allowable floodway fringe encroachments does not increase the unobstructed base flood elevation more than one-half foot. The city floodplain administrator may establish either a lower or higher permissible increase in the base flood elevation for individual levee projects only with concurrence from the state department of natural resources and conservation and the Federal Emergency Management Agency based upon consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)  The estimated cumulative effect of any anticipated future permissible uses; and 
(2)  The type and amount of existing floodprone development in the affected area; 
c.  The proposed levee or floodwall, except those to protect agricultural land, is constructed at least three feet higher than the base flood elevation; 
2.  Bank stabilization methods provided that: 
a.  When selecting a bank stabilization method, best management practices consistent with the intent of this chapter must be used; 
b.  The bank stabilization method is designed to withstand a 100-year flood; 
c.  The bank stabilization method does not increase the base flood elevation; and 
d.  The bank stabilization method will not increase erosion upstream, downstream or adjacent to the stabilization site; 
3.  Channelization projects if they do not significantly increase the magnitude, velocity or base flood elevation in the proximity of the project; 
4.  Dams provided that: 
a.  They are designed and constructed in accordance with the Montana Dam Safety Act and applicable safety standards; and 
b.  They will not increase flood hazards downstream, either through operational procedures or improper hydraulic design.  
Sec. 38.600.230. - Same—Permits for water diversions. 
A.  Permits for the establishment of a water diversion or change in place of diversion will not be issued if, in the judgment of the city floodplain administrator: 
1.  The proposed diversion will significantly increase the upstream base flood elevation to the detriment of neighboring property; 
2.  The proposed diversion is not designed and constructed to minimize potential erosion from a 100-year flood; and 
3.  Any permanent diversion structure crossing the full width of the stream channel is not designed and constructed to safely withstand a 100-year flood.  
Sec. 38.600.240. - Same—Prohibited uses. 
A.  The following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses are prohibited within the floodway: 
1.  New construction of any residential, commercial or industrial structure including manufactured homes; 
2.  Encroachments including fill, new construction, alterations, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in erosion of the embankment, obstruction of the natural flow of waters or increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the 100-year flood; 
3.  The construction or permanent storage of an object subject to floatation or movement during flooding; 
4.  Solid and hazardous waste disposal, sewage treatment and sewage disposal systems; 
5.  Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials; and 
6.  Alterations of structures unless it can be shown the alteration will not raise flood heights.  
Sec. 38.600.250. - Floodway fringe—Uses allowed without permits. 
All uses allowed in the floodway, according to the provisions of section 38.600.200 of these regulations, are also allowed without a permit in the floodway fringe.  
Sec. 38.600.260. - Same—Uses requiring permits. 
A.  When a site specific exemption or relaxation of the standards of section 38.410.100 allows utilization of a portion of the floodplain, the uses allowed in the floodway subject to the issuance of a permit, according to the provisions of sections 38.600.210 through 38.600.230, must also be allowed by permit within the floodway fringe. In addition, new construction, substantial improvements and alterations to structures are allowed by permit. This includes but is not limited to residential, commercial and industrial construction and suitable fill to be allowed by permit from the city floodplain administrator, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Such structures or fill must not be prohibited by any other statute, regulation, ordinance or resolution; 
2.  Such structures or fill must be compatible with local growth policies; 
3.  The new construction, alterations and substantial improvements of residential structures including manufactured homes must be constructed on suitable fill such so that the lowest floor elevation (including basement) is two feet or more above the base flood elevation. Any approved suitable fill must be at an elevation no lower than the base flood elevation and must extend for at least 15 feet, at that elevation, beyond the structure in all directions; 
4.  The new construction, alteration and substantial improvement of commercial and industrial structures can be constructed on suitable fill as specified in subsection C of this section. If not constructed on fill, commercial and industrial structures must be adequately floodproofed to an elevation no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressures, velocities, impact, buoyancy and uplift forces associated with the 100-year flood; 
a.  If the structure is designed to allow internal flooding of areas below the lowest floor, use of this space must be limited to parking, loading areas, building access and storage of equipment or materials not appreciably affected by floodwaters. The floors and wall must be designed and constructed of materials resistant to flooding to an elevation no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Walls must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, other coverings or devices which permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
b.  Structures whose lowest floors are used for a purpose other than parking, loading or storage of materials resistant to flooding must be floodproofed to an elevation no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing must include impermeable membranes or materials for floors and walls and watertight enclosures for all windows, doors and other openings. These structures must also be designed to withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic and buoyancy effects of a 100-year flood; and 
c.  Floodproofing of electrical, heating and plumbing systems must comply with sections 38.600.350 through 38.600.390; 
5.  All manufactured homes placed in the floodway fringe must have the chassis securely anchored to a foundation system that will resist floatation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. The following conditions also apply: 
a.  When a manufactured home is altered, replaced because of substantial damage as a result of a flood, or replaced on an individual site, the lowest floor must be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation. The home can be elevated on fill or raised on a permanent foundation of reinforced concrete, reinforced mortared block, reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength; and 
b.  Replacement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home community or subdivision must be raised on a permanent foundation. The lowest floor must be at least 36 inches above the ground or raised two feet above the base flood elevation, whichever is less. The foundation must consist of reinforced concrete, reinforced mortared block, reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength; 
c.  Manufactured homes proposed for use as commercial or industrial structures must be elevated and anchored, rather than floodproofed; 
6.  Fill material placed in the floodway fringe must be stable, compacted, well graded, pervious, generally unaffected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar foreign matter, devoid of tree stumps or other organic material, and appropriate for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure; 
7.  Roads, streets, highways and rail lines must be designed to minimize increase in flood heights. Where failure or interruption of transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety, the facility must be located two feet above the base flood elevation; and 
8.  Agricultural structures that have a low damage potential, such as sheds, barns, shelters, and hay or grain storage structures must be adequately anchored to prevent floatation or collapse and all electrical facilities must be placed above the base flood elevation; 
a.  Recreational vehicles, if they are on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use, must meet the elevating requirements of subsection C of this section.  
Sec. 38.600.270. - Floodplain—Prohibited uses. 
A.  The following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses are prohibited within the floodway fringe: 
1.  Solid and hazardous waste disposal; and 
2.  Storage of highly toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials. Storage of petroleum products may be allowed by permit if stored on compacted fill at least two feet above the base flood elevation and anchored to a permanent foundation to prevent downstream movement.  
Sec. 38.600.280. - Same—Areas with flood elevations and no delineated floodway. 
A.  A development proposed for a 100-year floodplain, where water surface elevations are available but no floodway is delineated, may not significantly increase flood velocities or depths or generally alter patterns of flood flow. The provisions of sections 38.600.250 through 38.600.270 apply to these areas. The city floodplain administrator may require a permit applicant to furnish additional hydraulic data before acting on a permit application for such a floodplain. The data may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  A hydraulic study documenting probable effect on upstream, downstream or adjacent property owners' caused by the proposed development; or 
2.  The calculated increase in the 100-year floodwater surface profile caused by the proposed development. 
B.  Permits for such proposed development may be modified or denied if the additional information shows that the proposed use would cause an additional flood hazard to adjacent property or significantly increase flood heights. A significant increase in flood height is one-half foot unless existing or anticipated development in the area dictates a lesser amount of allowable increase.  
Sec. 38.600.290. - Shallow flooding (AO zones). 
A.  Shallow flooding areas are delineated as AO zone floodplains on the flood insurance rate maps. The provisions of section 38.600.260 apply to any AO zone floodplains. The depth of the 100-year flood is indicated as the depth number on the flood insurance rate maps. The 100-year flood depth must be referenced to the highest adjacent grade or stream flow line in determining which fill or floodproofing heights to use in applying the provisions of subsections C and D of section 38.600.260. In the absence of depth or elevation information, a minimum two-foot flood depth must be used. 
B.  Floodplain boundary interpretation. The city floodplain administrator must make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of an AO zone floodplain boundary when there is a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.  
Sec. 38.600.300. - Applicability to unnumbered A zones. 
The minimum floodplain development standards listed in this section apply to the 100-year floodplains delineated by approximate methods and identified as unnumbered A zones on the flood insurance rate maps.  
Sec. 38.600.310. - A zones—Uses allowed without permits. 
All uses allowed in a floodway, according to the provisions of section 38.600.210, are also allowed without a permit in unnumbered A zone floodplains.  
Sec. 38.600.320. - Same—Uses requiring permits. 
A.  All uses allowed in the floodway and floodway fringe subject to the issuance of a permit according to the provisions of section 38.600.260, require permits from the city floodplain administrator for unnumbered A zone floodplains. Also, the provisions of section 38.600.260 apply to the A zone floodplains with no floodway delineated or water surface profile computed. Since there are no 100-year floodwater surface profiles computed for A zone floodplains, the following conditions also apply: 
1.  Elevation data on the 100-year flood must be provided for subdivision proposals according to the definitions and rules of the Montana Sanitation in Subdivisions Act, title 76, chapter 4, part 1, Montana Code Annotated (MCA 76-4-101 et seq.) and the rules adopted by Department of Environmental Quality under this Act. These data must be used in applying subsections C, D and E of section 38.600.270. Subdivision proposals must also provide for adequate drainage to minimize potential flood hazards; 
2.  The city floodplain administrator may obtain, review and reasonably use any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources, until such data have been provided by FEMA, to enforce subsections C and D of section 38.600.270; 
3.  The city floodplain administrator may use historical flood elevations to determine suitable fill or floodproofing elevations as required by subsections C and D of section 38.600.270; 
4.  If historical flood evidence is not available, then the city floodplain administrator must determine, from a field review at the proposed development site, an appropriate fill or floodproofing elevation to use in applying subsections C and D of section 38.600.270. In the absence of depth or elevation information, a minimum two foot flood depth must be used; and 
5.  Proposed structures must be anchored to prevent floatation or collapse and must be located as far from stream channels as practicable.  
Sec. 38.600.330. - Same—Prohibited uses. 
Those uses prohibited in the floodway fringe, in accordance with section 38.600.270, are also prohibited within the A zone floodplain boundaries.  
Sec. 38.600.340. - Same—Floodplain boundary interpretation. 
The city floodplain administrator must make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the unnumbered A zone floodplain boundary when there is a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.  
Sec. 38.600.350. - Floodproofing requirements—Certification. 
If the following floodproofing requirements are to be applied to a proposed structure, as stipulated by the city floodplain administrator in accordance with these regulations, the methods used must be certified as adequate by a registered professional engineer or architect.  
Sec. 38.600.360. - Same—Conformance. 
Permitted floodproof systems must conform to the conditions listed in sections 38.600.370 through 38.600.390 and the floodproofing standards listed in subsection D of section 38.600.260 for commercial and industrial structures.  
Sec. 38.600.370. - Same—Electrical systems. 
A.  All incoming power service equipment, including all metering equipment, control centers, transformers, distribution and lighting panels, and all other stationary equipment must be located at least two feet above the base flood elevation; 
B.  Portable or movable electrical equipment may be placed below the base flood elevation, if the equipment can be disconnected by a single submersible plug-and-socket assembly; 
C.  The main power service line must have automatic or manually operated electrical disconnect equipment located at an accessible location outside the 100-year floodplain and above the base flood elevation; and 
D.  All electrical wiring systems installed at or below the elevation of the 100-year flood must be suitable for continuous submergence and may not contain fibrous components.  
Sec. 38.600.380. - Same—Heating systems. 
A.  Float operated automatic control valves must be installed in gas furnace supply lines so that the fuel supply is automatically shut off when floodwaters reach the floor level where the furnace is located; 
B.  Manually operated gate valves must be installed in gas supply lines. The gate valves must be operable from a location above the elevation of the 100-year flood; and 
C.  Electric heating systems must be installed in accordance with the provisions of International Building Code and any other applicable regulations.  
Sec. 38.600.390. - Same—Plumbing systems. 
A.  Sewer lines, except those to be buried and sealed in vaults, must have check valves installed to prevent sewage backup into permitted structures; and 
B.  All toilet stools, sinks, urinals and drains must be located so the lowest point of possible water entry is at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year flood.  
Sec. 38.600.400. - Violation—Notice. 
The city floodplain administrator must bring any violation of this division 38.600 to the attention of the local governing body, its legal counsel and the state department of natural resources and conservation.  
Sec. 38.600.410. - Same—Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this division 38.600 or failure to comply with any of the requirements, including permit approval prior to development of floodprone lands, and conditions and safeguards established are subject to the provisions of division 38.200 of this chapter.  
DIVISION 38.610. - WETLAND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 38.610.010. - Title and applicability. 
These regulations are known as the city wetland regulations and may be cited as the wetlands regulations. These wetland regulations govern areas in compliance with the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual of the U.S. (1987 Corps Manual), or the most current wetland delineation manual sanctioned by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE)-Omaha District. This manual provides specific guidelines and methods to identify whether an area is a wetland and to determine the boundary between wetlands and uplands. The city's wetland regulations will pertain to wetlands with a direct hydrologic connection to "waters of the U.S." (those wetlands that connect to a federally-regulated stream or river directly or via a series or watercourse, wetlands or ditches), and also to isolated wetlands with no direct connection to a water of the U.S. and exhibit positive wetland indicators for all three wetland parameters. The provisions contained in these regulations do not apply to wetlands created by a wholly manmade water source used for irrigation purposes or stormwater control.  
Sec. 38.610.020. - Intent and purpose. 
A.  Wetlands perform many important ecological functions. It is the intent and purpose of this division 38.610 to protect, preserve and enhance wetlands to provide: 
1.  Aquifer recharge; 
2.  Water storage; 
3.  Regional stream hydrology (discharge and recharge); 
4.  Flood control and storage; 
5.  Sediment control (filter for waste); 
6.  Nutrient removal from urban runoff; and 
7.  Erosion control. 
B.  Wetlands provide important values that enhance the quality of life of community residents. It is the intent of this division 38.610 to protect, preserve and enhance wetlands to provide: 
1.  Habitat for fish, wildlife and plants (including endangered and threatened); 
2.  Recreation; 
3.  Open space; 
4.  Visual and aesthetic; 
5.  Education and research; and 
6.  Historical, cultural and archaeological resources. 
C.  Wetlands can present significant constraints to development. Wetlands typically form in areas characterized by poor drainage conditions which are ill-suited for most types of development. Development in these areas often involves extra expense resulting from considerations for site drainage, flood protection and facility maintenance. In addition, wetlands are characterized by hydric soils that are unstable for most types of development. Hydric soils tend to compress under the weight of structures and decompose when drained. Therefore, costs of development may be greater due to complex engineering design requirements, or the need to excavate and replace the soils. It is the intent of these regulations to protect public and private facilities and structures from damage, and to minimize public and private development and maintenance costs. 
D.  It is not the intent of this division 38.610 to prohibit all activities within regulated areas and associated buffers, but rather to encourage the avoidance of regulated activities within the regulated areas and to require best management practices in regulated areas. 
E.  Nothing in this division 38.610 will be construed to prevent irrigation companies from diverting and carrying water under historic water rights or owners of such rights from exercising those historic rights. 
F.  Nothing in this division 38.610 will be construed to prevent compliance with applicable state or federal statutes and regulations.  
Sec. 38.610.030. - Application of wetland regulations. 
A.  These regulations apply to any regulated activity which may impact wetlands as defined in section 38.700 known prior to or discovered through the development review process, and verified through a site-specific wetlands boundary determination. When any regulated activity is proposed a wetlands boundary determination must be conducted. If the determination finds that there are no wetlands present on the subject tract, these regulations do not apply. If, however, wetlands are found on the subject tract the proposal is subject to these regulations. The provisions of this division 38.610 will be applied in addition to any other applicable regulations of this chapter. 
1.  The wetlands boundary determination must be prepared in accordance with the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual of the U.S. (1987 Corps Manual), or the most current wetland delineation manual sanctioned by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE)-Omaha District by a qualified wetland professional. 
2.  A qualified wetland professional is an individual with a minimum of a bachelor's degree in a water resource related field, five years' experience, and/or a professional wetland scientist certification. 
B.  Isolated wetlands with a size of less than 400 square feet, regardless of property boundaries, are exempt from this division 38.610 unless the wetland provides habitat for the following species: 
1.  Plant, animal or other wildlife species listed as threatened or endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and/or 
2.  Plant, animal or other wildlife species listed as a species of concern, species of potential concern, or species on review by the state department of fish, wildlife and parks and the state natural heritage program. 
C.  Any development for which the watercourse setback requirements of section 38.410.100 are provided is considered to have addressed the concerns of this division 38.610 and is exempt from this article. 
D.  This division 38.610 is not intended to repeal, abrogate, supersede or impair any existing federal, state, or local law, easement, covenant or deed restriction. However, if this division imposes greater or more stringent restrictions, the provisions of this division must prevail. Specifically, if a regulated activity pursuant to this division also requires authorization under section 404 of the Clean Water Act from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the applicant must meet any greater or more stringent restrictions set forth in this division in addition to and independent of the restrictions of such permit.  
Sec. 38.610.040. - Wetlands review board powers and duties. 
A.  If established, the WRB has the powers and duties established in 2.05.2900.  
Sec. 38.610.050. - Wetlands determinations. 
A.  Wetland boundary determinations must be performed in accordance with the procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (January 1987). 
B.  An electronic and printed document containing the wetland boundary determination and raw survey data (if applicable) must be provided per part 1 of division 38.220. The data must be reported in UTM Zone 12 coordinates and NAD83 datum.  
Sec. 38.610.060. - Regulated activities. 
A.  No person may conduct any of the following regulated activities within a wetland, as described in section 38.610.030, without first having the proposed activity approved by the review authority. Any activity which reduces the size of a wetland or reduces the degree to which a wetland performs any function is subject to the requirements of this division 38.610. Such activities include but are not limited to: 
1.  Placement of any material, including without limitation any soil, sand, gravel, mineral, aggregate, organic material or water; 
2.  Construction, installation or placement of any obstruction or the erection of a building, trail, boardwalk or other structure; 
3.  Removal, excavation or dredging of solid material of any kind, including without limitation any soil, sand, gravel, mineral, aggregate or organic material; 
4.  Removal of any existing vegetation or any activity which will cause any loss of vegetation in a wetland; 
5.  Alteration of the water level or water table by any means, including without limitation draining, ditching, trenching, impounding or pumping; and 
6.  Disturbance of existing surface drainage characteristics, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood retention characteristics by any means, including without limitation grading and alteration of existing topography. 
B.  The following activities are permissible in a wetland, without prior approval by the review authority, if such activity does not reduce the size of a wetland or significantly reduce the degree to which a wetland performs any function. Such activity must be in compliance with any other applicable state or federal law. Activities permissible without prior approval include: 
1.  Maintenance of an existing and lawful public or private road, structure or facility, including but not limited to drainage facilities, water conveyance structures, dams, fences or trails, or any facility used to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telecommunications or other services provided that these activities do not materially change or enlarge any road, structure or facility; 
2.  Maintenance of an existing farm or stock pond, water conveyance structure, agricultural fence or drainage system; 
3.  Weed control consistent with a Noxious Weed Management and Revegetation Plan approved by the county weed control district; 
4.  Continuation of existing agricultural practices such as the cultivation and harvesting of hay or pasturing of livestock, or change of agricultural practices which has no greater impact on wetland function; 
5.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife; 
6.  Outdoor recreational activities, such as fishing, bird watching, hiking, rafting and swimming which do not harm or disturb the wetland; 
7.  The harvesting of wild crops; 
8.  Education and scientific research; 
9.  Minor improvements and landscape maintenance outside a wetland but within a previously established wetland buffer, including but not limited to the pruning of trees, mowing of grass, and removal of dead vegetation and debris; and 
10.  Activities in a wetland previously approved pursuant a wetland permit, including but not limited to removal of debris and maintenance of vegetation and wildlife habitat.  
Sec. 38.610.070. - Application requirements and procedures for activities in wetland areas. 
A.  Review. All proposals for regulated activities in wetlands areas must be reviewed by the review authority. The applicant must prepare a functional assessment for all wetlands. Based on the functional assessment and other submittal materials, the review authority may request the WRB, if established, forward a recommendation of approval, conditional approval or denial to the review authority. 
B.  Decision. All proposals for regulated activities in regulated wetland areas must be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the review authority in accordance with articles 240, 230 and 430 of this chapter prior to commencement of the regulated activity. 
1.  If a regulated activity is proposed for a regulated wetland area, but the regulated activity is not proposed in conjunction with a land development proposal, the applicant must submit a sketch plan application for decision by the review authority. 
C.  Submittal materials. The information required in section 38.220.130 must be submitted for all regulated activities proposed for regulated wetland areas. 
D.  Noticing. The review of regulated activities proposed for regulated wetland areas must comply with the noticing requirements of division 38.220 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.610.080. - Review standards. 
A.  The review authority may approve, conditionally approve or deny a regulated activity in a regulated wetland if: 
1.  The applicant has demonstrated that all adverse impacts on a wetland have been avoided; or 
2.  The applicant has demonstrated that any adverse impact on a wetland has been minimized; the activity will result in minimal impact or impairment to any wetland function and the activity will not result in an adverse modification of habitats for, or jeopardize the continued existence of, the following: 
a.  Plant, animal or other wildlife species listed as threatened or endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and/or 
b.  Plant, animal or other wildlife species listed as a species of concern, species of potential concern, or species on review by the state department of fish, wildlife and parks and the state natural heritage program; or 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that the project is in the public interest, having considered and documented: 
a.  The extent of the public need for the proposed regulated activity; 
b.  The functions and values as determined by a state accepted method of functional assessment of the wetland that may be affected by the proposed regulated activity; 
c.  The extent and permanence of the adverse effects of the regulated activity on the wetland and any associated watercourse; 
d.  The cumulative adverse effects of past activities on the wetland; and 
e.  The uniqueness or scarcity of the wetland that may be affected.  
Sec. 38.610.090. - Wetland permit conditions. 
A.  The review authority may recommend conditions of approval for proposed regulated activities, and the city may conditionally approve proposed regulated activities, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Requiring the provision of a wetland buffer of a size appropriate for the particular proposed activity and the particular regulated wetland area; 
2.  Requiring that structures be appropriately supported and elevated and otherwise protected against natural hazards; 
3.  Modifying waste disposal and water supply facilities; 
4.  Requiring deed restrictions or covenants regarding the future use and subdivision of lands, including but not limited to the preservation of undeveloped areas as open space and restrictions on vegetation removal; 
5.  Restricting the use of an area, which may be greater than the regulated wetland area; 
6.  Requiring erosion control and stormwater management measures; 
7.  Clustering structures or development; 
8.  Restricting fill, deposit of soil and other activities which may be detrimental to a wetland; 
9.  Modifying the project design to ensure continued water supply to the regulated wetland; and 
10.  Requiring or restricting maintenance of a regulated wetland area for the purpose of maintaining wetland functions. 
11.  Requiring a yearly mitigation monitoring report to be submitted to the review authority on a yearly basis, with the due date to be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
12.  Requiring a deed restriction to be filed with the county clerk stating the measures that will be taken to protect all water resources, mitigation, and buffer areas in perpetuity. 
13.  Requiring that all reasonable effort has been made to limit indirect impacts to vegetation, faunal interspersion and connectivity, and hydrological connectivity in the site design (e.g., any structures, boardwalks, viewing platforms, or bridges, which are constructed within wetlands will have at least a two-foot space between the bottom chord of the structure and the wetland surface elevation to limit shading impacts and allow wetland vegetation to persist). 
14.  Requiring conditions that mitigate locally-regulated (wetlands not connected to a water of the U.S.) infringement upon watercourses, buffers, or negative indirect or direct effects on the functionality of wetlands, watercourses or buffers.  
Sec. 38.610.100. - Appeals. 
Depending upon the application procedure involved, decisions related to the approval or denial of regulated activities proposed for regulated wetland areas may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of division 38.250 of this chapter.  
Sec. 38.610.110. - Enforcement. 
This division 38.610 will be enforced in accordance with the provisions contained in division 38.200 of this chapter.  
ARTICLE 7. - DEFINITIONS  
DIVISION 38.700. - TERMS AND INTERPRETATION 
 
Sec. 38.700.010. - Definition of terms and interpretation of language. 
A.  Terms specifically defined in regulations issued by the department of justice and the department of transportation to implement the Americans with Disabilities Act or in referenced standards have those meanings. Otherwise, all words in this chapter must be first defined as provided in this division 38.700 and, if not defined herein, must be defined as in the latest edition of "The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions" by Harvey S. Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom, and if not defined in "The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions," have their customary dictionary definitions as defined in collegiate dictionaries in the sense that the context implies. 
B.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "must" is always mandatory, the word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or company, as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, is construed to include the word "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied"; the words "map" or "zoning map" mean the zoning map of the city that delineate the area to be governed by these regulations. 
C.  For the purposes of this chapter certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:  
Sec. 38.700.020. - A definitions. 
Access or access way. The place, means or way by which pedestrians and vehicles have adequate and usable ingress and egress to property or use as required by this chapter. 
Accessory building or use. A subordinate building, or portion of the principal building, located on the same lot as the principal building, or a subordinate use of land, either of which is customarily incidental to the principal building or to the principal use of land. Individual public utility installations above ground are considered accessory buildings. 
Adaptive reuse. The development of a new use for an older building or for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose. 
Administrative design review (ADR) staff. Certain members of the planning staff charged with the design review, as defined in this division 38.700, of certain plans and proposals as specified in this chapter. The organization, composition and procedures of the administrative design review staff are subject to the requirements of division 38.200 of this chapter. 
Adult business. An establishment which advertises, trades, exchanges, transfers, sells, presents, shows, offers or exhibits materials, activities, reproductions, likenesses, services and/or objects defined as obscene by MCA 45-8-201(2). Adult business as defined in this section include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, rap studios, massage parlors, exotic dance studios, nude art studios, nude photographic studios and nude body painting studios. 
Affordable housing. Housing for persons earning less than 65 percent of the area's annual median income for rental housing and 100 percent of the area's annual median income for purchased housing. Further, affordable housing does not require greater than 33 percent of the household gross annual median income for housing. Annual median income is defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Aggrieved person. A person, as defined in this division 38.700, who has a specific, personal and legal interest in the final decision of an agency, board or commission, as distinguished from a general interest such as is the concern of all members of the community, and which interest would be specifically and personally prejudiced by the decision or benefited by its reversal. 
Agricultural. The cultivation or tilling of soil or use of other growing medium for the purpose of producing vegetative materials for sale or for use in a commercial operation and/or the raising or tending of animals for commercial sale or use. Agriculture does not include gardening for personal use, keeping of house pets or animals as authorized under chapter 8, service animals as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, or landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Agricultural water user facility. Those facilities, which include but are not limited to ditches, pipes, and other water-conveying facilities, which provide water for irrigation and stock watering on agricultural lands, with said lands being defined in MCA 15-7-202. 
Alley. A permanent public thoroughfare providing a secondary means of access to abutting lands connecting two right-of-way streets. 
Aliquot part. An equal division of a government section in quarters as described by the Manual for the Survey of the Public Lands of the United States. 
Alteration. Any act or process, except repair and light construction as defined herein, that changes one or more of the architectural features of a structure or site, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, relocation of, or addition to a structure. The term "alteration" may apply to any act or process that changes the interior architectural features of that portion of a public or private property commonly frequented by the general public, provided said public or private property is located within a designated historic district or listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places. However, changes upon interior elements of private residences, regardless of their location or historic status, are not considered alterations as defined in this section. The term "alteration" further means any change or addition to a structure within a floodplain that either increases its exterior dimensions or increases its potential flood hazard. 
Animated sign. A sign depicting action, motion, light, or color change, or that change the sign displayed through electrical or mechanical means. Excludes those signs defined as revolving signs. 
Antenna. One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). 
Apartment. A habitable room or suite of two or more habitable rooms meeting the requirements of the city's adopted International Building Code, located in an apartment building or used for residential purposes in non-residential buildings located within non-residential districts, as specified in this chapter. An efficiency unit is as an apartment under this definition. Townhouses and rowhouses are excluded from this definition. 
Apartment building. A building other than a hotel, motel, townhouse, or rowhouse containing five or more dwelling units. 
Appellant. An aggrieved person who has appealed the decision of an agency, board or commission to another body designated herein by the filing of a notice of appeal. 
Applicable non-discrimination laws. The Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the Montana Human Rights Act, and the Montana Governmental Code of Fair Practices. 
Applicant. The person who, or organization which, submitted the application to the agency, board or commission for approval, or the person who, or organization which, submitted the application to the agency, board or commission whose decision has been appealed. 
Architectural appearance. The architectural character and general composition of a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind and texture of the building's materials and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant exterior elements; and, interior architectural detail including, but not limited to, floors, fixtures, hardware, ornamentation and other elements that contribute to the building's architectural or historical significance. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within the community subject to inundation by a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
Area of signs. The area of a sign that is computed by enclosing the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character together with any other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from a building on which it is placed. The area of a sign having no such perimeter is computed by enclosing the entire area within parallelograms, triangles, or circles in a size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign copy and computing the size of such area. In the case of a two-sided sign, the area is computed as including only the maximum single display surface which is visible from any ground position at one time. If the angle between the two sign faces is greater than 45 degrees, the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two faces. The supports or uprights on which any sign is supported are not included in determining the sign area unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral background of the sign. In the case of any spherical, conical, or cylindrical sign, one-half of the total surface area is computed as the area of the sign. 
 
Figure 38.700.020. 
Area of signs. 
 
Articulation. The giving of emphasis to architectural elements (like windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces. See section 38.530.040 for articulation standards. 
Articulation interval. The measure of articulation; the distance before architectural elements repeat. See section 38.530.040 for articulation standards. 
Artificial obstruction/development. Any obstruction which is not natural and includes any dam, diversion, wall, bank stabilization method, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, revetment, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, refuse, automobile body, fill or other analogous structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any 100-year floodplain which may impede, retard or alter the pattern of flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is placed where the natural flow of water would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property. 
Arts center and/or entertainment center. A structure or facility for the presentation of the performing arts, including indoor motion picture theaters; theaters for live performances; indoor concert halls; and studios for arts education, such as dance or painting. Also includes entertainment activities such as arcades; bowling alleys or pool halls. The term "arts and entertainment center" does not include any business meeting the definition of adult business as defined by this chapter. 
Automobile fuel sales or repair. The use of a site for the direct sale of fuel to the end user, or for the repair of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats. The term "automobile fuel sales or repair" includes the sale and on-site installation of parts, wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities, but excludes dismantling or salvage. 
Automobile reduction yard. Any area of land where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition and/or two or more unlicensed motor vehicles, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for the wrecking, dismantling, storage or abandonment of motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
Automobile washing establishment. A building which has its primary purpose as washing automobiles. Such facilities are considered incidental to automobile service stations if not more than one auto may be washed at one time and if the service station is clearly the principal use. 
Awning. A roof-like structure, which is generally composed of a skeletal frame, covered in a fabric or other skin-type material, and typically opens on the bottom side, which projects beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building. For the purposes of this chapter a sign on an awning is considered to be a wall sign.  
Sec. 38.700.030. - B definitions. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. A single one of each national, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business are not considered banners. 
Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A base flood is the same as a 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation. The elevation above sea level of the base flood in relation to the city's adopted vertical datum unless otherwise specified in the flood hazard study. 
Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground but having not less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
 
Figure 38.700.030-1. 
Basement. 
 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Bed and breakfast. A single-household dwelling which remains owner-occupied at all times providing one or more guest rooms for compensation, and where food service is limited to breakfast which may be served to overnight guests only. 
Blank wall. A ground floor wall or portion of a ground floor wall over ten feet in height has a horizontal length greater than 20 feet and does not include a transparent window or door. See section 38.530.070.C for blank wall treatment standards. 
Building. Any structure having enclosed space and a roof for the housing and/or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building area. The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal and accessory building, excluding open steps, terraces, and architectural appurtenances projecting not more than two feet. Building area, as that portion of a lot upon which construction is permitted, is that area of a lot that lies within the boundaries of the front, side and rear setback requirements measured from the actual lot line. 
Building envelope. The three-dimensional volume on a lot lying between the front, side and rear setback lines and between ground level and the maximum allowable building height, amounting to the area available for potential building construction. 
Building frontage. The maximum dimension of the building front measured on a straight line parallel to the street, but excluding façades facing alleys or drive aisles. 
Building height. The vertical distance measured from grade as defined in this section to the highest point on the roof or parapet wall. Where a building utilizes multiple roof styles or pitches, the highest point of each type of roof or parapet wall must comply with applicable height regulations as established for the respective roof pitches in each zoning district. Where the vertical difference between grade as defined in this section is greater than two feet between opposite elevations of the building, the height of the building may be increased by one foot for every one foot in grade difference up to a maximum of six additional feet. 
 
Figure 38.700.030-2. 
Building height. 
 
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the main, or principal, use of the lot on which the building is situated. 
Business. A commercial enterprise carried on for profit; a particular occupation or employment habitually engaged in for livelihood or gain. 
( Ord. No. 2032 , § 2, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.700.040. - C definitions. 
Canopy. Any open, permanent roof-like accessory structure which is not attached or part of a principal building. 
Canopy tree. A species of tree which normally bears crown foliage no lower than six feet above ground level upon maturity. 
Carport. A structure, open on at least two sides, consisting of a roof and either walls or columns for the purpose of housing automotive vehicles and other chattels. The structure must be considered as an accessory building when detached from the principal building and as a part of the principal building when attached to the principal building along one or more sides of the carport or principal building. 
Casino. 
A.  An establishment whose primary use or activity is gambling, either in the form of gambling machines (video poker, keno, etc.), card games or other licensed gambling activity. A casino may have beverage and restaurant facilities as accessory uses. An establishment will be considered a casino for the purpose of these regulations if any of the following characteristics apply: 
1.  The establishment is referenced as a casino by signage, advertisement or by name; 
2.  More than one card table is on the premises; and/or 
3.  15 or more gambling machines are on the premises. 
Cemetery. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A permit issued by the pertinent review authority indicating its approval of plans to alter or construct a structure or alter a site within the Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District. 
Certificate of survey. A drawing of a field survey prepared by a registered land surveyor for the purpose of disclosing facts pertaining to boundary locations. 
Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
City. The City of Bozeman. 
City commission. The governing body of the City of Bozeman. 
Civic use. Public buildings or uses, including, but not limited to, college/university facilities, congregate postal facilities, schools, government offices, libraries, assembly uses, police stations, and fire stations. 
Club, private (nonprofit). A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building, or a portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. 
Collocation. The placement of an antenna by two or more wireless service providers on a common antenna-supporting structure, or the addition or replacement of antennas on an existing structure. The term "collocation" does not include roof-mounted or surface-mounted wireless facilities or the placement of other antenna on an amateur radio antenna. 
Commercial message. Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
Commercial node. 
A.  A commercial node is an area meeting all of the following conditions: 
1.  Designated as "community commercial" in the land use section of the city's adopted growth policy; 
2.  Designated as a B-2 zoning district; and 
3.  Located in one of the four following locations: 
a.  Northwest of the intersection of Stucky Road and South 19th Avenue to the limits as shown on the future land use map contained in the adopted growth policy, 
b.  East of Highland Boulevard across from the Bozeman Deaconess Hospital to the limits as shown on the future land use map contained in the adopted growth policy, 
c.  South of West Main Street across from the Gallatin Valley Mall to the limits as shown on the future land use map contained in the adopted growth policy, 
d.  Northwest of the intersection of Baxter Lane and Davis Lane to the limits as shown on the future land use map contained in the adopted growth policy. 
Common open space. Undeveloped land within a subdivision that has been designated, dedicated, reserved or restricted in perpetuity from further development and is set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents of the development. Common open space may not be part of individual residential lots. It must be substantially free of structures, but may contain historic structures and archaeological sites, and/or recreational facilities for residents, including but not limited to benches, picnic tables and interpretive signage as indicated on an approved development plan. Stormwater control facilities for the benefit of the subdivision may also be located within common open space. 
Common ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, or unincorporated association in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of the owner's family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or unincorporated association. 
Community center. A building or portion of a building used for nonprofit cultural, educational, recreational, religious or social activities which is open to the public or a designated part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency. Examples of community centers are schools, churches, Boys and Girls Clubs, and similar uses. Community center does not include fraternities, lodges or similar uses. 
Community development director. The director of the Bozeman Department of Community Development and the person charged with the administration of this chapter unless otherwise specifically noted in this chapter. 
Community residential facility. 
A.  A facility licensed by the Montana Department of Public Health and Human services including: 
1.  Those occupied by persons having developmental disabilities and living together for the purpose of residential training, observation and/or common support, in which care is provided on a 24-hour per day basis; 
2.  A community group home for developmentally, mentally or severely disabled persons which does not provide skilled or intermediate nursing care; 
3.  A youth foster home or other facility for care of minors as defined in MCA 52-2-601 et seq.; 
4.  A halfway house operated in accordance with regulations of the state department of public health and human services for the rehabilitation of alcoholics or drug dependent persons; 
5.  A licensed adult foster care home; 
6.  An assisted living facility licensed under MCA 50-5-227; 
7.  A foster home, kinship foster home, youth shelter care facility, or youth group home operated under the provisions of MCA 52-2-621 through 52-2-623. 
Where a limitation of eight or fewer residents is imposed for the purpose of defining the necessary review process to establish this use, the operator of a residential facility, members of the operator's household or persons employed as staff are not counted as residents, except that the total number of all persons living at the facility may not exceed ten. 
Compatible development. The use of land and the construction and use of structures which is in harmony with adjoining development, existing neighborhoods, and the goals and objectives of the city's adopted growth policy. Elements of compatible development include, but are not limited to, variety of architectural design; rhythm of architectural elements; scale; intensity; materials; building siting; lot and building size; hours of operation; and integration with existing community systems including water and sewer services, natural elements in the area, motorized and non-motorized transportation, and open spaces and parks. Compatible development does not require uniformity or monotony of architectural or site design, density or use. 
Compatible land use. A land use which may by virtue of the characteristics of its discernible outward effects exist in harmony with an adjoining land use of differing character. Effects often measured to determine compatibility include, but are not limited to, noise, odor, light and the presence of physical hazards such as combustible or explosive materials. 
Conditional use. A public or private use as listed in this chapter which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a principal use or accessory use in a particular district. 
Conditional use permit. Legal authorization to construct, develop or operate a conditional use as defined by this chapter. 
Conservation easement. The grant of a property right or interest from the property owner to the public or nonprofit conservation organization stipulating that the described land must remain in perpetuity in its natural and open state, precluding future or additional development (with the exception of any allowable structures or facilities). 
Contiguous tract. A parcel of land next to, abutting, adjoining or touching another individual parcel of land, including tracts which are separated by public right-of-way. 
Construction. The act of adding to an existing structure or erecting a new principal or accessory structure; the act of building by combining or arranging parts or elements; the thing so built. 
Convenience use. 
A.  Retail commercial uses which have relatively high traffic-generation rates per 1,000 square feet compared to other commercial uses. A use is designated as a convenience use if the method of operation includes one or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  The primary business is the sale of food or drink for consumption, either on or off premises, over a counter, or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window. Of the food or drink sold, at least 20 percent is in disposable or carry-out containers; or 
3.  Use features drive-in and/or drive-through component. 
Cooperative household. 
A.  A cooperative household is a single housekeeping unit with five or more persons which exhibits four or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  A shared strong bond or common commitment to a single purpose, such as members of a religious order; 
2.  Are not legally dependent on others not living with them; 
3.  Can establish legal "domicile" as defined by state law; 
4.  Share a single household budget; 
5.  Share in the work of maintaining the premises; 
6.  Legally share in the ownership or possession of the premises, e.g., tenants in common on a deed or cosigners of a single lease; or 
7.  A relationship of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. 
B.  Cooperative housing does not mean any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or other individuals with a common living arrangement or whose basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is for a period of less than 12 months. 
Cornice. A horizontal molding projecting along the top of a wall, building, etc. See section 38.530.050.E for related standards. 
Covenant. An agreement that restricts the land and binds present owners and subsequent grantees with a view towards protecting and enhancing the physical, natural and economic integrity of an area.  
Sec. 38.700.050. - D definitions. 
Day care center. A place in which supplemental care is provided to 13 or more non-resident persons on a regular basis and which is licensed by the state. 
Day care home, family. A private residence in which supplemental care is provided to three to six non-resident persons from separate families on a regular basis and which is registered by the state. 
Day care home, group. A private residence in which supplemental care is provided to seven to 12 non-resident persons on a regular basis and which is registered by the state. 
Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use, reserving no rights which are incompatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted. 
Demolition. Any act or process that destroys, in part or whole, a structure or archaeological site. 
Departure. A provision allowing for applicants to propose alternative means of compliance with a specific standard on a voluntary basis, provided they meet the intent of the standard. See section 38.250.060 for procedures. 
Design review. The aesthetic evaluation of certain development proposals. 
Design review board. That board created by chapter 2 article 5 of the Municipal Code with duties as described. 
Development. Any manmade change to improve or alter real estate, including, but not limited to, subdivision of land, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Development envelopes. Areas on a lot within which grading, lawns, pavement and buildings will be located. 
Development review committee. That committee created by division 38.200 of this chapter and charged with reviewing designated plans and proposals. 
Deviation. A modification of physical standards of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property located within the neighborhood conservation overlay district or anywhere within the city through a planned unit development. 
Disabled person. A person who has a medical, physical or mental condition that limits a major life activity, anyone who is regarded as having such a condition or anyone who has a record of having such a condition, and includes persons who have a handicap or a physical or mental disability as defined in applicable non-discrimination laws. 
Division of land. The segregation of one or more parcels of land from a larger tract held in single or undivided ownership by transferring, or contracting to transfer, title to a portion of the tract, or properly filing a certificate of survey or subdivision plat establishing the identity of the segregated parcels pursuant to this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act (MCA 76-3-101 et seq.). The conveyance of a tract of record or an entire parcel of land that was created by a previous division of land is not a division of land. 
Directional sign. An on-premises sign which is intended to convey information regarding the location of specific features of the site or to convey on-premises regulations including traffic and circulation regulations. 
Drive access. That area between the curb of a street, or edge of the traveled portion of a street when no curb exists, and the right-of-way/property line over which the city will permit vehicular travel from the traveled portion of a street to an individual property or off-street parking space. 
Drive-in business. Any business in which people are provided a service or a product, where a sale is made without the customer being required to leave the vehicle. Such businesses include, but are not limited to, drive-in theater, drive-in bank, freestanding automated teller machine, drive-in laundry or dry cleaning pickup station, drive-in restaurant and any business offering take-home food services. 
Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, meeting the requirements of the city's adopted International Building Code and used by one household, as defined by this article, for residential purposes. Dwellings may exist in many configurations, including single-household, two-household, multiple-household dwellings and group homes. Dwellings do not include hotels, motels, Type-3 short term rentals as defined in section 38.360.250.  
Sec. 38.700.060. - E definitions. 
Easement. A grant by a property owner to the public, a specific person or persons, other than the owner, for a right to use land for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Efficiency unit. A dwelling unit containing only one habitable room as defined and regulated by the most recently adopted International Building Code. 
Engineer (registered professional engineer). A person licensed in conformance with the Montana Professional Engineers Registration Act (MCA 37-67-101 through 37-67-332) to practice engineering in the state. 
Engineering division. Engineering Division of the City of Bozeman's Department of Public Works. 
Essential services (Type I). Small-scale and below ground facilities, equipment and structures required for the provision of immediate customer service of public and quasi-public services within the city. Additional items may be determined by the director of community development to be appropriately included in this definition. These facilities, equipment and structures include: 
1.  Public water distribution lines. 
2.  Public sanitary sewer collection lines. 
3.  Stormwater drainage collection lines, stormwater drainage retention/detention ponds, and drainageways. 
4.  Fire hydrants. 
5.  Electric service: 
a.  Below ground distribution and local transmission lines, cables and appurtenances. 
b.  Above ground distribution and local transmission lines, cables and appurtenances no greater in height than the minimum required by the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) plus 15 percent. 
6.  Natural gas service: 
a.  Below ground distribution lines and appurtenances. 
b.  Below ground transmission lines and appurtenances. 
c.  Natural gas regulator/valve stations and appurtenances, with no above ground buildings. 
7.  Communications services: 
a.  Below ground telephone lines and cables. 
b.  Below ground cable television lines. 
c.  Below ground electronic data transmission lines and cables. 
8.  Above ground utility boxes, not to exceed 20 square feet in footprint. 
9.  Roof mounted distributed electrical generation solar panel. 
10.  Public and amateur radio antennae and towers. 
Essential services (Type II). Facilities, equipment and structures required for the provision of neighborhood level public and quasi-public services within the city. Additional items may be determined by the director of community development to be appropriately included in this definition. Specific facilities, equipment and structures include: 
1.  Public water storage facilities; and pumping stations. 
2.  Public sanitary sewer or storm sewer lift stations. 
3.  Water fill stations for firefighting equipment. 
4.  Electric service: 
a.  Transmission lines, cables and appurtenances operable prior to September 3, 1991 including the repair and replacement of the same as necessary to maintain their operation. 
b.  Transmission lines, cables, and appurtenances 161 kV or less and no greater in height than the minimum required by the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) plus 25 percent, other than those included in Essential Services (Type I). 
5.  Natural gas service: 
a.  Natural gas regulator/valve stations and appurtenances, with above ground buildings not to exceed 125 square feet. 
6.  Communications services, except those included in essential services (Type F), including above ground buildings not to exceed 125 square feet: 
a.  Telephone lines and cables. 
b.  Cable television lines. 
c.  Electronic data transmission lines and cables. 
7.  Above ground utility boxes, from 20—125 square feet, except those included in essential services (Type I). 
Essential services (Type III). Community-scale facilities, equipment and structures required for the provision of public services not otherwise listed as an essential services (Type I or II). 
1.  Public water treatment. 
2.  Sanitary sewer treatment. 
3.  Storm sewer treatment. 
4.  Police and fire stations. 
5.  Electric substations and electrical transmission lines, cables and appurtenances, except those included in essential services (Type I) or essential services (Type II). 
6.  Natural gas regulator/valve stations and appurtenances, with above ground buildings in excess of 125 square feet. 
7.  Communications including but not limited to telephone satellite community dial offices; telephone exchanges and repeater stations, except those facilities which may be considered wireless facilities. 
8.  Gasoline, oil and coal pipelines. 
Establish. To construct, place, insert or excavate. 
Evergreen tree or shrub. A tree or shrub of a species which normally retains its leaves/needles throughout the year. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the manufactured home lots is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations. This includes, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.  
Sec. 38.700.070. - F definitions. 
Façade. The entire building front or street wall face of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
Final decision. The final action of an agency, board or commission when no further action is available before such agency, board or commission. 
Final plat. The final drawing of a subdivision and dedication required by this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act to be prepared for filing for record with the clerk and recorder, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter and the Montana Subdivision and Platting Act. 
Final site plan. The final scale drawings of a preliminarily approved development and any other required information, the approval of which by the review authority indicates that the required conditions for approval have been met. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry lands from the overflow of a stream, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map. The map on which FEMA has delineated both the 100-year floodplains and the risk premium zones. 
Flood insurance study. The report in which FEMA has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface profiles. 
Floodplain. Areas generally adjoining a stream that would be covered by floodwater of a 100-year flood except for designated shallow flooding areas that receive less than one foot of water per occurrence. The floodplain consists of a floodway and floodway fringe. Floodplain regulations are found in article 6 of this chapter. 
Floodplain Act. The Montana Floodplain and Floodway Management Act, MCA 76-5-101 et seq. 
Floodway. The channel of a stream and the adjacent overbank areas that must be reserved in order to discharge a base flood (100-year flood) without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-half foot. 
Floodway fringe. The portion of the floodplain that is outside the limits of the floodway. 
Footcandle. A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot and measurable with an illuminance meter. 
Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Front setback. A setback extending across the full width of the lot between two side lot lines, the depth of which is the least distance between the street right-of-way and the front building line.  
Sec. 38.700.080. - G definitions. 
Garage, private. A detached accessory building, or portion of a main building, designed or primarily used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles for the household housed in the building to which such garage is accessory. 
Garage, public. Any building or premises, except those defined herein as an individual garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles; or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for rental, hire or sale. 
General service establishment. "General service establishment" refers to a category of uses whose primary activity is the provision of assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industry, government, and other enterprises. Specific uses in this category include but are not limited to financial establishments, postal and courier services, repair shops, laundries, veterinary clinics, and other services where uses occur entirely within buildings, little or no outdoor storage, and no external impacts are anticipated. This term also includes vehicular parking lots and garages. 
Ghost sign. A wall sign painted on the exterior wall of a building prior to June 22, 1997 and which advertises a business, product or service no longer found at that location or an expired political campaign. 
Glare. The sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility to the eye. 
Governing body. The governing authority of a city or town organized pursuant to law. In the city, the city commission is the governing authority. 
Grade. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet distance from the wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of the building and the property line if it is less than five feet distance from the wall. If walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley or other public way, the grade must be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way. The term "finished surface of the ground" does not include window wells, stairwells or other similar features, but does include features such as usable patio areas. 
Green. An open space available for unstructured recreation, with landscaping consisting of maintained grassy areas, trees and other vegetation. 
Greenhouse. A building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glass-like translucent material, cloth, lath or similar materials which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other plants. 
Gross acreage. The total area of a parcel including the area of perimeter street rights-of-way to the centerline of the street. 
Gross density. The number of residential dwelling units per unit of land used for residential purposes, with the term "unit of land" being the gross residential acreage. 
Groundcover. Natural mulch or plants of species which normally reach a height of less than two feet upon maturity, installed in such a manner so as to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
Ground floor area. The square foot area of a building within its largest outside dimension computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, exterior stairways and secondary stairways. 
Group living. A building, portion of a building or a complex of buildings under unified control and management which contains facilities for living, sleeping, sanitation, eating and cooking for occupancy for residential uses; and which does not otherwise meet the definition of another residential use defined in this chapter. Eating and cooking areas may be shared in whole or part. 
Growth policy. An official public document adopted and used by a local government as a general guide for development and conservation decisions. It is not a regulation; rather, it is an official statement of public policy to guide growth and change. The required and optional elements of a growth policy are listed in MCA 76-1-601. 
Guest house. An attached or detached accessory building used to house guests of the occupants of the principal building, and which is never rented or offered for rent. Any guest house providing cooking facilities (e.g., full-size dishwasher, more than a bar sink, or a stove) is considered a dwelling unit.  
Sec. 38.700.090. - H definitions. 
Health authorities. The state department of environmental quality, local environmental health specialist or other authorized representative. 
Health and exercise establishments. An establishment designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise activities and other customary and usual recreational activities, including tennis, racquetball, handball and squash courts, martial arts, gymnastics, weight and aerobic exercise rooms, running facilities, swimming pools, yoga, sport dancing, and whirlpool and sauna facilities. Permitted accessory uses include child care, sun tanning booths, massage, health and nutrition counseling services, retail sales of sporting goods and restaurant services. 
Heavy retail and service establishment. Retail and/or service activities that may have exterior service or storage areas. This use category includes, but is not limited to sales of agricultural supplies, building materials, manufactured homes, and heating fuels, truck stops, transit terminals, outdoor display/sales, and warehousing. 
Height of low profile sign. The vertical distance between the finished grade and the highest component of the sign. 
Height of pole style sign. The vertical distance between the elevation of the adjacent street curb, or edge of pavement, if no curb exists, to the highest attached component of the sign. In the event that the finished grade of the sign location is higher, or lower, than the adjacent street curb or edge of pavement, the height is determined as the vertical distance from the median elevation between the adjacent street curb or edge of pavement and the lowest finished grade at the base of the sign to the highest attached component of the sign. 
 
Figure 38.700.080. 
Height of pole style sign. 
 
High visibility street corners and gateway sites. All commercially zoned and REMU Districts intersecting Arterial or an Arterial and Collector street are defined as a high visibility street corner and warrant special design standards set forth in section 38.530.050.D. 
Historic site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity where the location itself possesses significant historic, cultural or archaeological value. The value of a site must be based on the ability of the site to meet the eligibility requirements for historical significance as described by the National Register of Historic Places and as approved by the city. The most recent National Register Criteria for Evaluation as published by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service are the basis for determining whether a property is eligible for historical significance when a new or updated evaluation is prepared. 
Historic structure. Any building or structure that is: 
1.  listed in the State or National Register of Historic Places; 
2.  designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or survey; 
3.  certified as a contributing resource within a National Register listed or locally designated historic district; or 
4.  eligible, as determined by the City of Bozeman, to be listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing building to an existing or potential historic district. 
The most recent National Register Criteria for Evaluation as published by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service are the basis for determining whether a property is eligible for historical significance when a new or updated evaluation is prepared. 
Home-based business. Any business, occupation or activity undertaken for gain within a residential structure that is incidental and secondary to the use of that structure as a dwelling. Home based businesses are subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Home office. An accessory use in which work for compensation is undertaken, including, but not limited to, receiving or initiating correspondence, such as phone calls, mail, faxes or email; preparing or maintaining business records; word and data processing; and telephone, mail order and off-premises sales. 
Hospital. An institution for the diagnosis, treatment or other cure of human ailments and which may include a sanitarium or clinic, provided such institution is operated by, or treatment is given, under direct supervision of a physician licensed to practice by the state. 
Hotel or motel. A building or a group of buildings in which lodging is provided and offered to transient guests for compensation; the term "hotel or motel" does not include a boardinghouse, lodginghouse or roominghouse. 
Household. 
A.  A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities: 
1.  Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly-authorized custodial relationship; 
2.  Not more than four unrelated people; or 
3.  Two unrelated people and any children related to either of them. 
4.  Persons or groups granted a request for a reasonable accommodation to reside as a single housekeeping unit pursuant to section 38.35.090. 
5.  "Household" does not include: 
a.  Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, coterie, cooperative housing or like organization; 
b.  Any group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal in nature; or 
c.  Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses. 
d.  Any group of individuals living in a structure permitted as transitional or emergency housing pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 5, 3-19-2018)  
Sec. 38.700.100. - I definitions. 
Illuminance. The quantity of light measured in footcandles or lux. The density of the luminous flux incident on a surface; it is the quotient of the luminous flux by the area of the surface when the latter is uniformly illuminated. 
Immediate family. A spouse, children by blood or adoption, and parents. 
Incidental. Any action or use of less importance, or secondary to, any other action or use. 
Incidental sign. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message, which is designed with the intent to be legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is located, will be considered incidental. 
Interchange zone. Districts created for the purpose of allowing larger and/or additional signage for the areas adjacent to the Interstate 90 interchanges at East Main Street, North 7th Avenue and North 19th Avenue which are located within the B-2 Zoning District and within 1,300 feet of the Interstate 90 right-of-way. 
Irregularly shaped tract of land. A parcel of land other than an aliquot part of the United States Government survey section or a United States lot, the boundaries or areas of which cannot be determined without a survey or trigonometric calculation. 
(Order No. 2018-01 , § 18, 4-18-2018)  
Sec. 38.700.110. - L definitions. 
Landmark. A site, structure or object designated as a "landmark" pursuant to the procedures prescribed in division 38.340 of this chapter, that is worthy of preservation, restoration or rehabilitation because of its historic land planning or architectural significance and officially recognized through listing in the National Register of Historic Places. A landmark is subject to all neighborhood conservation overlay district procedures and requirements. 
Landscape architect. A person licensed to practice landscape architecture in the state. 
Landscaping. At least 75 percent coverage of an area with natural grass, vegetative groundcover or other natural living plant materials, the remainder of which is covered with non-vegatative decorative landscape design elements such as washed rock, lava rock, bark chips and ornamental features such as pools, fountains, benches, etc. For purposes of this chapter, the term landscaping is considered to have the same meaning as the terms "landscape," "landscaped" and "landscaped area." 
Large scale wireless facility. A wireless facility 25 feet or greater in height from the base to the highest point including attachments. Examples of supporting structures are monopoles, self-supporting (lattice) towers, guy-wire supported towers and other similar structures. When calculating the height of a facility, other structures designed for other uses such as buildings or water towers may not be included in the calculation. Some illustrated examples of large scale wireless facilities are shown below. 
 
Figure 38.700.110-1. 
Large scale wireless facility. 
 
Large shrub. A shrub which normally reaches a height of five feet or more upon maturity, and usually has five or more canes. 
Large tree. A tree of a species which normally reaches a height of 25 feet or more upon maturity, and usually has a single stem. 
Levee. A manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as drainage and closure devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Level I, II, and III Improvements. See section 38.500.020.B for descriptions. 
Light construction. Any change not construed as an alteration or repair, including paving of established driving and parking areas (subject to the requirements of division 38.540 of this chapter); construction of patios not greater than 120 square feet in size; construction of sidewalks not wider than five feet; and landscaping (but not including major changes in grading or site surface drainage). 
Light goods repair. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households as well as businesses, but excluding automotive, boat and similar intensive repair use types. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, the repair of appliances, shoes or clothing, watches or jewelry, instruments, office equipment or electronics. 
Light source. A single artificial point source of light that emits measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum. 
Light trespass. Light emitted by a lighting installation that extends beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited. 
 
Figure 38.700.110-2. 
Light trespass. 
 
Limited access. A way or means of allowing physical entrance to land at controlled locations or points. A "no access" strip or line may be placed on a plat as a means of limiting access. 
Limited access roadway. A street or road especially designed for through traffic, over which abutting landowners have no right to direct access. 
Live-work unit. A single household dwelling unit designed to accommodate ground level commercial uses. The dwelling unit type may be any type that is permitted in the applicable zoning district. Permitted non-residential uses may be those that are permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
Local services. All services provided by governmental bodies for the benefit of citizens. These services include, but are not limited to, police, fire, water, recreation, streets, parks, libraries, schools, and wastewater and solid waste collection and disposal. 
Lodginghouse. A building with not more than ten guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation to persons not meeting the definitions of household, community residential facility, cooperative household, fraternity or sorority. Also referred to as a boardinghouse. 
Lot. A piece, parcel, plot, tract or area of land in common ownership created by subdivision or its legal equivalent for sale, lease or rent. A lot has the characteristics of being able to be occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more principal buildings, and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to them, and including the open spaces required under this chapter, and having its principal lot frontage on a street. When one or more lots are held in common ownership they must be treated as a single lot for the purposes of development review and evaluation of compliance with the standards of this chapter. 
Lot area. The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. 
Lot coverage. The ratio of horizontal area, measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor, of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area. For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, those portions of a structure which do not have exterior walls are not included, even if it is covered by a roof. 
Lot measurements. 
A.  Lot depth. The horizontal distance of a line measured at a right angle to the front lot line and running between the front lot line and rear lot line of a lot. 
B.  Lot width. The distance as measured in a straight line, between side lot lines at the points of intersection with the required front building line. 
C.  Lot frontage. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. All sides of a lot that abuts a street are considered frontage. On curvilinear streets, the arc between the side lot lines is considered the lot frontage. 
D.  Lot area. The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. 
Lot types. 
A.  Corner lot. A lot at a junction of, and fronting on, two or more intersecting streets. 
B.  Interior lot. A lot other than a corner or through lot. 
C.  Double frontage or through lot. A lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel, streets. 
D.  Reverse frontage lot. A double frontage or through lot that is not accessible from one of the parallel or non-intersecting streets on which it fronts. 
Lot line, front. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street, in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street and in the case of a double frontage or through lot, a line separating the lot from the street from which a drive access may be permitted by the city. 
Lot line, rear. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side. Any lot boundary line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot line, zero. A concept utilized to permit a structure or wall of a building to be located on a property line. 
Lot width. The distance as measured in a straight line, between side lot lines at the points of intersection with the required front building line. 
Lot with residential adjacency. 
A.  Any of the following: 
1.  A building site in a residential zoning district, if the site abuts or is directly across a street or alley from an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-O zoning district; 
2.  A building site in a non-residential zoning district, if the site abuts or is directly across a street or alley from an R-S, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-O zoning district; 
3.  An artificial lot in a residential district, if the lot is less than 200 feet from an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-O zoning district; or 
4.  An artificial lot in a non-residential zoning district, if the lot is less than 200 feet from an R-S, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-O zoning district. 
Low-profile sign. A freestanding sign composed of a solid structure between finished grade and the top of the sign. Also referred to as a monument sign. 
Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts; also called the lighting fixture. 
Luminance. The physical and measurable luminous intensity of a surface (e.g., a lamp, luminaire, reflecting material) in a specific area and measurable with an illuminance meter. The quotient of the luminous flux at an element of the surface surrounding the point, and propagated in directions defined by an elementary cone containing the given direction, by the product of the solid angle of the cone and area of the orthogonal projection of the element of the surface on a plane perpendicular to the given direction. The luminous flux may be leaving, passing through and/or arriving at the surface. 
Lux. A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square meter. There are approximately 10.7 lux per footcandle.  
Sec. 38.700.120. - M definitions. 
Manufactured home. A factory-built, single-household structure that is manufactured under the authority of 42 USC § 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. This definition does not include recreational vehicles. Any dwelling meeting the definition of modular home is not a manufactured home. 
Manufactured home lot or space. A lot for rent or lease in a manufactured housing community designated for the accommodation of one manufactured home and its accessory buildings or structures for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
Manufactured home stand. That area of a lot for rent or lease which has been prepared for the placement of a manufactured home in a manufactured home community. 
Manufactured home community. Any piece of real property under single ownership or control for which the primary purpose is the placement of two or more manufactured homes for permanent residential dwellings and for the production of income. A manufactured housing community does not include real property used for the display and sale of manufactured units, nor does it include real property used for seasonal purposes only, as opposed to year-round occupancy. Home sites within the community are leased to individual homeowners, who retain customary leasehold rights. 
Manufacturing. The creation of products either with machinery or by hand according to an organized plan and with the division of labor. 
Manufacturing, artisan. Production of goods by the use of hand tools or small-scale, light mechanical equipment occurring solely within an enclosed building where such production requires no outdoor operations or storage, and where the production, operations, and storage of materials related to production occupy no more than 3,500 square feet of gross floor area. Typical uses have negligible negative impact on surrounding properties and include woodworking and cabinet shops, ceramic studios, jewelry manufacturing and similar types of arts and crafts, production of alcohol, or food processing. 
Manufacturing, heavy. The creation of products either with machinery or by hand according to an organized plan and with the division of labor. These uses contain land use intensity impacts typically associated with large industrial uses, their accessory outdoor storage uses, and large building areas. This use category includes, but is not limited to wrecking yards, building material manufacturing, chemical plants, concrete and asphalt plants, and freight facilities. 
Manufacturing, light. Small scale fabrication of and/or assembly of goods from previously prepared materials that occurs entirely indoors and features low levels of trucking access typical of standard retail or general service establishments. 
Manufacturing, moderate. Refers to a category of uses that accommodate moderate intensity levels of manufacturing and assembly activities, storage, warehousing, services, associated offices and similar uses. This use category includes, but is not limited to contractors, call centers, textiles, wood products, printing, pharmaceuticals, machinery manufacturing, research and development, regional distribution, and crematories. These uses may feature some outdoor activities and/or storage and/or moderate levels of associated trucking access. 
Mean sea level. The city's adopted vertical datum or other datum to which base flood elevations are referenced. 
Medical offices, clinics and centers. An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by licensed health care professionals, including acupuncturists and chiropractors. 
Micro-scale wireless facility. A wireless facility less than ten feet in height from the base to the highest point, including attachments. When calculating the height of a facility, other structures designed for other uses, such as buildings or water towers, may not be included in the calculation. 
Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel or other material from the land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from the site without processing. 
Mini-warehouse (warehouse, residential storage). A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced or screened compound that contains relatively small storage spaces of varying sizes and/or spaces for recreational vehicles or boats, having individual, compartmentalized and controlled access for the dead storage of excess personal property of an individual or household generally stored in residential accessory structures, when such building or group of buildings are not located on the lot of the residence. 
Minor subdivision. A subdivision that creates five or fewer lots from a tract of record. 
Mobile home. A transportable, manufactured structure, suitable for year-round single-household occupancy and having water, electrical and sewage connections similar to those of conventional dwellings. This definition applies only to units constructed prior to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. Compare with the definition of manufactured home. 
Modular or sectional home. A dwelling unit meeting the standards of the International Building Code which was mass produced in a factory, designed and constructed for transportation to a site for occupancy when connected to the required utilities and when permanently anchored to a permanent foundation, whether intended for use as an independent, individual unit or in combination with other units to form a larger building, and which does not have integral wheel, axles or hitch. For the purposes of locating a dwelling according to the standards of this chapter there is no distinction made between a dwelling constructed wholly or partly off-site and a dwelling constructed on-site so long as they meet the standards of the city's adopted International Building Code. 
Monument (permanent monument). Any structure of masonry, metal or other permanent material placed in the ground which is exclusively identifiable as a monument to a survey point, expressly placed for surveying reference. 
Mural. A visual representation using texture, colors, forms, or symbols, which does not meet the definition of a sign, placed on a solid, nontransparent vertical surface such as a wall of a building. 
( Ord. No. 2032 , § 3, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.700.130. - N definitions. 
Natural environment. The physical conditions which exist within a given area, including land, water, mineral, flora, fauna, noise, light, and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. 
Neighborhood commercial center. Commercial uses oriented at serving the needs of neighborhoods. These areas are typified by smaller scale shops and services, and a high level of pedestrian, bicycle and transit opportunities. Neighborhood commercial centers are intended to support and help give identity to individual neighborhoods by providing a visible and distinctive focal point. A neighborhood commercial center may also contain uses that draw from more than the immediate vicinity, especially when located adjacent to arterial streets. Activities commonly expected in this classification are daycares, smaller scale groceries, bakeries, coffee shops, retail stores, small restaurants, offices and residences above other uses. 
Neighborhood conservation overlay district. An area designated as the neighborhood conservation overlay district on the city zoning map pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. 
Net residential density. The number of residential dwelling units per buildable unit of land, excluding any land used or to be used as street rights-of-way, parks, public buildings or private non-residential uses. For calculating net residential density, the following formula applies: 
D 	= 	du 	
		A- (c+i+s+a+d) 	
 
Where 
D = Residential density 
du = Total number of dwelling units in project 
A = Total site area (acres) 
c = Total commercial land area (acres) 
i = Total industrial land area (acres) 
s = Reserved but undedicated school or park sites (acres) 
a = Street, public or private, rights-of-way and transportation easements (acres) 
d = Dedicated parklands, conservation easements, or common open spaces (acres) 
New construction. Development commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Nonbroadcast telecommunication facility. A facility used for the transmission or enhancement of telecommunications which does not include the presence of antennas, as defined in this chapter. A nonbroadcast telecommunication facility does not include office use, materials storage or other similar uses. 
Noncanopy tree. A large tree which in its native state has at maturity canopy vegetation less than six feet above the ground. 
Non-commercial speech. Any sign wording, logo or other representation that does not directly or indirectly name, advertise or call attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
Nonconforming sign. A sign that does not conform to the provisions of division 38.560 of this chapter. 
Nonconforming structure. Any structure which was legal prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which fails to comply with the building location standards, and/or size requirements of the applicable zoning district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use. An existing use of land or building which was legal prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived but which fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the zone in which such use is located. 
Noxious matter or material. Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
Nursing home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
Nursery, plant. Facilities for commercial development, growth and sale of plants and/or for the utilization of and storage of equipment for landscaping operation and wholesale and/or retail or commercial gardening supplies.  
Sec. 38.700.140. - O definitions. 
Off-premises sign. A sign which advertises or directs attention to products or activities that are not provided on the parcel upon which the sign is located. 
Offices. Buildings or portions of buildings in which commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced, sold or repaired. These include but are not limited to general and professional offices; governmental offices; insurance offices; real estate offices; taxicab offices (but not taxi stands); travel agency or transportation ticket offices; telephone exchange; utility offices; radio broadcasting and similar uses. 
Official floodplain maps. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood insurance study (FIS) provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the Gallatin County, Montana, inclusive of the City of Bozeman, dated September 2, 2011 (FEMA FIS No. 30031CV000A), and incorporating any approved updates or revisions. 
100-year flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 100-year flood is the same as a base flood. 
Open space. A land or water area devoid of buildings and other physical structures except where accessory to the provision of recreation, including but not limited to benches, picnic tables and interpretive signage. 
Open space, usable. That space which is capable of being used by the public for recreation, relaxation and social purposes. Parking lots and perimeter landscaping are specifically excluded from this definition of usable open space, except as allowed by section 38.430.090. 
Ordinary high-water mark. The outermost line caused by water impressing on land and covering it for sufficient periods to cause physical characteristics that distinguish the area below the line from the area above it. Characteristics of the area below the line include, when appropriate, but are not limited to, deprivation of the soil of substantially all terrestrial vegetation and destruction of its agricultural vegetative value. A floodplain adjacent to surface waters is not considered to lie within the surface water's high-water marks. 
Overlay zone. A zone superimposed upon an underlying zone which establishes special requirements in addition to, or in lieu of, those of the underlying zone. 
( Ord. No. 2029 , § 11, 12-18-2019)  
Sec. 38.700.150. - P definitions. 
Parapet. That part of the wall which extends above the roof. For the purposes of this chapter relating to signage, the top of the parapet is considered to be the roofline. 
 
Figure 38.700.140. 
Parapet (for signage). 
 
Park. For the purposes of this chapter only, park means an open space, as defined in this chapter, under the ownership or other legal control of the city which provides area for active and passive recreational purposes. 
Parking area. An area, other than a street or alley designated for use, or used, for temporary parking of vehicles. 
Parking space, off-street. A space designated for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle not on the right-of-way or alley but accessible from a street or alley. 
Party wall. Any wall of a building or structure which is common to two or more buildings, and which has a minimum of one-hour fire resistant construction as defined and regulated by the latest adopted International Building Code. 
Pathway. A facility that accommodates the recreational and/or transportation needs of pedestrians and bicyclists, including sidewalks, bike lanes, boulevard trails and trails. 
Paved parking space or surface. An area covered by an impervious dustfree surface of asphalt or concrete designed to specifications of the city. 
Pedestrian-oriented open space. Publicly accessible spaces that enliven the pedestrian environment by providing opportunities for outdoor dining, socializing, relaxing and provide visual amenities that can contribute to the character of the neighborhood. See section 38.520.060.D for pedestrian-oriented open space design criteria. 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Permeable pavement. A paving material that permits water penetration to a soil depth of 18 inches or more. Permeable pavement may consist of nonporous surface materials poured or laid in sections not exceeding one square foot in an area and collectively comprising less than two-thirds of the total surface area. 
Permitted use. A use which is lawfully established in a particular zoning district and which conforms to all requirements, regulations and performance standards of such district. A permitted use may be a principal use, an accessory use or a conditional use. 
Personal and convenience services. Businesses offering services such as barbershops, beauty shops, tailors, shoe repair, tattooing, massage, laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pickup and delivery stations, and similar uses. Some production of finished goods may occur as an activity accessory to the delivery of services. 
Personal property. Any movable or intangible thing that is subject to ownership and not classified as real property. 
Persons. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other organized group of persons, including state and local governments and agencies thereof. 
Planned unit development (PUD). A land development project consisting of residential clusters, industrial parks, shopping centers, or office building parks or any combination thereof that compose a planned mixture of land uses built in a prearranged relationship to each other and having open space and community facilities in a common ownership or use, and/or public parkland. 
Planning board. The Bozeman Planning Board. 
Plat. A graphical representation of a subdivision showing the division of land into lots, parcels, blocks, streets, alleys, and other divisions and dedications. 
Plaza. An area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used principally for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically providing amenities such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees and landscaping for use by pedestrians. 
Pole sign. A freestanding sign which is supported by a column or other structural member that is permanently attached to the ground, or a ground-mounted structure and provides a minimum of eight feet of visible, vertical clearance between the bottom of the sign and finished grade. 
Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
Preservation board. The Bozeman Historic Preservation Advisory Board. 
Primary access. The major access to a subdivision. The major access generally carries the most traffic as determined by the traffic engineering study. 
Principal use. A use or structure which determines the predominant or major use of the lot on which it is located. The principal use is that use which establishes the character of the property relative to surrounding or adjacent properties. 
Private street. A right-of-way usable by the public but maintained by a property owners' association. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall and is perpendicular to such building or wall. 
Proper access. Either an improved public street or road, maintained by the city, county or state; or a street or road built to the standards provided in these regulations. 
Property owner. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity shown as being the legal owner of a tract, parcel or lot in the records of the county clerk and recorder. 
Property owners' association. An association incorporated or not incorporated, combining individual property ownership with shared use or ownership of common property or facilities, or shared maintenance of subdivision or community facilities. This definition includes condominium associations. 
Public building. A building, supported by government funds, to be used in an official capacity on behalf of the entire community. 
Public health and safety. A condition of optimal well-being, free from danger or injury, for a community at large, not merely for an individual or small group of persons. 
Public improvement. Any structure or facility constructed to serve the residents of a subdivision or the general public such as parks, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street lighting, utilities and systems for water supply, sewage disposal and drainage. 
Public street or road. A street or road for which the right-of-way has been dedicated to the public.  
Sec. 38.700.160. - R definitions. 
Real property. Land and anything growing on, attached to, or erected on it, excluding anything that may be severed without injury to the land. Real property also includes easements. 
Rear setback. A setback extending across the full width of the lot between the two side lot lines, the depth of which is the distance required by this chapter between the rear property line and the rear building line. 
Reasonable accommodation. A process for providing flexibility in the application of city land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when necessary to eliminate barriers to equal housing opportunities guaranteed under applicable non-discrimination laws. It may include flexible application of regulations such as: the definition of household; authorized uses in zone districts; setback area modifications for ramps, handrails or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened drive aisles, parking area or walkways; building additions for accessibility; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable accommodation does not include an accommodation which would (1) impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city or (2) require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning program. Reasonable accommodations are subject to all laws that require or regulate planning, zoning or subdivision and platting. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation, which is built on a single chassis; which is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel use and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes less than eight feet in width and 50 feet in length. 
Recreational vehicle park. A plot of ground upon which two or more sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by the general public as temporary living quarters for travel, recreation or vacation purposes. 
Recreational vehicle space. A lot for rent or lease within a recreational vehicle park designed for the placement of a single recreational vehicle and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Relocation. Any movement of a structure, on the same site or to another site. 
Repair. Any change not otherwise construed as light construction or an alteration, as defined in this division 38.700, that constitutes replacing broken, worn or damaged materials with like, not necessarily identical, materials and is insignificant to the size and condition of the structure or property. Repainting and reroofing is included under this definition of repair. 
Required side building line. The line nearest to the side and extending between the required front building line and required rear building line establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the side line of a building and the side lot line. See also the definition of "setback line." 
Required setback. The minimum dimension of a front, side or rear setback as established by the use regulations for each district. 
 
Figure 38.700.160. 
Required setbacks. 
 
Restaurant. Any restaurant (except a drive-in restaurant or a convenience food restaurant as defined in this division 38.700), coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, sandwich stand, drugstore and soda fountain serving food. 
Retail. The rental or sale of tangible personal property for any purpose other than for resale. 
Retail, large scale. The sale of tangible personal property for any purpose other than for resale where the total area utilized by a single tenant, exclusive of parking, occupies 40,000 square feet or more. 
Revolving sign. Any sign which all, or a portion of, mechanically rotates either on an intermittent or constant basis around a central axis. 
Ridgeline. A relatively narrow elevation that is prominent because it rises at an angle of 25 percent or greater; an elongated crest, or series of crests, with or without individual peaks, significantly higher than the adjoining ground and often acting as the hydrologic dividing line between two or more drainage areas. 
Ridgeline protection area. 
A.  A ridgeline protection area is the area within 150 feet horizontal feet of a ridgeline, measured perpendicular to the ridgeline when the ridgeline is: 
1.  Located in an area above 4,900 feet in elevation above mean sea level; and 
2.  When the elevation of a line parallel to the ridgeline loses either: 
a.  At least ten feet in vertical elevation on both sides of the ridgeline within 100 feet; or 
b.  At least 30 feet in vertical elevation on both sides of the ridgeline within 300 feet; 
c.  A combination of the two standards where one side of the ridgeline meets one loss of elevation standard and the opposite side meets the other. 
Right-of-way. A linear public way established or dedicated for public purposes by duly recorded plat, deed, easement, grant, prescription, condemnation, governmental authority or by operation of the law and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, water line, sanitary sewer line, storm sewer line or other similar uses. 
Roadway. That portion of the street or road right-of-way which is improved or is proposed to be improved to carry traffic and provide for the on-street storage of automobiles; where curb is provided, the roadway is measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or extending vertically above any portion of the roof. Roof signs do not include signs located on a mansard roof if the sign is mounted vertically and integrated with the roof. For the purpose of this division 38.700, architecturally integrated mansard signs and other architecturally integrated signs located below the principal roofline are classified as wall signs. 
Rowhouse. A dwelling unit that shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. A rowhouse does not share common floors/ceilings with other dwelling units. 
Rowhouse cluster. A building consisting of three or more rowhouses.  
Sec. 38.700.170. - S definitions. 
School. Any: 
1.  Pre-primary, primary or grammar, public, parochial or private school or high school; 
2.  Preparatory school or academy, public or founded, or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization; 
3.  Private preparatory school or academy furnishing courses of instruction substantially equivalent to the courses offered by public high schools for preparation of admission to college or universities which award B.A. or B.S. degrees; 
4.  Junior college or university, public or founded, or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization; or 
5.  Private school when not conducted as a commercial enterprise for the profit of individual owners or stockholders. 
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring an abutting or nearby structure or use from another through the use of solid or nearly solid barriers (e.g., wall, fence, plantings, berms). 
Security lighting. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and outdoor security where general illumination for safety or security of the grounds is the primary concern. 
Setback. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. Setback also refers to a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open and unoccupied from the ground upward or from the ground downward other than by steps, walks, terraces, drive aisles, lamp posts and similar structures, and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Setback line. That line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way or public access easement line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which structures must be placed, as specified in this chapter. 
Sewer, public. Any sanitary sewer line owned and maintained by the city, whether or not installed by the city. 
Shared access. A fixed automotive and pedestrian access location from a street to two or more adjoining properties which mutually have the right and ability to use the access, and which has been established by an easement or other legally binding means. 
Shopping mall. A multitenant retail structure where tenants are located on both sides of a covered walkway with direct pedestrian access to all establishments from the walkway. 
Short Term Rental. A vacation home, tourist home as defined in MCA 50-51-102, a dwelling as defined in section 38.700.050, accessory dwelling unit, or room within a vacation home or dwelling, which is rented by or on behalf of the owner to the general public for compensation for transient occupancy as provided for in section 38.360.250. 
Sign. Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Side setback. A setback extending between the front building line and the rear building line, the width of which is the least distance between the side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building. 
Site plan. A scale drawing showing the accurate location of all structures, streets, alleys and parking areas, existing and proposed, on subject property or any other information as may be required by this chapter. 
Small-scale wireless facility. A wireless facility less than 25 feet in height from the base to the highest point including attachments. Examples of supporting structures are monopoles, self-supporting (lattice) towers, guy-wire supported towers and other similar structures. When calculating the height of a facility, other structures designed for other uses such as buildings or water towers may not be included in the calculation. This definition excludes those facilities meeting the definition of a micro-scale wireless facility. Some illustrated examples of locations for possible small-scale wireless facilities are shown below. 
 
Figure 38.700.170. 
Small scale wireless facility. 
 
Small tree. A tree of a species which normally reaches a height of less than 25 feet upon maturity. 
Soil. A medium in which plants will grow. 
Square. Open space that may encompass an entire block, is located at the intersection of important streets, and is set aside for civic purposes, and consists of paved walks, lawns, trees and civic buildings. 
Stable, commercial. Any building or complex of buildings and pastures which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for equestrian purposes, where less than 75 percent of the capacity is for the use of the owner or resident of the property. A public stable is an agricultural activity. 
Stable, private. Any building located on a lot which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for not more than four horses for the private use of the owner of the lot, but may not exceed 6,000 square feet in area. 
Start of construction. The commencement of clearing, grading, filling or excavating to prepare a site for construction. 
Stealth or camouflaged. Placement of a wireless facility in such a way that it may not be discerned as being separate from the principal use of a site. This may be accomplished through visual screening, use of color or encasement of the facility within an existing structure such as a steeple. A stealth installation may also include the placement of a new structure to contain the facility so long as the new structure complies with the height, setback and other requirements of the zoning code or is otherwise exempt from those requirements. 
Street. A right-of-way, dedicated or otherwise legally established, for public use by motorized and non-motorized vehicles and pedestrians, usually affording the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street frontage. Any property line separating a lot from a street other than an alley; the front lot line. 
Street, public. Any street which has been dedicated to the public or is otherwise publicly owned. Any street not a public street is deemed a private street. 
Street types. For the purposes of these regulations, street types are defined as follows: 
1.  Alley. A street used primarily for vehicular access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by public or private streets. 
2.  Arterial. A street or road having the primary function of moving traffic with emphasis on a high level of mobility for through movement and the secondary function of providing limited access to adjacent land. Arterial streets are generally designated in the city transportation plan, however, streets not depicted in the city transportation plan may be designated as arterials by the review authority specified in section 38.200.010. 
a.  Principal arterial. Serves the major centers of activity, the highest traffic volume corridors, and the longest trip distances in an urbanized area. This group of streets carries the highest proportion of the total traffic within the urban area with typical loads of 10,000 to 35,000 vehicles per day. Most of the vehicles entering and leaving the urban area, as well as most through traffic bypassing the central business district, utilize principal arterials. Significant intra-area travel, such as between central business districts and outlying residential areas, and between major suburban centers, are served by major arterials. 
b.  Minor arterial. Interconnects with and augments the urban principal arterial system. It accommodates trips of moderate length and at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials, and it distributes travel to smaller geographic areas. With an emphasis on traffic mobility, this street network includes all arterials not classified as principal arterials while providing access to adjacent lands. Minor arterials typically carry 5,000 to 15,000 vehicles per day. 
3.  Collector. A street or road that provides equal priority to the movement of traffic, and to the access of residential, business and industrial areas. This type of roadway differs from those of the arterial system in that the facilities on the collector system may traverse residential neighborhoods. The system distributes trips from the arterials to ultimate destinations. The collector streets also collect traffic from local streets in the residential neighborhoods, channeling it into the arterial system. Collectors typically carry 2,000 to 10,000 vehicles per day. Collector streets are typically designated in the city transportation plan, however, additional streets may be designated as collectors by the review authority specified in section 38.200.010. 
4.  Cul-de-sac. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminating in a turnaround area. 
5.  Dead-end street. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic. 
6.  Half-street. A portion of the width of a street, usually along the outside perimeter of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street must be located on adjacent property. 
7.  Local streets. A street having the primary purpose of permitting access to abutting lands and connections to higher systems. Generally, service to higher speed traffic movements are intentionally discouraged. They typically carry 1,000 to 3,000 vehicles per day but can carry in excess of 6,000. 
8.  Loop. A local street which begins and ends on the same street, generally used for access to properties and to control traffic access to arterials or collectors. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground; and for the purposes of floodplain review anything which may impede, retard or alter the pattern of flow of water in a floodplain. 
Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the exterior walls or the roof. 
Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who causes land to be subdivided or who proposes a subdivision of land. 
Subdivision. A division of land or land so divided that it creates one or more parcels containing less than 160 acres that cannot be described as a one-quarter aliquot part of a United States government section, exclusive of public roadways, in order that the title to the parcels may be sold, or otherwise transferred, and includes any resubdivision, or condominium. The term also means an area, regardless of its size, that provides or will provide multiple spaces for rent or lease on which recreational camping vehicles or mobile homes will be placed. 
Subdivision or development construction yard. A temporary office and/or vehicular and material storage yard. 
Substantial improvement. 
A.  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
2.  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first construction to any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences. The term "substantial improvement" does not include: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or state inventory of historic places. 
Suitable fill. Fill material which is stable, compacted, well-graded, pervious, generally unaffected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar foreign matter, devoid of tree stumps or other organic material and is fitting for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure. 
Surveyor (registered land surveyor). A person licensed in conformance with the Montana Professional Engineers, Registration Act (MCA 37-67-101 through 37-67-332) to practice surveying in the state. 
Swap meet. Any permanent or temporary sales or lot where the sale or trade of goods, materials and merchandise takes place outside any permanent structure, from within temporary structures or from vehicles and where several sellers or traders may congregate for the purpose of selling or trading. 
(Ord. No. 2020 , § 8, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.700.180. - T definitions. 
Temporary sign. Any advertising display that appears to be intended or is determined by the code official to be displayed for a limited period of time rather than permanently attached to the ground or a structure. 
Temporary use. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
Transit stop. Improvements and facilities at selected points along transit routes for passenger pickup, dropoff and waiting. Facilities and improvements may include shelters, benches, signs, structures and other improvements to provide security, protection from the weather and access to nearby services. 
Townhouse. A dwelling unit, located on its own lot, which shares one or more common or abutting walls with each wall having no doors, windows or other provisions for human passage or visibility with any other dwelling units, each located on its own lot. A townhouse does not share common floors/ceilings with other dwelling units. Each of the attached dwelling units must have: 
1.  Independent water and sewer service lines and metering pursuant to the applicable plumbing code and all other city regulations; 
2.  Individual services for all private utilities; and 
3.  A two hour fire separation separating the dwelling unit from any adjoining dwelling units. 
Townhouse cluster. A building consisting of three or more dwelling units, each meeting the definition of a townhouse, placed side-by-side and/or back-to-back. 
Tract of record. An individual parcel of land, irrespective of ownership, that can be identified by legal description, independent of any other parcel of land, using documents on file in the records of the county clerk and recorder's office. 
Transitional and emergency housing. The use of a site by a government or non-profit agency for individuals and/or households who are making the transition from homelessness to community living or who are in need of emergency housing. Other names for this use include warming center, transitional shelters, transitional living programs and transitional housing programs. This type of use may include on-site related services and facilities for residents and may also include services and facilities for non-residents if permitted by the underlying zone. 
Transom window. A window or series of windows placed above a beam separating a door and/or storefront windows. Transom windows are often placed above a canopy or marquee to emit extra daylight into a commercial space. 
Trellis. A frame supporting open latticework used as a screen or a support for growing vines or plants. 
(Ord. No. 1997 , § 6, 3-19-2018; Ord. No. 2014 , § 15, 6-3-2019; Ord. No. 2020 , § 9, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 38.700.190. - U definitions. 
Uniformity ratio. In outdoor lighting, a measure indicating how evenly light is distributed across a surface as expressed in a ratio of one value to another, such as average to minimum, or maximum to minimum. Using ratios, perfect uniformity would be 1:1. 
Use. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for a person's service, benefit or enjoyment. 
Usable lot area. The portion of an area of a lot exclusive of setbacks or other building restrictions within which structures subject to setbacks may be placed.  
Sec. 38.700.200. - V definitions. 
Variance. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property. 
Vertical building modulation. A stepping back or projecting forward of vertical walls of a building face, within specified intervals of building width and depth, as a means of breaking up the apparent bulk of a structure's continuous exterior walls. Vertical building modulation may be used to meet façade articulation standards set forth in section 38.530.040. 
Violation. The failure of a structure, subdivision, use of land or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter.  
Sec. 38.700.210. - W definitions. 
Wall sign. Any sign painted on, attached to or erected against the wall of a building, structure, canopy or awning with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of said wall or structure. The sign must be attached in a manner so that it does not extend six inches beyond the wall. 
Warehouse. A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive. 
Watercourse. Any stream, river, creek, drainage, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which some or all of the water is naturally occurring, such as runoff or springs, and which flows either continuously or intermittently and has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow. In the event of a braided or other multiple channel configuration of a watercourse, the area of the watercourse is that area lying between the two outermost high-water marks, as defined in this chapter. The term "watercourse" does not mean any facility created exclusively for the conveyance of irrigation water or stormwater. The city may consult with other agencies with expertise in this matter when there is a question of whether a particular water body is a watercourse. 
Way-finding signage. A set of coordinated signs which are intended to give directional guidance to and within a defined district and to assist pedestrians or vehicles in finding areas of common interest or convenience. 
Wetland. 
A.  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, and meet the established criteria briefly described below: 
1.  Vegetation. A prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation. Hydrophytic species, due to morphological, physiological, and/or reproductive adaptation, have the ability to grow, effectively compete, reproduce, and/or persist in anaerobic soil conditions. 
2.  Soils. A hydric soil is a soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. 
3.  Hydrology. The area is inundated either permanently or periodically, or the soil is saturated to the surface at some time during the growing season of the prevalent vegetation at a duration sufficient to induce anaerobic and reducing conditions. 
Wholesale. The sale of goods and merchandise for resale instead of for direct consumption. 
Wildlife. Animals that are neither human, domesticated, nor feral descendants of commonly domesticated animals. 
Wildlife habitat. The place or type of habitat where wildlife naturally lives. 
Window sign. Any sign painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to a window or suspended within 18 inches behind a window for the purpose of being visible from the exterior of the building. 
Wireless facility. An unstaffed facility for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF), microwave or other signals for commercial communications purposes, typically consisting of an equipment enclosure, an antenna support structure and one or more antennae. This definition excludes amateur radios, Essential Services (Type I), satellite earth stations and private receive-only antennae, such as for the reception of television signals. 
Wrecking yard. A place, lot or area where the primary function is that of dismantling, storage, abandonment or sale of goods and materials as parts or scraps.  
Sec. 38.700.220. - Y definitions (Reserved).  
Sec. 38.700.230. - Z definitions. 
Zoning commission. The Bozeman Zoning Commission. 
Zoning map. A map with all notations, dimensions, references and symbols shown thereon depicting individual zoned districts in accordance with this chapter.  
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Utility services, MCA 7-13-101 et seq.; municipal utilities, MCA 69-7-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 40.02.010—40.02.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY 
 
Sec. 40.02.150. - Interfering with or polluting water supply prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, without the written permission of the director of public service, to manipulate, interfere with and/or obstruct, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, the free flow of water in any part of the municipal water carrying, treatment and distribution system of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits of the city; and/or to manipulate, interfere with, injure, deface, remove and/or destroy any part of the water carrying, treatment and distribution system of the city, including in whole and in part any and all appliances, pipelines, aqueducts, reservoirs, telephone system and any signaling system or device, gates, headgates, measuring devices, ditches, canals, trenches, drains, valves, valve parts, manholes, hydrants, sprinkling-pipes, fences, gates, posts, signs, notices, storage tanks, Pear Street Booster Station and/or appurtenances of every kind and description of the water carrying, treatment and distribution system and/or used in connection therewith and/or for the protection thereof, and/or any part thereof; and/or to pollute and/or impair the purity and wholesomeness, by any means or manner whatsoever, of any part of the water supply of the municipal water carrying, treatment and distribution system within and without the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.04.010)  
Secs. 40.02.170—40.02.290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER SERVICE UTILITY OPERATIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 40.02.300. - Provisions adopted; regulations a part of service contracts. 
A.  The rules and regulations set out in this division are made for the government of the waterwork system of the city. 
B.  These rules and regulations of the city pertaining to its waterworks system, are made a part of the contract with every individual, firm or corporation who takes water, and every such individual, firm or corporation agrees, in making application for water, to be bound thereby. The following rules and regulations set out in this division are adopted by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.010; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.310. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Customer" means any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private corporation, or governmental agency, or any other entity receiving water service from the utility. 
2.  "Meter" or "meters" mean the complete installation, including auxiliary devices and equipment, if any, used to measure the water supplied to a customer. 
3.  "Point of delivery" means the point at which the utility's facilities connect physically to customer's facilities, the location of which shall be designated by or satisfactory to utility, unless otherwise defined in the service agreement. 
4.  "Residential dwelling unit" means any room or combination of rooms, including trailers and mobile homes, with facilities for cooking, designed for occupancy by one family. 
5.  "Service agreement" means the agreement or contract between utility and customer pursuant to which service is supplied and taken. 
6.  "Utility" means the City of Bozeman, Montana, and its water service division, engaged in the business of providing water and supplying water service to its customers on its system in the State of Montana. 
7.  "Water service" or "service" means the supplying of or availability at the point of delivery of water, and also the water delivered or used. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.020; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.320. - Purpose of provisions. 
These service regulations are intended to define good practice which can normally be expected, but are not intended to exclude other accepted standards and practices not covered herein. They are intended to ensure adequate service to the public and protect the utility from unreasonable demands. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.030; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.330. - Scope of provisions; revision conditions. 
These service regulations govern the supplying by the utility, and taking by its customers, of water service from the utility's water system. These regulations are subject to revision, and supersede all regulations, by whatever term designated, which may heretofore govern the supplying and taking of water service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.040; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.340. - Information available to public. 
There shall be made available to the public at the office of the city clerk copies of these service regulations and the rate schedules, forms of agreement for water service, and service standards of the utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.050; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.350. - Waiver of regulations; conditions. 
In any case where compliance with any of these rules introduces unusual difficulty, such rule may be temporarily waived by the director of public service upon application of the utility or the customer. If in any case compliance with a rule would cost more than the results of such compliance are worth, such rule may be permanently set aside by the director of public service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.060; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Secs. 40.02.360—40.02.490. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Service Provided 
 
Sec. 40.02.500. - Service provided by utility; basis. 
The utility agrees to furnish water and water services for certain specified purposes as contained in the service agreement, for a certain specified sum, based either on a metered or nonmetered rate, as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.070; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.510. - Water service for customer's use only; violations. 
If a customer furnishes other individuals or entities with water services without permission from the utility, or utilizes the water or water service for other purposes than for which it was intended, that customer is in violation of the customer's service agreement. Customers in violation of their service agreements may have their water service discontinued until such time as the charge for such additional service has been paid, together with the actual additional expense incurred by the utility in discontinuing or reconnecting water service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.080; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.520. - Customer to furnish easement, right-of-way and permits. 
A customer, or prospective customer, must furnish all easements, cleared rights-of-way, and permits necessary to enable the utility to supply the service required. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.090; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.530. - Access to premises. 
The utility's employees or representatives, or other authorized persons, shall have access at reasonable hours to enter any premises where water is used, for the purpose of making inspection, or investigation. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.100; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.540. - Unauthorized tapping into system prohibited. 
With the exception of special installation approved by the utility, no person or other entity, other than agents, representatives or employees of the utility, shall tap into the utility's transmission or distribution system or service lines attached thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.110; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.550. - Furnishing water to others prohibited; exception. 
In no instance may the customer extend such customer's water facilities across or under a street, alley, lane, court or avenue, or other public or private space, existing under different ownership, in order to obtain a rate advantage by taking water service for two or more premises through one source or meter. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.120; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.560. - Procedure for activating water lines. 
No person or entity shall activate a line connected to the utility's system, or allow any other person to do so, except upon specific, written permission of the utility. Activation of any line, for testing purposes, or otherwise, shall obligate the individual performing the test to turn off the water service at the curb stop. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.130; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Secs. 40.02.570—40.02.690. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Service Conditions 
 
Sec. 40.02.700. - General conditions for supplying service. 
Service will be supplied only under and pursuant to these service regulations, and any modification or additions thereto lawfully made, and under such applicable rates, schedules and contracts as may from time to time be lawfully established. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.280; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.710. - Application; existing service; requirements. 
Application for the use of water from an existing service must be made at the city administrative services office on a printed form provided for that purpose. Service will be furnished to any customer who fully and truly sets forth all the purposes for which water may be required and who agrees to and conforms with all the rules and regulations governing the service; provided the purposes set forth comply with all the utility's rules and regulations as on record and, that the existing utility water system, and water supply, is adequate to meet the use for which the application is made. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.290; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.720. - Service supplied to existing points of delivery only. 
Service will be supplied under the applicable rates, schedules and contracts only at points of delivery as are presently existing on the utility's system. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.300; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.730. - Line extension costs borne by customer. 
Line extension costs will be borne by the customer requesting that service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.310; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.740. - Installation conditions; property owner's responsibilities; permit required. 
A.  Except under special conditions approved by the utility, the property owner, at the property owner's expense, will be responsible for installing all water service lines, fire lines, back flow valves and all other necessary appurtenances or attachments from the curb box to the meter inside the served structure. All water services to any premises shall be installed by a plumber licensed and bonded in accordance with Montana state law and the Bozeman Municipal Code. Service lines must be so installed that the supply of water for each separate building, house or customer shall be controlled by a separate curb stop placed within or near the property line. The curb stop and box must be kept in a readily accessible condition by the owner of the premises. 
B.  An application for installation of water service to any premises must be signed by the property owner or the property owner's designated agent and must be made on a regular form furnished by the utility for that purpose. Prior to approval of such application, the utility will require the property owner to obtain a plumbing permit, and may require the property owner to establish credit or to furnish a deposit. 
C.  Upon completion of the application, receipt of the plumbing permit and payment of all charges related to the connection of water services, and full inspection by the utility, the utility will, in its discretion and at the property owner's expense, install the service, from the main to the curb box. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.321; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.750. - Protective devices. 
When it is deemed by the water/sewer superintendent that such protective devices are necessary to protect another customer's facilities and/or the municipal water supply system, the water/sewer superintendent may require a property owner to install, as a condition of continued water service and at the property owner's expense, an approved expansion tank, pressure reducing valve, backflow prevention device, pressure relief valve, or any other similar type of device on property owner's water service line at a location designated by the city's water/sewer superintendent. Property owners will be responsible for keeping these devices in good repair and effective operating condition at all times. Failure to keep these devices in good working condition may be cause to discontinue water service to the property involved. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.322; Ord. No. 1497, § 2, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.760. - Fire lines. 
Fire lines will be applied for and installed, at the property owner's expense, in compliance with the utility's standards of design and construction for fire lines. Except when specifically excepted, a fire line will not be interconnected with domestic service pipes downstream of the curb valve, and each fire line will have its own independent curb valve, which will be located at or near the water main in the street at a point designated by the utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.323; Ord. No. 1497, § 3, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.770. - Service lines; inspection, connection and penalty for failure to comply. 
A.  The owner of any house, building or other property used for human occupancy, employment, or recreation, which is situated within the corporate city limits and abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main of the city which the city determines is of sufficient capacity within 100 feet of the property line will, at the city's request and at the owner's expense, connect to the city water service for domestic purposes. The utility will be responsible for the connection from the water main to the curb box. The connection of the service lines between the main and the curb box will not be made by any other person, business or entity other than the utility unless given express permission by the utility. 
B.  Prior to backfill, the applicant will notify the utility when the service line is ready for inspection and connection to the curb box. The connection and testing will be made under the supervision of the city water/sewer department. The utility may elect not to connect the property owner to the utility's water service unless the inspection has been completed and the service line fully complies with all applicable federal, state, and city regulations. 
C.  Should the owner of any property described above fail to connect to the city's water service or in any way fail to comply with the provisions of this division, the water/sewer superintendent will provide the owner with notice of the requirement to do so. The notice will be sent to the owner by certified mail and give the owner 90 days to install the proper service lines. Should the owner fail to connect even after receiving proper notice, the utility may, at its discretion and at the owner's cost, lay the proper service lines from the main to the meter. The utility may charge the owner an additional five percent of the cost of installing the service for failure to connect within a timely manner. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.324; Ord. No. 1497, § 4, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.780. - Maintenance—When utility responsible. 
Subject to section 40.02.790, the utility, at its own expense, will maintain the service lines or fire lines up to a distance of 60 feet, as measured from the curb box, or to and including the meter, whichever is less, to any property owner receiving service prior to July 1, 1999. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.330; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1497, § 5, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.790. - Same—Property owner responsibility. 
A.  Beginning July 1, 1999, water service lines and fire lines from the curb box to the premises are owned by the owner of the property served. As owners of the service lines, all new property owners will have the responsibility of keeping the service lines, backflow valves, and all other necessary appurtenances from the curb box to the meter in good condition. Should the lines not be properly maintained, the utility may, at its discretion and at the owner's expense, fix or correct any deficiencies that occur which may affect the utility's ability to provide service to its customers. The utility, at its own expense, will maintain the service lines, fire lines or combinations thereof from the utility's main line to the property owner's curb box. 
B.  Any property owner currently receiving water from the utility seeking to utilize the water provided for purposes not stated in their original agreement with the utility, including but not limited to extending those lines, or those requiring any type of repair to the water lines within their boundaries will be required to complete a new application in which they agree to maintain the service line from the curb box to their property. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.340; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1497, § 6, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.800. - Meter—Required for new service; installation cost deposit required. 
All new installations shall be metered. Prior to installation, the customer is required to deposit with the utility an amount equal to the installation charges, as determined by the utility. Following installation, the actual costs incurred thereby will be credited against the amount of the deposit. If the installation charges are less than the deposit, the difference between the actual costs incurred and the deposit shall be refunded to the customer. If the installation costs are greater than the deposit, the difference shall be billed to the customer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.350; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.810. - Same—Location. 
The meter shall be located at some convenient and accessible point inside the premises and so located that it cannot freeze. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.360; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1269, 1988)  
Sec. 40.02.820. - Same—Required for expanded service when. 
Any customer presently on a flat-rate schedule who installs additional fixtures or seeks to utilize the water provided for purposes not stated in their original agreement, such as expending or remodeling their residence, shall be required to convert to a metered water service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.370; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.830. - Same—Utility responsibility; maintenance. 
The utility shall install and maintain all meters to include routine maintenance and replacement of meters on an established schedule. When it is determined maintenance is required, the utility will notify the customer in writing and schedule the required service. No person, business or entity other than the utility will tamper with the meter for any reason. Should the customer feel maintenance is required or for any other reason feels the meter should be inspected, the customer must contact the city's water/sewer superintendent to schedule service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.375; Ord. No. 1497, § 7, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.840. - Irrigation or other outdoor use; restrictions; prohibited in emergencies. 
In emergency situations, as determined by the water superintendent, which demand immediate action, the water superintendent of the utility may immediately restrict or wholly prohibit the use of water from the utility's system by notifying customers by newspaper publication within a newspaper of general circulation in the city and/or public by service radio announcements within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.380; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.850. - Flat-rate service; billing procedures; penalties for delinquent payment. 
All flat-rate services shall be billed monthly in advance, on or about the first day of each month, based on rates and charges on file with the city. Payment is due upon receipt of the bill, and will be considered delinquent if not paid by the 15th day of the month in which it is received. If the bill is not paid within 30 days after it has become delinquent, the water service will be disconnected after a ten-day written notice. Service will not be reinstated until delinquent charges are paid, together with the cost incurred by the utility in disconnecting and subsequently reconnecting the line. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.400; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.860. - Metered service; billing; penalties for delinquent payment. 
All metered services shall be billed for actual water consumed, based on rates and charges as established by resolution of the city commission. Payment is due upon receipt of the bill, and will be considered delinquent if not paid by the 15th day of the month in which it is received. If the bill is not paid within 30 days after it has become delinquent, the utility, at its own discretion, may disconnect the water services following a ten-day written notice. Should the utility disconnect a customer's service for failure to pay a delinquent bill, service shall not be reinstated until delinquent charges are paid, together with the cost incurred by the utility in disconnecting or subsequently reconnecting the line. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.410; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 1497, § 8, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.870. - Billing method for multiple delivery points or separate meters for single customer. 
Where separate points of delivery exist for supplying service to a single customer, or separate meters are maintained and provided for measurement of service to a single customer, each point of delivery or metering shall be separately billed under the applicable rates. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.420; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.880. - Termination of service by customer. 
Customer shall give utility at least 24 hours' notice, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded, to terminate service, unless a longer notice of termination is provided for in the service agreement. Should the customer desire to discontinue the use of water temporarily, or should the premises become vacant, the utility must be notified in writing of the temporary discontinuance of use of the utility water supply. Upon being so notified, the utility will shut off the water at the curb box and allowance will be made on the bill (for customers on a flat-rate charge) for such time as the water is not in use. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.430; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.890. - Maintenance; customer responsibility; wasting water prohibited. 
Waste of water is prohibited, and customers must keep their fixtures and interior pipes in good order at their own expense, and all waterways closed when not in use. Leaky fixtures must be repaired at once without waiting for notice from the city, and if not repaired within five days after written notice is given, water service may be discontinued until such time as the leak is repaired. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.440; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.900. - Adjustment of accounts following repairs. 
Following completion of the repair of customer's lines, the utility may adjust the customer's account to the extent of actual water consumed retroactive for three billing periods, commencing upon completion of the repair. The customer will be responsible for notifying utility of the repair made. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.450; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.910. - Continuity of service; liability limitations. 
A.  The utility shall make reasonable effort to avoid interruption of service, and when such interruptions occur, shall reestablish service with reasonable diligence. 
B.  The utility shall not be liable to customer or others for failure or interruption of water service due to acts of God, governmental regulations, court orders, acts of the public enemy, strikes or labor difficulties, accidents, weather conditions, acts of third parties, droughts, or, without limitation by the foregoing, any other cause beyond the reasonable control of utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.460; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.920. - Suspension of service for repairs and changes. 
A.  When it is necessary for the utility to make repairs or to change its water collecting, storage, transmission or distribution system, meters or other property, utility may, without incurring any liability therefor, suspend service for such period as may be reasonably necessary, and in such manner as to minimize the inconvenience to customers. 
B.  All persons having boilers on their premises, depending on connected pressure with the water mains, are cautioned against collapse of their boilers. As soon as the water is turned off, the hot-water faucet should be opened and left open until the water is again turned on. A check valve must always be placed between the boiler and the city's mains to prevent draining the boiler. A customer must never leave the premises with any faucets open or water turned off. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.470; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.930. - Interruption of service; liability limitations. 
Interruptions of service resulting from the repair of leaks as provided in section 40.02.890, or for repair of frozen facilities of customer, shall not render the utility liable for any adjustment in customer's bill. Whenever service is discontinued under section 40.02.890, the utility shall not be required to restore service until customer's account, if any be outstanding, is paid in full. The utility may also require customer to pay all costs of discontinuing or reestablishing service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.480; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.940. - Authorized utility personnel required for maintenance. 
With the exception of special installations approved by the utility, no person or other entity, other than agents, representatives or employees of the utility, shall maintain or repair the utility's water utility system. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.490; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.950. - Violation of irrigation or sprinkling rules; penalty. 
At such time when the utility, through its agents, employees or representatives, determines that a customer is in violation of the utility's regulations in regard to sprinkling or irrigation, the utility shall deliver to such customer a copy of the notice of hours and days of sprinkling and irrigating, and shall advise the customer that such customer is in violation of the rule. If the customer is found in violation of the rule on more than one occasion in any one irrigation or sprinkling season, the customer will be notified by certified mail, with return receipt, that another violation will result in discontinuance of service or the installation of a meter. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.500; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.02.960. - Violation of division provisions; disconnection of service required when. 
For violation of any of these regulations or for nonpayment of water charges, as provided in the utility's schedule of rates and charges currently on file with the city, the utility has the right to disconnect water service following ten days' written notice to the customer. After service has been discontinued, the same shall not be reinstated until all delinquent charges are paid. Costs of all disconnects and/or subsequent reconnects shall be borne by the customer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.12.510; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 1981)  
Secs. 40.02.970—40.02.1090. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Water System Rules and Regulations 
 
Sec. 40.02.1100. - Rules and regulations adopted; part of contract with customer. 
A.  The following rules and regulations are made for the government of the waterworks system of the city. 
B.  These rules and regulations of the city, pertaining to its waterworks system are made a part of the contract with every individual, firm or corporation who takes water. The following rules and regulations are adopted by the city: 
1.  An application for the introduction of water service to any premises must be signed by the owner of the premises and must be made on the regular form furnished by the city for that purpose. When such an application has been granted, the city, at the property owner's expense, will tap the main and furnish corporation cock, clamp when necessary, and any other material used or labor furnished in connection with the tapping of the main. All expense of laying the service pipes from the mains to the property owner's premises must be borne by the property owner. Additionally, the property owner is responsible for the maintenance of all service lines including the pipe and all necessary fixtures and appurtenances as required, from the curb box to the meter as well as all associated costs. The lines must be laid below the street grade and on the property owner's premises, at a depth not less than six feet and, designated by the city, to prevent freezing. A curb cock of approved pattern with a cast-iron curb box must be installed by the property owner at a point designated by the city. Whenever a tap is made through which regular service is not immediately desired, the applicant will bear the entire expense of tapping, subject to a refund whenever regular service is begun. 
2.  At some convenient point inside of the building and so located that it cannot freeze, a stop and waste cock must be placed, so that the water can be readily shut off from the building and the water pipes drained to prevent freezing. 
3.  Waste of water is prohibited, and consumers must keep their fixtures and service pipes in good order at their own expense, and all waterways closed when not in use. Leaky fixtures must be repaired at once without waiting for notice from the city and if not repaired after reasonable notice is given, the water will be shut off by the city. 
4.  No plumber or other person will be allowed to make connection with any conduit, pipe or other fixture connecting therewith or to connect pipes when they have been disconnected, or to turn water off or on, on any premises without permission from the city. 
5.  Service pipes shall be so arranged that the supply of each separate building, house or premises may be controlled by a separate curb cock, placed within or near the line of the street curb, under rules established by the city. This curb cock and box must be kept in repair and easily accessible by the owner of the premises. 
6.  Should the consumer desire to discontinue the use of water temporarily, or should the premises become vacant, the city, when notified to do so in writing, will shut off the water at the curb and allowance will be made on the bill for such time as the water is not in use. No deduction in bills will be made for the time any service pipes may be frozen. 
7.  Shutoff notice; effect of shutoff on boilers 
a.  Notice will be given, whenever practicable, prior to shutting off water, but consumers are warned that owing to unavoidable accidents or emergencies, their water supply may be shut off at any time. 
b.  All persons having boilers on their premises, depending on connected pressure with the water mains, are cautioned against collapse of their boilers. As soon as water is turned off, the hot water faucet should be opened and left open until the water is again turned on. A check valve must always be placed between the boiler and the city's mains to prevent draining the boiler. Never leave the premises with any faucets open and water turned off. 
8.  Contractors, builders and owners are required to take out a permit for the use of water for building and other purposes in construction work, payable in advance at the rate of $1.00 per month. Consumers are warned not to allow contractors to use their fixtures unless they produce a permit specifying the premises on which the water is to be used. Water will not be turned on at any new building until all water used during construction has been paid for. 
9.  Permits for lawn sprinkling during each current year must be secured at the office of the city clerk, and payment made at the time of securing such permit, as the supply to any premises, using a hose without a permit, will be shut off without warning. Lawn sprinklers will only be permitted where water is carried into the house also. 
10.  The city's officers or other authorized person shall have access at reasonable hours to enter any premises where water is used, for the purpose of making inspection or investigation. 
11.  For violation of any of these rules or for nonpayment of water rent, for either domestic, sprinkling or other purposes, the city has the right to turn off the water without further notice, and after it has been turned off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment or violation of rules, the same shall not be turned on again until back rents are paid, together with the cost incurred thereby, amounting to $1.00. 
12.  Applicability of flat rate and meter rate rules. 
a.  The flat-rate rules and the meter-rate rules shall be effective for all water utilities having schedules of that nature. 
b.  This rule, however, shall not be construed to mean that the city must have both flat rates and meter rates. The city may adopt either a flat-rate or meter-rate schedule, or both. 
c.  In addition to the general flat-rate and meter-rate rules, the city may adopt other rules by written order of the director of public works. 
C.  Flat-rate service. 
1.  The flat-rate will cover the use of water for domestic use, lawn sprinkling, and any other purposes enumerated on the rate sheet covering flat-rate services. The city agrees to furnish water for certain specified uses for a certain specified sum. If, therefore, a consumer furnishes other people with water without permission from the city, or uses it for other purposes than those the customer is paying for, it is a violation of the consumer's contract and the consumer offending, after reasonable notice, may have the consumer's water shut off and service discontinued until such time as the additional service furnished has been paid for, together with the actual additional expense incurred in shutting off and turning on water, not to exceed $1.00. 
2.  Flat-rate water rents are payable monthly in advance and payments should be made at the city clerk's office on the first day of each month. If not paid before the 15th day of the month, the water will be shut off. 
3.  Every user of water coming under the use prescribed under meter rates shall furnish a meter at the user's own expense, and the meter rate for the first month shall be the rate for such use as estimated by the city clerk, and thereafter the rate shall be paid monthly in advance; and payment should be made at the city clerk's office on the first day of each month. If not paid before the 15th day of each month, the water will be shut off. The rate for each succeeding month after the first month shall be based upon the amount of water used during the preceding month. 
4.  Should any consumer on a flat-rate schedule wish to install additional fixtures or should such customer desire to apply the water to purposes not stated in the original application, written notice must be given the city prior to making such installation or change of use. Special extension permits are issued for any extension of pipes within a building. In case a consumer places new fixtures on the consumer's premises without securing an extension permit from the city, when such fixtures are discovered, a charge will be made for such extra fixtures at schedule rates for the full length of time such fixtures have been installed. 
5.  Should it be desired to discontinue the use of water for any special purpose, whether for bathtubs, closets, lawn sprinklers, hose connections, or other fixtures, the faucet must be removed, the branch pipe plugged, and notice given the city at the city clerk's office before any reduction of rates will be made. 
(Code 1982, § 13.16.010; Ord. No. 1497, § 9, 1999)  
Sec. 40.02.1110. - Plumbers; rules and regulations. 
A.  The following rules and regulations are adopted for the government of plumbers: 
1.  Inspection of the work. Any person or firm, carrying on a plumbing business, who shall interrupt or resist an inspection of the person's or firm's work, done upon the pipes or appurtenances of the city waterworks or its consumers, shall be liable to a forfeiture of the person's or firm's license and bond; and may, on conviction, be fined in any sum not more than $100.00. 
2.  Application for permits. Any person or firm, carrying on a plumbing business, desirous of introducing water from the works to any premises, or of making any alterations, additions or extensions for consumers, shall first procure a permit from the city for such purpose, and for each and every opening, excavation or change required. All applications for permits must be made in writing, upon blanks furnished by the city, stating the full name of the owner of the property and the purpose for which the water is to be used. 
3.  Taps. No person, except the tapper employed by the city, shall, under any circumstances, tap the distribution pipes or insert pipes therein, or lay pipes in the streets; and any violation shall subject the offender, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
4.  Kind of material that may be used. 
a.  All pipes placed in connection with the city waterworks, and the pattern of all water closets, hydrants, stopcocks, and other appurtenances that are proposed to be used, shall be submitted to the inspection and subject to the approval of the waterworks committee. 
b.  The water pipe laid in trenches shall be laid not less than 6½ feet below the surface of the ground, and in such a manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. 
c.  All pipe and all cocks and fixtures must be of sufficient strength to sustain a hydrostatic pressure of 300 pounds to the square inch. 
d.  All work shall be done in the manner required by the city engineer and shall be subject to its inspection or approval; and no work underground shall be covered up until so inspected and approved. 
5.  Location of service pipe. 
a.  Permits for attachments will not be granted when the service pipe passes over or through premises which at the time are, or may thereafter, become the property of persons other than the owner of the premises to be supplied by such attachments; and in case the building does not occupy the full width of the lot on which it is situated, the service pipe must either be laid under the building or in the lot clear of the building, and within three feet of the side wall thereof. 
b.  No service pipe will be permitted to be laid in a sewer trench, or within 18 inches of such trench. 
6.  Curb stop and boxes. There shall be a curb stop and curb box attached to every supply pipe at the point where it enters the building, so as to admit the water being shut off in frosty weather, or in case of accident, and of the pipes being drained. The service pipe passing from the ground into every building shall be enclosed in a box of not less than eight inches, inside measurement, filled with sawdust or other suitable material to protect the pipes from frost, except when connections are in cellars. 
7.  Turning on and shutting off water. No plumber shall turn on the water at the curb cock, or allow any person in such plumber's employ to do so, except with the special permission of the waterworks committee. When the work in any building has been completed and tested, it shall be the duty of the plumber or fitter to turn off the water. 
8.  Report of plumbers. 
a.  Within 48 hours after the completion of any work, the plumber, or other person doing the work, shall make the water collector a full return stating the ordinary and special uses for which the water is to be applied, giving a description of the apparatus and arrangements used, the number of stories and rooms in the building, and all the particulars the case may call for. All plumbers shall make to the water collector, in addition to the special report required, not later than the fifth day of each month, a regular monthly report which shall cover, with the detail required by the special report above referred to, all work done by such plumber involving any new or increased use of the city's water, including sewer use and connections, during the calendar month preceding the date of such report. If no such work has been done, the plumber shall so report. 
b.  For failure to make such report and return, or for any misrepresentation or false statement therein or omissions therefrom, or for leaving the water on after completion or after testing any plumbing, the plumber so offending shall be liable to the suspension or cancellation of the plumber's license upon conviction, and in addition to such suspension or cancellation, shall be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding $50.00. 
9.  No plumber or fitter to allow name to be used by others. 
a.  No plumber or fitter shall allow the plumber's or fitter's name to be used by any person, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit or permits, or to do any work under the plumber's or fitter's bond. 
b.  The license of any plumber violating any of the city's rules and regulations governing the introduction, supply and consumption of water, will be revoked or suspended, at the discretion of the city, and will not be renewed under any circumstances until the city has been reimbursed for all damages that it may have sustained on account of such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 13.16.020)  
Secs. 40.02.1120—40.02.1240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OUTDOOR WATER USE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 40.02.1250. - Definitions. 
A.  For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
1.  "Outdoor use" means the use of water, excepting water which has been used indoors and is being recycled for outdoor use, for: 
a.  Sprinkling or irrigating gardens, lawns or other outdoor vegetation; 
b.  Washing automobiles, trucks, or other mobile equipment except at places of business where such are washed on every business day either with attendants, with automatic equipment or by self-service; 
c.  Washing sidewalks, driveways, outside building walls or other outdoor surfaces; 
d.  Washing any business or industrial equipment machinery; 
e.  Operating any ornamental fountain or other similar structure not employing a recirculating system; 
f.  Swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system; 
g.  Leakage or other escape outdoors through defective plumbing when a person has knowingly permitted the defective plumbing to remain in disrepair; 
h.  Settling back-fill around foundations, pipes, etc.; and 
i.  Other outdoor uses except use for fire protection. 
2.  "Water" means water from the city's water service utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.010; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1260. - Application of restrictions. 
A.  The provisions of this division or any restriction or prohibition in force pursuant thereto shall apply as follows: 
1.  To all persons using water both in and outside the city, and regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the city; or 
2.  To persons contracting for water service at a location who shall be responsible and strictly liable for all water use at that location. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.020; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1270. - Authority to restrict outdoor use of water. 
The director of public works is, with the concurrence of the city manager, authorized, directed and empowered, whenever in the director's opinion the necessities of the situation demand such action, to restrict or wholly prohibit the outdoor use of the water supply of the water service utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.030; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1280. - Restriction of particular indoor uses. 
Whenever outdoor use restrictions are in effect, business establishments which serve beverages for human consumption shall be prohibited from serving water except upon request. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.040; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1290. - Sprinkling systems; timing. 
Whenever outdoor use restrictions are in effect, the director of public works may set alternative time restrictions for the use of large scale sprinkling systems or those which are equipped with a timing device. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.050; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1300. - Landscaping; seeding; sodding; planting. 
While it is not the intent of this division to place restrictions on the normal conduct of business, whenever outdoor use restrictions are in effect, the director of public works may restrict or wholly prohibit the seeding, sodding or planting of live vegetation. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.060; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1310. - Notice required. 
Restrictions or prohibitions imposed by the director of public works shall become effective at midnight immediately following the publication of notice thereof in any daily newspaper published in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.070; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1320. - Wasting water prohibited. 
Whenever outdoor use restrictions are in effect, no person shall waste water which shall include but not be limited to permitting water to escape or run to waste. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.080; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1330. - Exception to maintain sanitation. 
The director of public works shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.090; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1340. - Enforcement. 
A.  Police officers to enforce. Every police officer of the city shall, in connection with the duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division. 
B.  Discontinuance of service. The city manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this division by the discontinuance of water service in the event of violation hereof. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.100; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1350. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this division or the restrictions issued hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.110; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
Sec. 40.02.1360. - Legislative intent. 
It is the intent of the city commission that the criminal offense listed in this division shall be an offense involving absolute liability. Unless specifically provided otherwise, this offense shall not require proof of any one of the mental states described in MCA 45-2-101(33), (37), and (58) 
(Code 1982, § 13.21.120; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1986)  
ARTICLE 3. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public sewer systems, MCA 7-13-4201 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 40.03.010—40.03.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SEWER SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 40.03.150. - Regulations adopted; applicability. 
The city commission adopts the following service regulations prescribing standards for sewer service as provided under Montana Law. These regulations supersede all rules, regulations and supplements previously applicable to municipal sewer utility operations. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.010; Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.160. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Customer" means any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private corporation or governmental agency, or any other entity receiving sewer service from the utility. 
2.  "Point of delivery" means the point at which the utility's facilities connect physically to customer's facilities, the location of which shall be designated by or satisfactory to the utility, unless otherwise defined in the service agreement. 
3.  "Residential dwelling unit" means any room or combination of rooms, including trailers and mobile homes, with facilities for cooking, designed for occupancy by one family. 
4.  "Service agreement" means the agreement or contract between the utility and customer pursuant to which service is supplied and taken. 
5.  "Sewer service" or "service" means the collection and treatment of waterborne wastes. 
6.  "Utility" means the City of Bozeman and its sewer service division, engaged in the business of providing sewage collection and treatment to its customers on its system in the state of Montana. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.020; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 1, §§ 1-1—1-8), 1981)  
Secs. 40.03.170—40.03.290. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - General Regulations 
 
Sec. 40.03.300. - Purpose of provisions. 
These service regulations are intended to define good practice which can normally be expected, but are not intended to exclude other accepted standards and practices not covered herein. They are intended to ensure adequate service to the public and protect the utility from unreasonable demands. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.030; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 2, § 2-2), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.310. - Applicability of provisions. 
These service regulations govern the supplying by the utility, and taking by its customers, sewer service to the utility's sewer system. These regulations are subject to revision, upon approval by the commission, and supersede all regulations, by whatever term designated, which may heretofore govern the collection and treatment of waterborne wastes. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.040; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 2, § 2-1), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.320. - Regulations available to the public. 
There shall be made available to the public at the office of the city copies of these service regulations and the rate schedules, forms or agreement for sewer collection and treatment standards of the utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.050; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 2, § 2-3), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.330. - Waiver of regulations; conditions. 
In any case where compliance with any of the rules in this division introduces unusual difficulty, such rule may be temporarily waived by the director of public works upon application of the utility or the customer. Nothing herein shall authorize a waiver of any of the requirements of division 3, wastewater collection and treatment system, section 40.03.900 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.060; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 2, § 2-4), 1981; Ord. No. 1923 , § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Secs. 40.03.340—40.03.440. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Service Provided 
 
Sec. 40.03.450. - General service conditions. 
The utility agrees to furnish sewer services for certain specified purposes, as contained in the service agreement, for a certain specified sum based either on a metered or nonmetered rate, as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.070; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-1), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.460. - Easements, rights-of-way and permits furnished by customer. 
A customer, or prospective customer, must furnish all easements, cleared rights-of-way and permits necessary to enable the utility to supply the service required. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.080; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-5), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.470. - Sewer service for customer use only. 
If a customer furnishes other individuals or entities with sewer services without permission from the utility, or utilizes the sewer service for other purposes than for which it was intended, that customer is in violation of the customer's service agreement. Customers in violation of their service agreements may have their water service discontinued until such time as the charge for such additional service has been paid, together with the actual additional expense incurred by the utility in discontinuing or reconnecting water service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.090; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-2), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.480. - Access to premises for inspection. 
The utility's employees or representatives, or other authorized persons, shall have access at reasonable hours to enter any premises where sewers are used, for the purpose of making inspection or investigation. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.100; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-6), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.490. - Extension of service to other persons prohibited when. 
In no instance may the customer extend the customer's sewer facilities across or under a street, alley, lane, court or avenue, or other public or private space, existing under different ownership, in order to obtain a rate advantage by taking sewer service for two or more premises through one connection. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.110; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-3), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.500. - Connections to be made by authorized personnel. 
With the exception of special installation approved by the utility, no person or other entity, other than agents, representatives or employees of the utility shall connect to the utility's collection system or service lines attached thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.120; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 3, § 3-4), 1981)  
Secs. 40.03.510—40.03.640. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Service Conditions 
 
Sec. 40.03.650. - Basis for supply of service. 
Service will be supplied only under and pursuant to these service regulations, and any modifications or additions thereto lawfully made, and under such applicable rates, schedules and contracts as may from time to time be lawfully established. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.250; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-1), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.660. - Service provided only to existing collection points. 
Service will be supplied under the applicable rates, schedules and contracts only at points of collection as are presently existing on the utility's system. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.260; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-2), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.670. - Line-extension costs borne by customer. 
Line-extension costs will be borne by the customer requesting that service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.270; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-3), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.680. - Application and other service conditions. 
Application for the use of sewers from an existing service must be made at the city administrative services office on a printed form provided for that purpose. Service will be furnished to any customer who fully and truly sets forth all the purposes for which water may be required and who agrees to and conforms with all the rules and regulations governing the service, provided the purposes set forth comply with all the utility's rules and regulations as on record and approved by the commission, and that the existing utility sewer system is adequate to meet the use for which the application is made. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.280; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-5), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.690. - Installation prerequisites and procedures. 
All sewer services to any premises shall be installed by a bonded installer, except under special conditions approved and inspected by the utility. An application for introduction of sewer service to any premises must be signed by the owner or the owner's designated agent, and must be made on a regular form furnished by the utility for that purpose. Prior to approval of such application the utility may require the customer to establish credit or to furnish a deposit. The utility shall then install the service to the property line, and the customer shall have the service brought to the building by a bonded installer, agreed upon between utility and customer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.290; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-6), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.700. - Billing—For multiple delivery points or separate meters for single customers. 
Where separate points of delivery exist for supplying service to a single customer, or separate meters are maintained and provided for measurement of service to a single customer, each point of collection or metering shall be separately billed under the applicable rates. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.300; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-4), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.710. - Same—Meter service; penalty for delinquent payments. 
All metered services shall be billed based on the actual water consumed, based on rates and charges on file with and approved by the commission. Payment is due upon receipt of the bill, and will be considered delinquent if not paid by the 15th day of the month in which it is received. If the bill is not paid within 30 days after it has become delinquent, the water service will be disconnected after a ten-day written notice. Service shall not be reinstated until delinquent charges are paid, together with the cost incurred by the utility in disconnecting or subsequently reconnecting the line. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.310; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-13), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.720. - Same—Flat-rate service; penalty for delinquent payments. 
All flat-rate services shall be billed monthly in advance, on or about the first day of each month, based on rates and charges on file with and approved by the commission. Payment is due upon receipt of the bill, and will be considered delinquent if not paid by the 15th day of the month in which it is received. If the bill is not paid within 30 days after it has become delinquent, the sewer service will be disconnected after a ten-day written notice. Service will not be reinstated until delinquent charges are paid, together with the cost incurred by the utility in disconnecting and subsequently reconnecting the line. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.320; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-13), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.730. - Adjustment of accounts following repairs. 
Following completion of the repair of customer's lines, the utility may adjust the customer's account to the extent of actual water consumed retroactive for three billing periods, commencing upon completion of the repair. The customer will be responsible for notifying utility of the repair made. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.330; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-7), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.740. - Continuity of service; liability limitations. 
A.  The utility shall make reasonable effort to avoid interruptions of service, and when such interruptions occur, shall reestablish service with reasonable diligence. 
B.  The utility shall not be liable to customer or others for failure or interruption of sewer service due to acts of God, governmental regulations, court or commission orders, acts of the public enemy, strikes or labor difficulties, accidents, weather conditions, acts of third parties, droughts or, without limitation by the foregoing, any other cause beyond the reasonable control of utility. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.340; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-8), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.750. - Suspension of service for repairs and changes. 
When it is necessary for the utility to make repairs or to change its sewer collecting system, the utility may, without incurring any liability therefor, suspend service for such period as may be reasonably necessary, and in such manner as to minimize the significance to customers. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.350; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-10), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.760. - Maintenance—Work performed by utility. 
Once service to any customer has been installed, the utility, at its own expense, shall maintain the service lines up to the public right-of-way line, with the exception that removal of tree roots and resultant line repair shall be borne by the customer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.360; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-9), 1981; Ord. No. 1160, 1984)  
Sec. 40.03.770. - Same—Authorized personnel required. 
With the exception of special installations approved by the utility, no person or other entity, other than agents, representatives or employees of the utility, shall maintain or repair the utility's sewer system. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.370; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-11), 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.780. - Violation of regulations; nonpayment of sewer charges notice; penalty. 
For violation of any of these regulations, or for nonpayment of sewer charges as provided in the utility's schedule of rates and charges currently on file with and approved by the commission, the utility has the right to disconnect sewer service following ten days' written notice to the customer. After service has been discontinued, the same shall not be reinstated until all delinquent charges are paid. Costs of all disconnects and/or subsequent reconnects shall be borne by the customer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.24.380; Ord. No. 1081, § 1(Rule 6, § 6-12), 1981)  
Secs. 40.03.790—40.03.890. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 40.03.900. - Purpose and policy. 
A.  This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Bozeman and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). 
B.  The objectives of this division are: 
1.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
2.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public owned treatment works that will pass through the public owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the public owned treatment works; 
3.  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
4.  To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
5.  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
6.  To enable the city to comply with its Montana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
C.  This division provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.010; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1923 , § 2, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.910. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
2.  "Approval authority" means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
3.  "Authorized representative of industrial user" means: 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
c.  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections a and b of this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
4.  "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
5.  "Best management practices (BMPs)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
6.  "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other polluted waters in drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
7.  "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
8.  "Bypass" means the diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility directly to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
9.  "Categorical industrial user" means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
10.  "Categorical pretreatment or categorical standards" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
11.  "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
12.  "Control authority" refers to the City of Bozeman. 
13.  "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
14.  "Estimated maximum daily discharge" means the greatest discharge into the sewerage system which it is estimated will occur in any one 24-hour day during the year. 
15.  "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
16.  "Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
17.  "Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
18.  "Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, (33 USC 1317), into the POTW. 
19.  "Industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge. 
20.  "Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
21.  "Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, of both: (a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (b) therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
22.  "National pollution discharge elimination system permit" or "NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
23.  "National pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard, or standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
24.  "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
25.  "New source:" 
a.  The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
i.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
ii.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
iii.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph a.ii or a.iii of this section, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
c.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
i.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
(A)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(B)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
ii.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
26.  "Pass-through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
27.  "Person" means any individual, business association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
28.  "pH" means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
29.  "Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, wastewater, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological material, radioactive material, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharge into water. 
30.  "Pollution" means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
31.  "POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
32.  "Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
33.  "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
34.  "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
35.  "Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
36.  "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by the city. 
37.  "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
38.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, or significant operational interference, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
39.  "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
40.  "Significant industrial user." Except as provided in 40 CFR 403.3(v) the term "significant industrial user" means: 
a.  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR ch. I, subch. N; and 
b.  Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the public works director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
41.  "Slug discharges" means any nonroutine discharge, episodic in nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
42.  "Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
43.  "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
44.  "Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
45.  "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
46.  "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
47.  "Upset" means an incident, beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user, that causes the user to be in unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. Upsets do not include noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
48.  "User" means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
49.  "Wastewater" means the liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
50.  "Wastewater contribution permit" shall have the meaning as set forth in section 40.03.1130. 
51.  "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
52.  "Waters of the state" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.020; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 1994; Ord. No. 1923 , § 3, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.920. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
CWA 	Clean Water Act 
l 	Liter 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
USC 	United States Code 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.030; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.930. - Discharge prohibitions. 
A.  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass-through or interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
1.  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketone, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which constitutes a fire or explosion hazard; 
2.  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to: fats, oils, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, paint, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
3.  Unless authorized by the city public works director, any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 12.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW; 
4.  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, injures or interferes with any wastewater treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceeds the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act; 
5.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or which create the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within in the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
6.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 and section 503 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
7.  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards; 
8.  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
9.  Any wastewater having a temperature that will cause the temperature of the wastewater plant influent to exceed 40 degrees centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit) or will inhibit biological activity of the wastewater treatment; 
10.  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW; 
11.  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed established limits; 
12.  Any septic tank pumpings or material taken from cesspools, privies or other sewage treatment systems, unless approved by the city engineer; 
13.  Any water or waste which may contain more than 25 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease that is generated from a restaurant, commercial kitchen or similar facility. Other users that discharge water or waste that contain fat, oil or grease may be determined to be a significant industrial user and subject to discharge limitations as determined by the public works director; 
14.  Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through; 
15.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except as may be approved by the engineer and at discharge points as may be designated by the city. 
B.  When it is determined that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, then the engineer shall: 
1.  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; 
2.  Develop effluent limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW; and 
3.  Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
C.  Upon such notification, the user shall develop a pretreatment program and comply with the conditions set forth in this division, particularly sections 40.03.1110 through 40.03.1200, inclusive. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.040; Ord. No. 1646, § 2, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 1923 , § 4, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.940. - Wastewater dischargers. 
No person shall discharge any wastewater to any natural outlet within the city or to the POTW except as authorized by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.050; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.950. - Permit required for connection or use. 
No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.060; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.960. - Sand and grease traps. 
A.  No person operating a filling station, garage, car wash or similar place having wash or grease racks shall discharge into the wastewater utility unless such place is provided with a sand and grease trap of a size and construction approved by the engineer. Each owner shall submit a detailed drawing and design criteria for the sand and grease trap. The operator of a restaurant or food preparation establishment discharging wastewater containing greater than 25 mg/l of oil and grease or that has a recurrence with grease building or blockage of sewer lines shall immediately install an approved grease trap. All sand and grease traps shall be properly maintained and serviced at the owner's expense. 
B.  Records of maintenance and service for the sand and grease trap shall be made available to the city upon request by the engineer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.070; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 3, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.970. - Construction and materials standards. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specification of A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.080; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.980. - Use of old building sewers permitted when. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the engineer, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.090; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.990. - Building sewer—Location. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted at the user's expense by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.100; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1000. - Same—Excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lighted so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the engineer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.110; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1010. - Same—Connection to system; specifications. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the city before installation. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.120; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1020. - Same—Inspection requirements. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city's building department. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.130; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 4, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1030. - Connection to public sewer; when required. 
The owner of any house, building or other property used for human occupancy, employment or recreation, which is situated within the city and abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary lateral sewer of the city within 100 feet of the property line, shall install suitable toilet facilities therein at the owner's own expense and connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer. The connection shall be made within 90 days after such owner is given official notice to make the connection by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.140; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 5, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1040. - Private sewage disposal facilities—Restrictions. 
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, unless such facility is approved by the Gallatin County health department. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.150; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 6, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1050. - Discharge of unpolluted waters to sanitary sewer prohibited unless approved. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer, except, however, that industrial cooling water or unpolluted water may be discharged into a sanitary sewer upon approval of the engineer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.160; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1060. - Connecting downspouts or drains to building sewers prohibited when. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.170; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1070. - Special agreements for sewage treatment. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. Such agreement shall not include the waiver of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.180; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1080. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.190; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1090. - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than national requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.200; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1100. - Excessive discharge. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.210; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985)  
Sec. 40.03.1110. - Accidental discharges; notice to employees; control of slug discharges. 
A.  Each user with the potential to contribute prohibited substances as outlined in section 40.03.930, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the engineer for review, and shall be approved by the engineer before construction of the facility. No user shall introduce industrial wastes into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW treatment plant of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
B.  Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the engineer a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any civil or criminal penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
C.  Each user shall permanently post on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Each user shall advise all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur of the emergency notification procedure. 
D.  The city may evaluate, at any time, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the city decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
1.  A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
2.  A description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW treatment plant of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition in section 40.03.930; and 
4.  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training and the building of containment structures or equipment. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.220; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 7, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1115. - Local limits. 
Pollutant limits for the following are established periodically to protect against pass through and interference. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the allowable discharge limits as established by city commission resolution for the following parameters: arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver, zinc. 
The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The public works director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, concentration-based limitations. The public works director may develop BMPs in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits or other requirements of this division. Such BMPs shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of this part and section 307(d) of the Act. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this division. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The public works director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 5, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1120. - Wastewater classification survey. 
A.  All industrial users shall complete and file with the engineer a wastewater classification survey containing the following information prior to discharging into the municipal wastewater system: name and facility address; type of services rendered and products produced; principal raw materials and catalysts used; plant operational characteristics; water use information; wastewater discharge information; wastewater quantities and constituents; wastewater pretreatment; a plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment monitoring facility locations; details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the POTW; and nondischarge wastes and their disposal. 
B.  All industrial users obtaining a building permit for initial construction or for building expansion or remodel shall complete and submit the survey to the engineer for review prior to approval of said building or remodel permit. 
C.  All industrial users shall update the wastewater classification survey on file with the engineer whenever significant changes are made in the wastewater discharge. Significant changes include without limitation, an increase or decrease in wastewater volume, concentration of materials or substances or changes in types of wastes that will last for a period exceeding normal wastewater production variations. The engineer may request a new submittal of the wastewater classification survey as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.230; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 8, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1130. - Industrial discharge permit. 
The city is authorized to control through permit, order, or similar means, the contribution to the POTW by each industrial user to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. In the case of industrial users identified as significant under 40 CFR §403.3(v), this control shall be achieved through individual permits or equivalent individual control mechanisms issued to each such user. 
A.  A significant industrial user shall obtain an industrial discharge permit renewable for a period not to exceed five years at the initial cost of $100.00 and a renewal fee of $50.00 if the user: 
1.  Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or 
2.  Is determined by the public works director to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on the quality of the wastewater treatment plant's effluent, sludge, scum or residues, or such that interference with the treatment process or facilities would result. 
B.  Existing significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division and proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least 60 days prior to discharging into the wastewater utility. The application shall include a statement regarding whether or not applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the standards. 
C.  The public works director may at any time, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.3(v)(3), determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria of section 40.03.910.A.42(b) is not a significant industrial user if the user has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
D.  Industrial wastewater permits are subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable reports, regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may must contain, without limitation, the following: 
1.  A statement of duration; 
2.  A statement of nontransferability without prior notification to the public works director and without a copy of the existing discharge permit being provided to the new owner or operator; 
3.  Effluent limits, including best management practices based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
4.  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
5.  Schedules for installation of pretreatment equipment to bring discharge into compliance with applicable regulations; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
7.  Specifications for monitoring programs that include sampling locations; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for tests; and reporting schedules; 
8.  Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports and compliance progress report; 
9.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access thereto; 
10.  Requirements for notification of the city to the new introduction of wastewater constituents or any change in character of the wastewater constituents or average volume being introduced into the wastewater utility; 
11.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines; 
12.  Requirement to control slug discharges, if determined by the public works director to be necessary; and 
13.  Other conditions as deemed necessary by the public works director in order to enforce the provisions of this division. 
E.  The public works director shall issue industrial discharge permits for a specified time period not to exceed five years. The industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions for the permit may be subject to modification by the public works director during the term of the permit if limitations or requirements are modified, if necessary to meet requirements of the city's MPDES discharge permit to accommodate new or increased contributions of wastewater or changes in the nature of the wastewater, or if there is other good cause. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
F.  An applicant for a permit shall pay the prescribed fees. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.240; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 9, 1994; Ord. No. 1923 , § 6, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1140. - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  All significant industrial users shall provide and operate, at their expense, monitoring equipment and facilities sufficient to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurements of the private sewer or internal drainage system. 
B.  The monitoring facility shall normally be situated outside of the building on the user's premises. If the industrial user's service line ties into an existing city manhole and such manhole allows for safe sampling and isolation of the industrial user's discharge, the engineer may allow said manhole to serve as the industrial user's monitoring facility. 
C.  Any significant industrial user or user discharging prohibited substances or specific pollutants into the POTW shall install a monitoring facility for each separate discharge. Each separate monitoring facility shall meet requirements set forth by the engineer with safe and independent access for city personnel at all times. 
D.  There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The industrial user shall maintain and operate its own monitoring facility and all sampling and measuring equipment at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the industrial user's expense. 
E.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the industrial user shall construct the sampling and monitoring equipment and facilities in accordance with monitoring requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications within 60 days following written notification by the engineer or before final building inspection approval. 
F.  All industrial users shall provide safe access to sampling and monitoring sites and pretreatment facilities at all times for authorized city personnel. 
G.  The city may inspect the facilities of any industrial user to determine whether the intent of this division and all applicable requirements are being met. Owners, employees or occupants of premises where wastewater is discharged shall allow city representatives or agents ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises where wastewater is created or discharged, including industrial process areas, for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, or performance evaluation. Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into industrial user's premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel authorized by the city, the state, or United States Environmental Protection Agency will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.250; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 10, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1150. - Sampling, analysis and inspection. 
A.  All industrial users shall obtain the engineer's approval for all sampling and measuring equipment prior to its installation or use. All measuring, test and analyses and all sampling that the industrial user is required to make shall be done at the user's own expense. 
B.  All industrial users shall make all measurements, tests, sampling and analyses required by this division in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. The engineer may direct an industrial user to deliver a split sample to a designated laboratory for analytical verification. 
C.  The engineer shall determine the frequency of sampling, measuring and analyses and include them as conditions of the user's industrial discharge permit. The engineer may impose mass limitations on industrial users that use flow equalization to meet applicable standards or requirements or in other cases where imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. 
D.  The city may place upon the industrial user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. 
E.  Sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of the industrial user. Where the city itself collects all the information required for the report, the industrial user may be excused from submitting duplicate test data results. 
F.  The city may randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by the industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
G.  The city shall inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year. 
H.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Proper chain of custody documentation shall be provided for samples. 
I.  Except as indicated in subsections J and K below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by public works director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
J.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
K.  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the public works director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs Section 6.4 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
L.  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement of this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedure prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.260; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 11, 1994; Ord. No. 1923 , § 7, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1160. - Reporting and compliance requirements. 
A.  All significant industrial users required to meet categorical pretreatment standards must submit the reports required in 40 CFR 403.12. All reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional. All industrial users that have permits or that have the potential to discharge prohibited substances or specific pollutants that may cause a significant impact on the POTW shall submit to the public works director semiannual compliance reports at the times designated on the permit, and containing information and data as required by the permit, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The name and address of the industrial user including the name of the operator and owners; 
2.  Any environmental control permits held by or for the industrial user; 
3.  A brief description of the nature and average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by the industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
4.  Building plans or details that indicate all points of discharge to the city sewer system from the regulated process; 
5.  New sources. All new sources subject to existing categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report within 90 days from the date of first discharge demonstrating actual and continuing compliance with those standards; 
6.  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in paragraphs A.1—9 of this section. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in § 40.03.1115, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
7.  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
b.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; 
c.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
d.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of §403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with §403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
e.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator; 
f.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
g.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW; 
8.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
9.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
a.  Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (§403.7), the combined wastestream formula (§403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (§403.13) at the time the user submits the required report, the information required by this section shall pertain to the modified limits. 
b.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (§403.7), the combined wastestream formula (§403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (§403.13) after the user submits the report required by this section, any necessary amendments to the information requested by this section shall be submitted by the user to the control authority within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
10.  Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by this section: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
11.  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify public works director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to pretreatment coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
B.  All applications and reports submitted to the industrial wastewater control program must contain the following certification statement and be signed as required in subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) below: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(a)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
(i)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation, or; 
(ii)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively. 
(c)  The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial user submitting the reports is a federal, state, or local governmental entity, or their agents. 
(d)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this section if: 
(i)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (a), (b), or (c); 
(ii)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(iii)  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
C.  All significant users must investigate instances of noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements, as indicated in the reports and notices required under 40 CFR 403.12, or indicated by analysis, inspection, and surveillance activities described in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Sample taking and analysis and the collection of other information shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions. 
D.  All industrial users must comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR part 25 in the enforcement of national pretreatment standards. These procedures shall include provision for at least annual public notification in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Chronic violation of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1); 
2.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
3.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
4.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
5.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
6.  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
7.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and 
8.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
E.  The city may publish an annual public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality in which the POTW is located, of industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. 
F.  All industrial users shall notify the POTW, EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
G.  All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
H.  Any industrial user submitting information to the city pursuant to this division may claim it to be confidential if it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the public works director that release of such information would divulge information processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as the user's trade secrets. 
1.  The user must assert such claim at the time of submission by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If no such claim is made at the time of submission, the city may make information available to the public without further notice. 
2.  Such confidential business information shall not be made available to the public, but the city may use the information for determining compliance with this division. 
3.  Effluent or discharge data is not confidential. 
4.  The city may provide confidential business information to governmental agencies upon written request for uses directly related to enforcement of this division, but, the city shall not transmit the confidential information to any government agency until the city has received written approval from the user. 
I.  No person shall make any false statement, representation or certification, knowing it to be false, in any application, record, plan, data or document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division. 
J.  Notice of potential problems, including slug loading. All categorical and non-categorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, as defined by §403.5(b), by the industrial user. 
K.  No person shall falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division. 
L.  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this section shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this section, and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the public works director. 
M.  Any industrial user and POTW subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section, including documentation associated with best management practices. Such records shall include for all samples: 
1.  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
2.  The dates analyses were performed; 
3.  Who performed the analyses; 
4.  The analytical techniques/methods use; and 
5.  The results of such analyses. 
N.  The public works director shall have access to records and wastewater testing facilities during normal working hours of the user. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.270; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 12, 1994; Ord. No. 1923 , § 8, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1170. - Affirmative defenses. 
A.  An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general and specific prohibitions established in section 40.03.930.A where the user can demonstrate that: 
1.  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference; and 
2.  A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be, was developed by the city for each pollutant in the industrial user's discharge that caused pass-through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference; or 
3.  If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant that caused the pass-through or interference, the industrial user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the industrial user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.280; Ord. No. 1390, § 14, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1180. - Upsets. 
A.  Definition. For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
B.  Effect of an upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph C are met. 
C.  Conditions necessary for a demonstration of upset. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
1.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
2.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
3.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
D.  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
E.  Reviewability of agency consideration of claims of upset. In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion. Agency enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
F.  User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.290; Ord. No. 1390, § 15, 1994; Ord. No. 1923 , § 9, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1190. - Bypass. 
A.  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections B and C of this section. 
B.  The industrial user shall provide notice of bypass, to the city, as follows: 
1.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW treatment plant, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
2.  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW treatment plant within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
C.  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against an industrial user for bypass, unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; and 
2.  There were no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
3.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection B of this section. 
D.  The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection C of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.300; Ord. No. 1390, § 16, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1200. - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
A.  The engineer may suspend or revoke any industrial discharge permit and terminate the wastewater service if the permittee: 
1.  Discharges wastewater which presents imminent or substantial endangerment to the environment and/or public health, safety and welfare; 
2.  Discharges wastewater which causes interference with the POTW or causes the city to violate any conditions of its NPDES permit; 
3.  Violates any condition stated in the permit or provisions of this division; 
4.  Fails to report an accidental discharge of a toxic substance; 
5.  Increases the use of process water or attempts to dilute the discharge for the sole purpose of achieving compliance with any limitations; 
6.  Falsifies any report of the wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
7.  Tampers with, disrupts or damages monitoring and sampling equipment or facilities; 
8.  Refuses reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
9.  Fails to pay fees or charges. 
B.  In the event of any violation of this division, the engineer shall revoke the industrial discharge permit for the remainder of its term or suspend it for a shorter period based on the severity of the disqualification, its effect on public health, safety and welfare, and the time during which the disqualification can be remedied if at all. 
C.  No user will be permitted to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which is in violation of this division. Any user may have their wastewater service suspended or terminated by the engineer. 
D.  Any person notified of a revocation or suspension of such person's wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall sever the sewer connection or take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the engineer within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
E.  Any user, whose permit is revoked or suspended, may request a hearing before the city commission to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not have been taken. 
1.  The city commission will cause the user to be notified of the time and place set for the hearing. Notice will be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
2.  The city commission or its designated representative will conduct the hearing by accepting testimony and evidence relevant to the matter involved in the hearing. Testimony shall be taken under oath and transcribed so that it may be made available to any party at the hearing or the public. 
3.  The city commission will, within ten days after the hearing, issue its final determination to the user. 
F.  The user shall pay all costs and expenses associated with any such suspension and restoration of service. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.310; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, §§ 13, 17, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1210. - Nuisance; injunctive relief available; liability. 
A.  Any discharge into the POTW in violation of this division or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, is declared to be a nuisance. 
B.  If any person discharges into the POTW in violation of this division or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, the city attorney may, in addition to any other remedies, commence an action for equitable or legal relief, or both, including a petition in a court of competent jurisdiction for a temporary restraining order, and preliminary and permanent injunctions to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this division. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this division or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, shall be liable for any loss, damage or expense to the city or others arising out of, resulting from or occurring in connection with said violation, including but not limited to injury to or death of any person, damage to property, enforcement of this division, attorneys' fees or increased costs for managing effluent, sludge or operating POTW. 
D.  Any person who discharges into the POTW in violation of any provision of this division or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, shall be liable for any expense arising out of, resulting from or occurring in connection with said discharge if the city is found to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, including but not limited to fines assessed against the city, enforcement of this division, attorney's fees, sampling or analytical testing. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.320; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 13, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1220. - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who purposely, knowingly or negligently violates any provision of this division, or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.330; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 1390, § 13, 1994; Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 1995)  
Sec. 40.03.1230. - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division, or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 for each violation, and a separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1982, § 13.28.340; Ord. No. 1390, § 18, 1994)  
Sec. 40.03.1240. - Notification of violation. 
When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the public works director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public works director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 10, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1250. - Consent orders. 
The public works director may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 40.03.1270 and 40.03.1280 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 11, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1260. - Show cause hearing. 
The public works director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the public works director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 14 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 40.03.910.A and required by section 40.03.1160. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 12, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1270. - Compliance orders. 
When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 13, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1280. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the public works director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
A.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
B.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 14, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 40.03.1290. - Administrative fines. 
A.  When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
B.  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the public works director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the public works director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The public works director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
C.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1923 , § 15, 3-6-2017)  
Secs. 40.03.1300—40.03.1340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY 
 
Sec. 40.03.1350. - Applicability of division and plumbing code. 
Any person owning or leasing property outside the corporate limits of the city now connected with the system of sanitary sewers shall be subject to the provisions of this division. As a condition and a prerequisite for the continuing use of the sanitary sewerage system, the plumbing inspector may, upon demand, inspect the plumbing on such property and require the owner or occupant to comply with the latest plumbing code. The plumbing upon any property which is to be connected with the city sewerage system shall comply with the plumbing code. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.010; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1360. - Application for permission to connect. 
Application for permission to connect with the sanitary sewerage system shall be made in writing to the city manager. The owner or lessee of such property shall make application to connect as provided, obtain a plumbing permit from the plumbing inspector, and pay the inspection fee required by the plumbing code. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.020; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1370. - Extension of service; factors for consideration. 
A.  The following factors will be considered by the city commission in determining whether or not to extend water or sewer service outside of the city limits of the city: 
1.  Orderly growth and development of the city; 
2.  Water and land pollution abatement or control; 
3.  Need of persons or industries requesting service as determined by the city commission; 
4.  Capacity of the utility system of the city to serve property outside of the city limits of the city; 
5.  Extension of water or sewer service facilities outside of the city limits will not be approved if the property to be served has been determined by an engineering analysis to be outside of the areas that the existing water system, sewer collection system and sewage treatment facilities are designated and constructed to serve. 
B.  The city manager will be responsible for submitting information and recommendations pertaining to the foregoing factors. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.030; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1380. - Consent to annexation; design specifications applicable. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation requesting water and/or sewer service outside of the incorporated limits of the city shall be required, as a condition precedent to the extension of such service, to execute and deliver to the city a written consent of annexation of the property to be served by the water and/or sewer facilities. 
B.  All extensions of water and/or sewer lines outside the city limits shall be constructed in accordance with the design and specifications approved by the city engineer prior to the installation of the water and/or sewer lines. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.040; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1390. - Sewer connection charge. 
A charge based on actual cost shall be made for each connection to any lateral of the city sewerage system to serve property located outside the city limits. The charge established by this section shall apply to each dwelling or building connected with a sewer lateral. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.050; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1400. - Line extensions; costs borne by property owners. 
The cost of water and/or sewer line extensions outside the city limits shall be borne by the owners of the property to be served, who shall also pay all water and sewer assessments and rates. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.060; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1410. - Rates, charges and rentals. 
The sanitary sewerage disposal rates, charges and rentals shall be charged by the city and paid monthly for all premises outside the city limits which are now or hereafter connected with the sewerage system of the city sanitary sewerage disposal, based upon the total consumption of water used during the months of November, December, January and February on the respective premises. The rate shall be computed in the same manner as for city residents, and where the character of the waste exceeds the limitations imposed by the ordinances of the city, the surcharges shall be based on a formula used by the city with the determination of the charge made by the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1982, § 13.32.070; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Secs. 40.03.1420—40.03.1540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 40.03.1550. - Persons liable for sewerage rates, charges and rentals. 
The rates, charges and rentals for sewage disposal service provided by the sewerage system of the city shall be imposed upon the parties and properties which are connected thereto for sanitary sewerage disposal. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.010; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1560. - Operation and maintenance costs designated; determination. 
The city, or its city engineer, shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.020; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980 Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1570. - Wastewater contribution percentage; determination procedure. 
A.  The city, or its city engineer, shall determine each user's average daily volume of wastewater which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharged to the wastewater system, to determine each user's volume contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow. The city, or its city engineer, shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five-day, 20-degree centigrade bio-chemical oxygen demand (BOD) which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all five-day BOD discharged to the wastewater system to determine each user's BOD contribution percentage. 
B.  The city, or its city engineer, shall determine each user's average suspended solids (SS) poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids discharged to the wastewater system, to determine the user's suspended solids contribution percentage. Each user's volume contribution percentage, BOD contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow, of the total five-day, 20-degree Celsius BOD and of the suspended solids, respectively. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.030; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1580. - Determining a surcharge for users with excess BOD and SS. 
The city, or its city engineer, will determine the average suspended solids (SS) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average residential user. The city, or its city engineer, will assess a surcharge rate for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with BOD and SS strengths greater than the average residential user. Such users will be assessed a surcharge sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users' above-normal BOD and 250 ppm SS. The surcharge rate structure for such above-normal-strength waste discharges is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.040; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1590. - Determining each user's wastewater service charges. 
Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contribution as determined in sections 40.03.1570 and 40.03.1580 shall be added together to determine such user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users may be considered to be one class of user, and an equitable service charge may be determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user. The city manager may classify industrial, commercial and other nonresidential establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to volume, suspended solids, and BOD. Each user's wastewater treatment cost contribution will be assessed in accordance with the rate schedule which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.050; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1600. - Notification of wastewater treatment rate. 
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.060; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1610. - Billing of charges; penalties for late payment. 
The city shall submit an annual statement to the user for the user's annual wastewater service charge, or 1/12 of the user's annual wastewater service charge may be included with the monthly water and/or wastewater utility billing. The city shall add a penalty of one and one-half percent per month if the payment is not received by the city within 15 days. Should any user fail to pay the user wastewater service charge and penalty within three months of the due date, the city may stop the wastewater service to the property. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.070; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1620. - Sewer connections;deferred payments authorized when. 
Pursuant to the provisions of MCA 7-3-4443, it is provided that whenever any sewer connection shall be made voluntarily, or ordered to be made by the director of public service, and the person so voluntarily making such connection or making it pursuant to such order shall, within 30 days after such connection is completed, request in writing filed with the city clerk that the cost thereof be divided into not more than eight equal annual payments with interest on the deferred payments at not to exceed six percent per year, the director of administrative services shall make the appropriate entry on the director's books of account, and the assessment shall be certified and collected as are other assessments for street improvements. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.080; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1630. - Review of wastewater service charges. 
The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than every two years, and will revise the system as necessary to ensure equity of the service charge system established herein and to ensure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works. If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission, such factual information, and the city shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.090; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1640. - Payment of sewerage charge; status of debt. 
A.  The sewerage charges for each premises shall be personal or corporate obligations of the same parties who are obligated for payment of city water bills for such premises, according to the ordinances and regulations respecting the city water utility. It is the duty of the water department of the city to prepare, issue and mail, as near as may be to the first day of each calendar month, a statement of the sewerage charge for each user of the sewerage utility. In all cases, the sewerage charges shall appear as a surcharge, separately stated, upon the water bill as rendered. Each such charge shall be due and payable at the time and place as the water bill on which it is shown, and no payment shall be accepted by the city, or any of its officers or employees, of a water bill without concurrent payment of the sewerage charge; and all of the penalties, including the shutting off of the customer's water supply, shall be applied in each case of nonpayment of the sewerage charge in like manner as for nonpayment of the water charge. 
B.  Each user of the sewerage utility shall be deemed to have contracted and agreed to pay the sewerage charges hereby imposed, and such charges may be collected by actions at law whenever the same are more than 30 days overdue and shall bear interest at the highest rate allowed by law for contract indebtedness from and after the 15th day of the month in which the charge becomes due and payable. 
C.  To the full extent now or hereafter permitted by law, overdue sewerage charges shall constitute a lien upon, and enforceable against, the real estate constituting the premises which was the user of the sewerage utility for which the charges were imposed. No subsequent owner or occupant of any premises for which any sewerage charge is overdue shall be entitled to water or sewerage service until the overdue charge is paid, notwithstanding that such subsequent owner or occupant may not have been personally obligated thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.100; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981)  
Sec. 40.03.1650. - Extra-strength surcharge; computation of rates. 
Customers contributing wastewater with strength concentration in excess of normal allowable limits of 250 milligrams per liter of BOD, 250 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, and five milligrams per liter of phosphorus shall be subject to an extra strength surcharge, in addition to the regular service charge computed in accordance with the current rate structure. 
(Code 1982, § 13.36.110; ; Ord. No. 1059, 1980; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1081, § 2, 1981; Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 1981)  
ARTICLE 4. - STORMWATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40.04.010. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this article is to: 
1.  Protect and enhance the water quality of Bozeman Creek, the East Gallatin River, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act of 1972 and the US EPA Phase II Stormwater Regulations. 
2.  Minimize non-stormwater discharges to storm drains and minimize pollutants in stormwater discharges. 
3.  Provide design, construction, operation, and maintenance criteria for permanent and temporary on-site stormwater management facilities to control stormwater runoff. 
4.  Establish legal authority to conduct inspections, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
5.  Establish legal authority to develop, implement, and enforce a program to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff from construction activities. 
6.  Establish legal authority to develop, implement, and enforce a program to address stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopment projects and provide for the issuance of penalties for violations of this article. 
7.  Provide an equitable distribution of cost for the program including but not limited to the fee schedule in accordance with "Rates for Storm Sewers" as hereafter established by commission resolution. 
8.  Provide for the issuance of a permit system for construction activities occurring within the city to meet the purposes and intents of this article. 
B.  Discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) may be subject to further regulation by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Montana Department of Environmental Quality and local agencies owning and operating an MS4. Local agencies owning and operating portions of the MS4 in Bozeman include, but are not limited to, Gallatin County, Montana State University (Bozeman), and the Montana Department of Transportation. 
C.  This article provides for the regulation of contributors or dischargers to the city's stormwater collection system through the development of a stormwater management program, including issuance and enforcement of private and public construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP) to address construction site stormwater, enforcement of adopted Best Management Practice (BMP) construction standards, enforcement of post-construction stormwater BMP maintenance, and the detection and elimination of illicit discharges. This article authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, protects the state and receiving waters, and establishes penalties and remedies for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.010), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 6, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.020. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city to protect the health and welfare of its citizens and environment by monitoring, reducing, and regulating discharges that may cause pollution to the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.030. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all construction and maintenance activities for industrial, commercial, institutional, single household and multi-household residential developments, as well as subdivision projects with private access which may introduce pollutants into any private or public storm drain, or any body of water within the city's MS4 jurisdiction. Exceptions include activities that are contained entirely on Federal, State, or County lands and do not impact adjacent jurisdictions or MS4s. Additionally, permanent and temporary stormwater management controls and facilities, constructed as part of any activities listed in this article, which are located within the city's MS4 jurisdiction, are also subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.030), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.040. - Regulatory consistency. 
This article shall be construed to ensure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the Montana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit and any amendments, revisions or re-issuance thereof. Activities regulated by this article may be subject to further regulation by the specific public entity owning and operating an MS4. No permit or approval issued pursuant to this article shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and approvals required for activities regulated by any other applicable rule, code, act, permit or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.040), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.050. - City stormwater master plan. 
The city's Stormwater Master Plan provides additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and is incorporated by reference herein. Design and construction of stormwater facilities shall meet minimum water quality performance standards that are outlined in the city's design standards that are separate from the Stormwater Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.050), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.060. - Ultimate responsibility of discharger. 
The standards set forth in and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards. This article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the state caused by that person. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any city agent or employee for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.060), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.070. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Authorized enforcement agent" means the director or any individual designated by the director as an authorized enforcement agent. 
2.  "Best management practices" (BMPs) means schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of state waters. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
3.  "Non-stormwater disposal best management practices" means best management practices adopted by reference by this article for non-stormwater disposal. 
4.  "CFR" means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
5.  "Clean Water Act (CWA)" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted by Public Law 92-500 as amended by Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483, and 97-117; and 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
6.  "Comprehensive drainage plan" means a stormwater management plan that covers all current and anticipated development on a site greater than five acres and sites planned for phased development, including the impact on existing off-site infrastructure. 
7.  "Concentrated flow" means the parameters exceed the median concentration in Table 2 of the general permit for MS4s and the flow exceeds dry weather flow conditions. 
8.  "Construction activity" means any work that results in land disturbance of any nature. 
9.  "Control measure" means any best management practices or other methods used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
10.  "Design Standards" means the city Design Standards and Specifications Policy prepared and updated by the city engineering department. 
11.  "Development" means any construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure within the jurisdiction of the city as well as any manmade change or alteration to the landscape, including but not limited to mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving, excavating and filling. 
11.1.  "Director" shall mean the director of the city's public works department. 
12.  "Discharge" means any introduction or addition of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance into the municipal storm sewer system (MS4), waters of the state, or into waters of the United States by a person. 
13.  "Discharger" means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
14.  "Firefighting water" means any water, and any substance or materials contained therein, used in an emergency to control or extinguish a fire. 
15.  "Illicit connection" means: 
a.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government agency; or 
b.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved or permitted by the city. 
16.  "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater except the following: discharges not identified as significant contributors of pollutants listed in the general permit and allowable under the city's MS4 program. 
17.  "Impervious surface" means a surface which prevents or retards the penetration of water into the ground including, but not limited to, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt paving, gravel, compacted native surfaces and earthen materials, and oiled, macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. 
18.  "Maximum extent practicable" (MEP) means the technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems to reduce pollutants in the stormwater discharges that was established by the Clean Water Act, §402(p). A discussion of MEP as it applies to MS4s is found in ARM 17.30.1111(5). 
19.  "MDEQ" means the Montana Department of Environmental Quality, a state regulating agency. 
20.  "MPDES permit" means the Montana Pollution Discharge Elimination System, an area-wide MPDES permit that is issued to a government agency or agencies for the discharge of pollutants from any point source into the waters of the state or United States. 
21.  "MS4" means the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
22.  "Municipal separate storm sewer system (or MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyance (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by a public body (created under state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as sewer district, irrigation district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity that discharges to the waters of the United States and which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in ARM title 17, chapter 30, subchapter 13. 
23.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit" (NPDES) means a permit issued by MDEQ, in compliance with the Federal Clean Water Act for the discharge of pollutants from any point source into the waters of the state or United States. 
24.  "NOI" means notice of intent. 
25.  "NOT" means notice of termination. 
26.  "Notice of intent (or NOI)" means submittal required by the state under the general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. 
27.  "Notice of termination (or NOT)" means submittal required by the state under the general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. The construction site has been finally stabilized and the operator desires to be relieved of responsibility on the general permit coverage period. 
28.  "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
29.  "Off-site stormwater" means any runoff crossing property lines that discharges to public right-of-way, property not included in the SWPPP, or property owned by others. 
30.  "Owner or operator" means 
a.  A person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises a point source; 
b.  For the purpose of permitting "stormwater discharge associated with construction activity" means any "owner or operator" associated with a construction project, who is a person designated as an eligible signatory, who has operational control over the construction plans and specifications and has day-to-day operational control at the project to ensure compliance with the SWPPP. 
31.  "Plan" pertains to the stormwater master plan. 
32.  "Point source" means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
33.  "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC 2011 et seq.)], heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water, and as otherwise defined in 40 CFR 122.2. 
34.  "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
35.  "Redevelopment" means a project that proposes to add, replace and/or alter impervious surfaces affecting an existing drainage system, other than routine maintenance, resurfacing, or repair. A project which meets the criteria of a major modification as defined in this section shall be considered a redevelopment. 
36.  "State waters" means any body of water, irrigation system, or drainage system, either surface or underground. 
37.  "Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
38.  "Stormwater management" means the process of collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater to ensure control of the magnitude and frequency of runoff and to minimize the hazards associated with flooding. Also includes implementing controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants including management practices, control techniques and systems, design and engineering methods. 
39.  "Stormwater design standards" means the design standards manual prepared by the city engineering office which provides design, performance, and review criteria for stormwater management practices. 
40.  "Stormwater management plan" means details of the on-site drainage system, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques that will be used to control stormwater, including drawings, engineering calculations, computer analyses, maintenance and operations procedures, and all other supporting documentation for developments equal to or less than five acres. 
41.  "Stormwater pollution prevention plan" (SWPPP) means under the state's general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activities which characterizes the construction activity, potential sources of pollutants, and best management practices (BMPs) to help ensure pollutants do not reach surface waters. 
42.  "Stormwater system" means the physical facilities, both private and public, temporary or permanent, designed to treat, collect and transport stormwater which includes, but is not limited to: curbs, inlets, pipe, box culverts, swales, ditches, ponds, French drains, boulder pits, wattles, and silt fences. 
43.  "Stormwater utility" means a funding mechanism for planning for, maintenance and operation of, as well as capital improvements to, the stormwater system. The utility is a user fee charged to all property within the service area which benefit from the utility. 
44.  "Total maximum daily load" (TMDL) means the sum of the individual waste load allocations for point sources and load allocations for both nonpoint sources and natural background sources established at a level necessary to achieve compliance with applicable surface water quality standards, as defined in Montana Code Annotated (MCA) 75-5-103. 
45.  "U.S. EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
46.  "Unified development ordinance" (UDO) means the entire chapter 38 of the Bozeman Municipal Code. 
47.  "Variance" means a modification of the requirements of this article. 
48.  "Watercourse" means any body of water including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the city or state. 
49.  "Wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that, under normal circumstances, does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas (also includes any area meeting the definition of wetland under chapter 38). 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.02.080), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 1831, § 2, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 2002 , §§ 4, 5, 3-26-2018)  
Secs. 40.04.080—40.04.190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 40.04.200. - Prohibitions of illicit discharges. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards or that could cause the city to be in violation of its MPDES. It shall be unlawful to store, handle or apply any pollutant in a manner that will cause exposure to rainfall or runoff and discharge to the MS4 and to state waters or waters of the United States. 
B.  The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any discharge not composed entirely of stormwater to the MS4 is prohibited except as follows: 
1.  Discharges pursuant to an MPDES General Permit for MS4s permit and discharges due to firefighting activities. 
2.  Discharges from the following activities shall not be considered a source of pollutants to the MS4 and to state waters when properly managed, and shall not be considered illicit discharges unless determined by the city to be significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4, concentration of pollutants, proximity to a watercourse, or condition of a receiving water: 
a.  Irrigation water; 
b.  Irrigation ditch return flows; 
c.  Landscape irrigation; 
d.  Permitted diverted stream flows; 
e.  Rising groundwaters; 
f.  Rising natural floodwaters; 
g.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewers; 
h.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
i.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
j.  Foundation drains; 
k.  Air conditioning condensation; 
l.  Springs; 
m.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
n.  Footing drains; 
o.  Lawn watering (excluding over watering); 
p.  Individual residential car washing; 
q.  Individual residential dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges; 
r.  Individual residential street washing; 
s.  Fire hydrant flushing; 
t.  Water line flushing; 
u.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
v.  Uncontaminated water from irrigation system meter pits (and flows from emergency firefighting activities). 
Before applying the listed exceptions, the city shall make a determination on a case-by-case basis as to what is considered significant contributors of pollutants. In addition, the following non-stormwater discharges need not be prohibited from entering the MS4, provided approved control measures to minimize the impacts from the sources are implemented: Municipally owned dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; Municipal water tank draining and water from street washing (including sidewalks and medians) that is conducted by city staff or under contract with the city. 
3.  The city may exempt, in writing, other non-stormwater discharges which are not a significant source of pollutants to the city's MS4 or state waters. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.04.010), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.210. - Prohibitions of illicit connections. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
C.  A person is in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage or other pollutant to the MS4, or allows an existing connection to continue. 
D.  Illicit connections must be disconnected at the owner's expense. 
E.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the city. The notice will specify a reasonable time period to locate the drain or conveyance, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations shall be documented and provided to the city engineering office. 
F.  No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, wash or rinse, keep any substance that may cause or contribute to pollution, or permit any such substance to be thrown, deposited, left, maintained, washed or rinsed, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, catchbasin, manhole, ditch, channel, pond or any other component of the MS4, or state waters. Pollutants for this purpose include but are not limited to oil, solvents, anti-freeze, flammables, septage, poisonous or infectious substances, garbage, soaps, acids, bases and sediment. Wastes deposited in streets in a manner allowed by the city for the purpose of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.04.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.220. - Parking lots and similar structures. 
A.  Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street, road, alley, or similar structure or persons conducting routine building wash downs, shall clean and maintain those structures or areas prior to discharging to a storm drain. 
B.  Newly constructed and/or significantly remodeled covered parking garages or other covered structures shall be drained into a stormwater system in accordance with this article and other city ordinances or design standards. The owner and operator of a private stormwater collection system may be required to construct control structures to ensure the pre-treatment of such discharges prior to entry into the stormwater system. Existing structures are exempt unless deemed by the city to be a significant contributor of pollution to the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.04.030), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.230. - Outdoor storage areas; commercial and industrial facilities. 
In outdoor areas, no person shall store grease, oil or other pollutants including restaurant grease bins in a manner that will or may result in such substances entering a stormwater system. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts, or other objects in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substances to a storm drain. To prevent the discharge of hazardous substances to the MS4, the city may require the installation of a spill containment system. Spill containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.04.040), 3-22-2010)  
Secs. 40.04.240—40.04.340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 40.04.350. - Required construction submittals/permits/fees. 
A.  Any construction activity within the city must comply with the provisions of this article, the city's Stormwater Management Plan, the currently adopted State of Montana's General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities, MCA 75-5-101, and the Administrative Rules of Montana (ARM 17.30.1101; 17.30.1301 et seq. and ARM 17.30.601 et seq.). 
B.  The city may require any person performing support activities related to a construction site (e.g., concrete or asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material storage areas, etc.) within the city to provide the following: NOI, SWPPP, NOT, similar to the requirements of construction activity provided that: 
1.  The support activity is not a commercial operation serving multiple unrelated construction projects and does not operate beyond the completion of the construction activity; 
2.  Appropriate controls and measures are identified in the SWPPP for discharge from support activity; 
3.  The support activity disturbs an area that is one acre or greater in size or is within 50 feet of any watercourse 
C.  In accordance with the state's reporting requirements the property owner shall also notify the city when there is any facility contact change, any spill or release, any finding that there has been noncompliance with the SWPPP. 
D.  The city shall conduct all inspections of any construction activities requiring a SWPPP and for city permits required under this article. 
E.  The city will enforce the requirements under the state's general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity in whole or in part determined by the city's enforcement agent. 
F.  As required by the director, the owner shall retain completed and signed copies of the NOI, MDEQ's confirmation letter for receipt of the NOI package, and a SWPPP at the construction activity project site at all times during the coverage period. If the operator does not maintain a permanent office or building at the project site, copies of these documents shall be retained at the operator's office and shall be brought to the project site by the operator responsible for implementation of the SWPPP. 
G.  Upon failure of the owner to take corrective actions on, or prior to, a required date of a reported or observed spill or the potential to release pollutants, including sediment, into the stormwater system, public right-of-way, private infrastructure, or state waters, the city may either perform the corrective work or employ contractors to do the same. The owner shall reimburse the city for all expenditures pertaining to the corrective action. 
H.  The city's enforcement agent and an official of the city's building division has the authority to issue a stop work order pursuant to the remediation of a current violation or the potential of a violation of this article. 
I.  Permission to enter. The city's enforcement agent and an official of the city's building division may conduct such investigations, examinations and site evaluations as they deem necessary to verify the information supplied or the execution of approved work. The submission of material for review and for a required permit shall constitute a grant of permission to enter the subject property. The grant of permission shall continue until all final actions required by the permit process have been completed including any follow up monitoring. The permission to enter extends to contractors working on the city's behalf. 
J.  All construction activities within the city must comply with the following and obtain a permit from the director prior to the commencement of any construction activities on the site or issuance of a building permit, whichever is earlier, by submitting any application materials required by the director as follows: 
1.  Sites where construction activities will disturb one acre or greater: All construction activities where construction activities will disturb one acre or greater must comply with the requirements of this article and the permit issued by the director. The owner of property where such work will be commenced must obtain a permit for such work from the director by providing materials required by the director, an executed copy of the state's NOI, the SWPPP, other documents such as but not limited to a state issued dewatering permit and, upon completion, a NOT. 
2.  Sites less than one acre where multi-household, commercial, or industrial development is occurring: All construction activities on sites less than one acre in size for the development of multi-household, commercial, or industrial development must submit the permit application materials required by the director and comply with the requirements of this article and the requirements of the permit issued by the director. The director may authorize construction activities for multi-household, commercial, or industrial development disturbing less than 10,000 square feet to submit a permit under section 40.04.350.J.3. 
3.  Sites less than one acre where single-household development is occurring: All construction activities on sites less than one acre for the construction of single-household structures must submit the permit application materials required by the director and comply with the requirements of this article and the requirements of the permit issued by the director. 
K.  The city may charge a fee for permits issued under this article pursuant to a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the commission. 
L.  By applying for a permit as required by this article, a property owner consents to the city filing a lien for non-payment of abatement costs and withholding the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building permit pursuant to section 10.02.010.D, or issuing a stop work order for a building permit under the authority of this article or pursuant to section 10.02.010.E for any violation of this article or a permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.06.010), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 7, 3-26-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002 , § 7, adopted March 26, 2018, amended the title of § 40.04.350 to read as herein set out. The former § 40.04.350 title pertained to required construction submittals.  
Sec. 40.04.360. - Stormwater management. 
A.  Erosion control. Owner/operator shall: 
1.  Stabilize disturbed soil using recommended methods described in the city's Stormwater Master Plan; 
2.  Stabilize or cover soil stockpiles to prevent sediment runoff or blowing of dust or sediment from the site; 
3.  Prevent upland runoff that may erode disturbed slopes. 
B.  Sediment control. Owner/operator shall: 
1.  Provide sediment controls in the form of settling basins or traps, temporary seeding, perimeter controls or other BMP described in the city's Stormwater Master Plan; 
2.  Where possible, design settling basins in a manner that allows adaption to provide long-term stormwater management; 
3.  Protect adjacent properties by the use of a vegetative buffer, silt fence, fiber roles, or other appropriate BMP as outlined in the city's Stormwater Master Plan. 
C.  Construction site access. Owner/operator shall: 
1.  Limit the number of temporary access entrances onto a construction site; 
2.  Implement BMP's to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets or alleys by construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains. 
D.  Removal of temporary erosion control devices. Owner/operator shall remove all temporary erosion control devices upon establishing 70 percent or greater permanent ground cover on a lot. 
E.  Emergency construction. Owner/operator shall clean up or contain sediment or debris resulting from the emergency construction activity in response to emergencies where services are being restored by a franchised utility company or contractor which are not subject to the requirements of a SWPPP. 
F.  Construction waste management. Owner/operator shall at a minimum, control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout water, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may adversely impact adjoining property, public rights-of-way, or the stormwater collection system. Failure to maintain good housekeeping practices at the construction site is a violation of this article. 
G.  Site inspection. 
1.  An authorized enforcement agent shall establish the appropriate frequencies for inspection of construction stormwater pollution prevention measures or BMPs at all active construction sites. 
2.  The permittee or the permittee's agent will be required to perform regularly scheduled site inspections, at least every 14 calendar days, and within 24 hours after major storm events to ensure all BMPs have been constructed and are functioning properly. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. The permittee shall document all inspections in writing and make inspection records available for review by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.06.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.370. - Construction activity on less than one acre. 
The provisions of this article and the permit required pursuant to section 40.04.350 apply to all construction activities occurring on sites less than one acre. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.06.030), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 8, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.380. - Construction activity on lots within a master plan development. 
Individual lot development, regardless of the lot size, or part of a master plan development, must follow good housekeeping practices and best management practices as outlined in the SWPPP for the development. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.06.040), 3-22-2010)  
Secs. 40.04.390—40.04.490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 40.04.500. - Requirement to control and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
A.  New development and redevelopment. The city's stormwater master plan, UDO, and Design Standards outline appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and the potential of pollutants in stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. 
B.  Responsibility to implement BMPs. Any person or entity engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the MS4 or state waters, shall implement BMPs to the maximum extent practicable to provide protection from discharge into the MS4. BMPs shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or operator's expense. The city engineer shall have the authority to require the installation, operation and/or maintenance of BMPs. The director shall also have the authority to require the removal of temporary BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.08.010), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.510. - Requirement to eliminate illicit discharges. 
The city may require, by written notice, that a person or entity responsible for an illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges at violator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.08.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.520. - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
A person responsible for an illicit connection to the MS4 shall comply with the requirements of this article and shall eliminate or secure approval for the connection, whether the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. An application seeking approval for the connection shall be submitted in writing to the city engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.030), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.530. - Watercourse protection. 
Any person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or that person's lessee, shall keep and maintain all parts of the watercourse within that property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, or significantly restrict the flow of water through the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall maintain any existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to that watercourse, so that those structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation unless it is reasonably necessary for maintenance. The owner or lessee shall not remove vegetation if it will increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall maintain and stabilize the watercourse within the property owner's property boundaries in a manner that will protect against any erosion and degradation of the watercourse origination on or flowing through their property. Actions to protect a watercourse shall be coordinated and consistent with the city's watercourse setbacks as described in section 38.23.100. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.040), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.540. - Requirement to remediate. 
A.  Whenever the city finds that a discharge of pollutants, within the MS4 area, is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the MS4 or state waters, the city will notify the responsible person or entity in writing and give them a reasonable opportunity to remediate the affected property in accordance with the provisions of this article using a remediation plan pre-approved by the director or designee. The city, or a designated contractor, may remediate the affected property at the owner's or responsible person's or entity's expense if the owner or responsible person does not take corrective actions within a reasonable time. Remediation plans shall be submitted to the city by the owner or responsible person and approved prior to the start of the remediation. The plan shall include, but may not be limited to, a remediation schedule, a course of action, a list of personnel performing remediation work and a list of equipment to be used. 
B.  Whenever a violation of this article constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, the city may remediate the conditions giving rise to the violation through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such abatement shall be paid by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.050), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.550. - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The city may require any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illicit discharges or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 or state waters to undertake, at the person's or owner's expense, monitoring and analysis by a state-certified laboratory pursuant to the provisions of this article, and furnish reports to the city engineering department as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.060), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.560. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any owner of or any person responsible for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or state waters from that facility, that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of a pollutant, the person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release not requiring an emergency response, that person shall notify the city by calling the city's engineering department within 24 hours, and providing a written notice thereto within five business days. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or responsible person must make and keep an onsite written record of the circumstances of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. These records shall be retained for not less than five years. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.08.070), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.570. - Discharge pursuant to MPDES permit. 
The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under an MPDES permit issued and administered by DEQ, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. Compliance with an applicable MPDES permit governing discharges into the MS4 shall be considered compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.080), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.580. - Noncompliance with MPDES permits. 
Any discharge that would constitute a violation of an MPDES permit and any amendments, revisions or re-issuance thereto, when either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the permit holder relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law. All persons in charge of a facility are to comply with applicable federal and state laws including facility personnel, training, training record maintenance, training records, maintenance of notification procedures, and implementation of notification requirements for spill response to ensure containment, cleanup, and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4. Individuals responsible for spills are to comply with applicable state and federal notification requirements to ensure containment, clean up, and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.080.090), 3-22-2010)  
Secs. 40.04.590—40.04.690. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS AND COMPREHENSIVE DRAINAGE PLANS 
 
Sec. 40.04.700. - Requirements. 
A.  To control the quality, volume and rate of stormwater runoff to storm drains and prevent the deterioration of water quality, all new developments and redevelopment projects will be required to submit a stormwater management plan or a comprehensive drainage plan to the city engineering department for approval. The stormwater master plan and city Design Standards establish standards and guidelines for implementing BMPs and stormwater management is incorporated by reference and made part of this article. 
1.  A comprehensive drainage plan is required for all development larger than five acres. 
2.  A stormwater management plan is required for all developments equal to or less than five acres and are designated as a sketch plan or larger in accordance to chapter 38, article 19, or are within 50 feet of a watercourse. 
3.  Redevelopment projects will be required to submit stormwater management plans or operation and maintenance plans if they meet the criteria found in the stormwater master plan, Design Standards, chapter 38, article 19, or this article. 
4.  Stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans shall: 
a.  Prevent any off-site direct discharge of untreated stormwater and non-stormwater from development or redevelopment improvements. 
b.  Minimize increased post-development discharge rates or volumes. 
c.  Provide for the removal of total suspended solids or other constituents so as to meet the median concentration of the state general permit for MS4s generated from development or redevelopment runoff prior to any off-site discharge. 
d.  Continue BMPs for appropriate periods of time. 
e.  Protect groundwater from development runoff infiltration. 
f.  Implement accepted BMPs to minimize impact of a development on existing offsite infrastructure and stormwater facilities. 
g.  Address other stormwater issues identified by the city. 
h.  Comply with section II of the city Design Standards, and chapter 38, article 23. 
5.  All drainage system reports, peak flow rates and runoff volume calculations, safety requirements, and grading plans shall be certified by a licensed professional authorized by the state to perform such functions. 
6.  The city reserves the right to amend, modify and/or add requirements to the stormwater master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.10.010), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.710. - Submission and review process. 
A.  Stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans shall be submitted as part of the development application process at the time a subdivision or a site development application is submitted. The plans shall be submitted to the city engineering department with a permit fee in an amount provided for in a fee schedule adopted by the city commission. No plan shall be approved if it: 
1.  Increases the peak level of stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces above a level from the site if left in its natural, undeveloped condition. 
2.  Does not address items required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan, comprehensive drainage plan or stormwater management plan deemed necessary by the city. 
B.  No final plat, final site plan, or building permit shall be issued without an approved stormwater management plan or comprehensive drainage plan as required under this section. 
C.  The city shall be notified of the commencement of any development covered by a comprehensive drainage plan and the owner or responsible person shall provide certification by a licensed professional authorized by the state that the development conforms with the previously approved plan. 
D.  Major modifications to an approved comprehensive drainage plan or stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the city's engineering department for approval. 
E.  Approval of a plan does not relieve the owner or responsible party from the duty to ensure the systems and their safety measures function as designed. 
F.  Approved may be suspended or revoked at any time if conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved plan or implementation of the plan is not proceeding as approved. 
G.  Approval of a stormwater management plan or a comprehensive drainage plan may be revoked or suspended if the project is not completed within two years after it is approved or development has ceased for a period of more than two years; however, a one-year extension may be granted upon a written request which provides the reason for the delay or cessation of development and specifies a timeframe for completion or commencement of development. Revocation or suspension shall be coordinated with the revocation or suspension of other relevant development approvals by the city. 
H.  The owner will receive written notice the revocation of any plan setting forth the reasons for the revocation. The owner may appeal a revocation to the city board of appeals within ten business days from the effective date of the suspension or revocation. 
I.  If a stormwater management plan or a comprehensive drainage plan is revoked, the owner shall submit a new plan for approval, with the requisite fee, prior to starting or continuing the planned project or development. 
J.  If strict application of the requirements of this article would result in undue hardship, the owner may request in writing an engineering variance detailing the reason for the request and provide supporting documentation. The cost associated with implementing minimum BMPs will not be considered an undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.10.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.720. - Maintenance of stormwater facilities. 
A.  Stormwater facilities shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible party in a condition so that the facilities will function as designed. 
B.  Waste shall be disposed of from maintenance of facilities in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
C.  The owner or other responsible party shall create and maintain records of installation and maintenance and repair for the life of the development and shall be made available to the engineering department upon request. 
D.  Any failure to maintain facilities or to correct deficiencies at facilities within a reasonable time after receiving written notice from the enforcement agent may result in criminal or civil penalties. The city may perform corrective or maintenance work the owner or responsible person fails or refuses to perform within a reasonable time at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.10.030), 3-22-2010)  
Secs. 40.04.730—40.04.840. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 40.04.850. - Inspections. 
A.  The owner or other responsible party shall conduct annual inspections of the facilities and shall maintain records of such inspections for the life of the development. 
B.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever an authorized enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which may constitute a violation of the provisions of this article in any building or upon any premises, the authorized enforcement agent may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the authorized enforcement agent by this article; provided that: 
1.  If such building or premises is occupied, the authorized enforcement agent first shall present proper credentials and request entry; and 
2.  If such building or premises is unoccupied, the authorized enforcement agent first shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
C.  If permission is refused or denied, or if it is not possible to locate the owner or responsible person and no emergency exists, the authorized enforcement agent shall obtain a warrant before entering the premises. If an emergency exists presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, the authorized enforcement agent may immediately enter into any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city for purposes of inspection or abatement. 
D.  The city may conduct routine inspections as deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, or similar factors. 
E.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.010), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.860. - Enforcement. 
Any deviation from what is declared in this article constitutes a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.020), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.870. - Sampling. 
With the consent of the owner or occupant or with authorization from a court of competent jurisdiction, any city enforcement agent may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the city enforcement agent may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record the on-site activities, provided that owners or occupants shall be entitled to split samples. Samples shall be collected, stored and transported in conformance with accepted sampling and testing standards, including chain-of-custody. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.030), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.880. - Testing and monitoring. 
A.  Whenever the director, or designee, determines that any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any facility that may cause or contribute to an illicit discharge to the stormwater system, the director, or designee, may, by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or analysis and furnish such reports as the director, or designee, may recommend. The written notice shall be served either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall describe the monitoring activities and/or analysis and reports required. The owner or operator shall perform the actions ordered by the director and shall pay for all costs of these activities, analysis and reports. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analysis and reports within the timeframes set forth in the order. 
B.  In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analysis and furnish the reports required by the order in the timeframes set forth therein, the city may cause such monitoring and/or analysis to occur and assess all costs incurred, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney's fees, to the facility owner or operator. The city may pursue judicial action to enforce the order and recover all costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.040), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.890. - Notice of violation. 
A.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
2.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
3.  A statement setting forth the facts which constitute the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within ten calendar days of service of notice of violation; and 
7.  A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
B.  Such notice may require, without limitation: 
1.  Monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
2.  Elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
3.  That discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this article shall cease and desist; 
4.  Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
5.  Payment of a civil fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
6.  Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.050), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.900. - Continuing violations. 
Unless otherwise provided, a person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this article is committed, continued or permitted by the person and shall be punishable accordingly, as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.060), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.910. - Violations constituting misdemeanors. 
Any person, firm or corporation, their agents or servants who violates any provision or requirement of this article or of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses of the case. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.070), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 9, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.920. - Concealment. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.080), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.930. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
A.  In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article may be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the director, or designee, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the city and/or civil action taken to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance. 
B.  The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. 
C.  In any administrative or civil proceeding under this article in which the city prevails, the city may be awarded all costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.090), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.940. - Civil actions. 
A.  In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of this article may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
2.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this section. 
3.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation. 
4.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this section shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this article. 
5.  Fines to the city for MPDES permit violations. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.100), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.950. - Administrative enforcement powers. 
A.  In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, any city enforcement agent has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
1.  Cease and desist orders/stop work orders. When a city enforcement agent finds that a violation has taken place or is likely to take place, the agent may issue an order to cease and desist such violation, or practice, or operation likely to cause such violation and direct that those persons not complying must: 
a.  Comply with the requirements of the enforcement agent, the provisions of this article and a permit issued pursuant to this article; 
b.  Comply with a time schedule for compliance as required by the enforcement agent; 
c.  Take appropriate remedial, corrective, or preventive action as required by the enforcement agent to prevent the violation from continuing or recurring; and 
d.  Order a property owner, contractor, or any other person responsible for or appearing to conduct work or that may have conducted work that may be in violation of the provisions of this article to immediately stop all work related to any violation until any such violation has been corrected or abated or until any costs of abatement borne by the city have been paid to the city. 
2.  Abatement order. Whenever a city enforcement agent finds any construction debris, pollutants, oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, within a public or private right-of-way or street, alley, parking lot, located on neighboring parcels, or in close proximity to any open drain or ditch channel, which may result in an increase in pollutants or any of the items listed herein entering the storm drain or a non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain, such agent may issue an order to abate, remove and lawfully dispose of such material in any manner that the agent reasonably may provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice within the timeframes set forth therein. 
3.  Invoice; notice of intent to file nuisance abatement lien. In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the activities as described in the abatement order, the enforcement agent may cause such required activities as described in the order to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and invoiced to the owner of the property with a notice that failure to pay the costs assessed and invoiced within 30 calendar days will result in a nuisance abatement lien being recorded against the property. The notice must be served on the owner according to the procedures set out in section 16.02.080. 
4.  Statement of costs. The enforcement agent must, after completing the abatement, file a statement of costs with the department of finance. Assessment of the costs must follow the procedures in 16.02.120. 
5.  Recording of lien; lien release. 
a.  After notice of nuisance abatement lien has been served on the property owner, the city may file a lien against the property for the costs assessed and invoice the owner of the property pursuant to sections 40.04.930 and 40.04.950 if the owner or the owner's agents fail to pay costs assessed and invoiced within 30 calendar days of the date the city mailed the invoice to the owner of the property. 
b.  The nuisance abatement lien must specify the amount of the lien, that the lien is imposed on behalf of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address and legal description of the property on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
c.  The city may file such lien in the records of the Gallatin County Clerk and Recorder. 
d.  Pursuant to section 40.04.350.L, the owner of property subject to submittal of a permit required by this article consents to filing of such a lien. 
e.  The city must file a document evidencing the satisfaction of such lien within 30 days after the date the lien is satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.110), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , §§ 4, 10, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.960. - Nonexclusivity of remedies. 
Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.120), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.970. - Appeal. 
Any person notified of non-compliance with this article or required to perform monitoring, analysis, reporting and/or corrective action, who is aggrieved by the decision of the city enforcement agent, may appeal such decision in writing to the board of appeals within ten business days following the effective date of the decision or written notice. Upon receipt of such request, the director shall request a report and recommendation from the city enforcement agent and shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, the director may hear additional evidence, and may revoke, affirm or modify the city enforcement agent's decision. Such decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.130), 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.980. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this article does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1763, § 1(14.12.140), 3-22-2010)  
Sec. 40.04.990. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STORMWATER UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 40.04.1000. - Costs and purpose. 
The purpose of the rates and charges shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation, maintenance, administration, permitting, and routine functions of the existing city stormwater system and the planning, engineering, construction, operation, maintenance, and administration of such future stormwater systems as may be established within, or without, the stormwater utility service area and to pay for the review of drainage plans, and the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of stormwater systems. All proceeds are deemed to be in payment for use of the city stormwater systems. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1010. - Stormwater utility service area. 
The stormwater utility service area is inclusive of all lands annexed to the city and bounded by the incorporated city limits as the same may be adjusted by the city commission. The city reserves the right to plan for stormwater system improvements outside the service area. The city may also construct stormwater system improvements outside the service area when needed as an integral part of the stormwater system located within the stormwater utility service area. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1020. - Operation cost determination. 
The city manager shall periodically determine the total annual cost of operation and maintenance of the stormwater systems and the director shall periodically develop operating plans for the systems. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance of the stormwater systems shall be include, but is not limited to all costs related to the city's activities under this article such as but not limited to planning and analysis, labor and personnel costs, repairs, capital improvements, equipment and equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, permitting, sampling, laboratory tests, hardware and software, overhead and administration, and a reasonable contingency amount. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 40.04.1030. - Monthly stormwater service charge. 
A monthly stormwater service charge is imposed and made applicable to all developed property within the stormwater service area. The stormwater service charge is to be assessed for the following purposes and for any other purpose incidental to or necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this article: The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property, and interests therein, necessary to manage stormwater or to construct, operate, and maintain stormwater systems; all costs of administration and implementation of the stormwater management program, including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency stormwater management requirements; costs related to planning, engineering and design, debt service and related financing expenses, and construction costs for new stormwater systems, and enlargement or improvement of existing stormwater systems; operation and maintenance of the stormwater system; monitoring, surveillance, and inspection of stormwater systems; water quality monitoring and water quality programs; retrofitting developed areas for pollution control; inspection and enforcement activities; billing and administrative costs; and permitting. The charge shall be assessed to each parcel in the utility service area upon a methodology and at a rate to be established by commission resolution. Nonpayment constitutes a lien on the property, as are taxes and assessments, in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1040. - Coordination with the state department of transportation. 
The city shall solicit the Montana Department of Transportation's financial participation in all stormwater system improvements constructed on or impacted by federal aid routes within the city limits. This solicitation shall be in accordance with any then-existing city-state stormwater agreement, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1050. - Billing of charges; penalties for late payment and procedure to collect. 
Stormwater service charges authorized by section 40.04.1030 shall be included with the monthly water and wastewater utility billing. Should any user fail to pay the stormwater service charge and penalty within two months of the due date, the city may terminate water service to the property. The city may also follow the collection procedure outlined in MCA 7-13-4903. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1060. - Establishment of stormwater utility fund. 
All stormwater service charges shall be collected as provided in this division and credited to a fund to be known as the "stormwater utility fund," which shall be at all times segregated and maintained as a separate enterprise fund. All revenues collected pursuant to section 40.04.1030 and all grants, permit fees, and other charges collected related to stormwater management shall be deposited to the fund. The commission may make additional appropriations to the fund. Disbursements from the fund shall be for the purposes described in section 40.04.1030. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012)  
Sec. 40.04.1070. - Appeal and adjustment. 
A.  The charges, fees, and costs established under this article are deemed prima facie fair, reasonable, and equitable. Any party who considers the charges applicable to their premises unfair, inequitable, or unreasonable may apply to the director for adjustment thereof, stating the facts and grounds of supporting the adjustment. In such case, the director shall cause appropriate investigation and report to be made. 
B.  The director shall consider each and all of such complaints and reports and communicate findings to the party seeking adjustment. The director shall accept the request for adjustment, reject the request for adjustment, or make other such equitable determination as the director determines necessary. The party seeking adjustment may appeal such determination to the city commission within 30 days of the director's decision. In such a case, the appeal shall be conducted as a public hearing and, if convinced that an adjustment of the charges for such premises is necessary to provide reasonable equality with those charged to others, the city commission shall so provide by resolution fixing special charges for individual premises during the period of continuance of special circumstances which make the standard charges unfair, inequitable, unreasonable, or inadequate. 
C.  The director may notify the owner of any premises as to which the city engineer considers the rates and charges to be inadequate and the date upon which such increase in the stormwater service charge shall commence which date may not be less than 60 days from the date of such notice. The party noticed of an increase in stormwater service charge may appeal to the city commission within 30 days of such notice. The commission shall uphold the director's determination, reverse, or make other such equitable determination it finds necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1831, § 3, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 2002 , § 4, 3-26-2018)  
ARTICLE 5. - LOCATION OF UTILITY POLES/CHANGE OF LOCATION 
 
Sec. 40.05.010. - Location of poles and lines. 
A.  Wherever possible, lines shall be erected in alleys. Lines shall be laid out, wherever possible, so as to follow one side of the street or alley so that the number of street crossings and corners shall be reduced to the minimum. 
B.  No poles except ornamental light poles shall be erected or maintained on the following streets, except where necessary to maintain municipal lamps and service wires: 
1.  Main Street, between the east side of Wallace Avenue and the west side of Fifth Avenue; 
2.  Mendenhall Street between the east side of Wallace Avenue and the west side of Fifth Avenue; 
3.  Babcock Street between the east side of Wallace Avenue and the west side of Fifth Avenue. 
C.  New pole locations shall be made under the direction of the city engineer and with the approval of the city commission. 
D.  Where double-pole lines are necessary for light and power and for signal wires on one side of a street or alley, the construction shall be governed by the rules and specifications governing joint pole line construction. 
(Code 1982, § 15.48.030)  
Sec. 40.05.020. - Change of pole locations; city rights reserved. 
The city expressly reserves the right to order and enforce the change of location of any and all poles or appliances erected or maintained whenever the city engineer orders any such change of location, and such change of location shall be made at the expense of the person, company or corporation owning or using any such pole or appliance. 
(Code 1982, § 15.48.040)  
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 40.06.010. - Adoption of the Montana Public Works Standard Specifications. 
A.  The current edition of the Montana Public Works Standard Specifications (MPWSS), including all accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications adopted by the Association of General Contractors, Montana Chapter of the American Public Works Association and the Civil Engineers Council of Montana, and as amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, except as may be noted in this article, by future administrative order, or by any regulations not applicable to local government jurisdictions. 
B.  One copy of the MPWSS shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk , one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public works and one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city engineer. 
C.  Any amendments or addendums adopted by the Association of General Contractors, Montana Chapter of the American Public Works Association and the Civil Engineers Council of Montana which apply to local government jurisdictions, including the adoption of the latest edition of MPWSS, shall become effective upon execution of an administrative order of the city manager unless a different effective date is specified in the administrative order. 
D.  A copy of the amendment notification and the corresponding new edition will be kept in the offices of the city clerk , the director of public service, and the city engineer. 
E.  The Montana Public Works Standard Specifications as adopted in subsection A of this section are applicable within the city and to all projects falling under the supervision and jurisdiction of the city engineering office. 
(Ord. No. 1611, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 40.06.020. - Adoption of City of Bozeman Modifications to the Montana Public Works Standard Specifications. 
A.  The City of Bozeman Modifications to the MPWWS (modifications) as drafted by the city engineer are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, except as may be noted in this article, by future administrative order, or by other amendment. 
B.  One copy of the modifications shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk , one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public service of the city, and one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city engineer of the city. 
C.  The modifications, as adopted, are applicable within the city and to all projects falling under the supervision and jurisdiction of the city engineering office. 
(Ord. No. 1611, § 2, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 40.06.030. - Adoption of the city design standards and specifications policy. 
A.  The city design standards and specifications policy (policy) as drafted by the city engineer is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, except as may be noted in this article, by future administrative order, or by other amendment. 
B.  One copy of the policy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk , one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public service of the city and one copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city engineer of the city. 
C.  The policy, as adopted, is applicable within the city and to all projects falling under the supervision and jurisdiction of the city engineering office. 
(Ord. No. 1611, § 3, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 40.06.040. - Amendment of the city modifications to the MPWWS and city design standards and specifications policy. 
A.  Any amendments to the modifications and the policy shall first be drafted and reviewed by the city engineering division, with comment from the public. These amendments, when compiled and reviewed, shall be forwarded to the director of public service for review. The director of public service shall forward the proposed revisions to the city manager for approval as appropriate. 
B.  The city manager may approve the changes and adopt them by issuance of an administrative order. The effective date of the changes shall be upon execution of the administrative order unless the order specifies otherwise. The city manager may also decline to adopt the changes by administrative order. In the event the city manager declines to adopt the changes by administrative order, the director of public service shall be notified of this decision and the proposal may be submitted through the ordinance amendment procedure. 
C.  A copy of the amendment notification, when approved, will be kept in the office of the city clerk , the director of public service, and the city engineer. A copy of the revised modifications or policy shall accompany this notification. 
D.  The modifications and the design standards and specifications policy, as amended, are applicable within the city and to all projects falling under the supervision and jurisdiction of the city engineering office. 
(Ord. No. 1611, § 4, 4-5-2004)  
Chapter 42 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Floodplain and floodway management, MCA 76-5-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE 2. - BOZEMAN CREEK 
 
Sec. 42.02.010. - Channel to be kept free from obstructions. 
The channel of Bozeman Creek, throughout its course within the corporate limits of the city, shall be preserved and kept at a minimum width of 12 feet in the clear, and kept free of all obstruction unless and until it shall be otherwise ordered or permitted by the city commission by ordinance or resolution duly adopted. 
(Code 1982, § 9.68.010)  
Sec. 42.02.020. - Narrowing, turning or obstructing channel prohibited; exception. 
Any person, firm, corporation or association who, directly or indirectly, or by any means whatever or at all confines Bozeman Creek, in any part of its course through the corporate limits of the city, to a narrower channel than is prescribed in section 42.02.010; or who alters, changes or turns the same from its natural channel, or alters its course at any point within the corporate limits of the city, except in pursuance of and in accordance with an ordinance or resolution of the city commission duly passed and adopted; or who builds, throws, deposits or, in any manner or at all, places any obstruction in the channel of the creek within the corporate limits of the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 9.68.020)  
Sec. 42.02.030. - Dumping items into channel or polluting creek prohibited. 
No person, firm, corporation or association, nor any employee or agent of any person, firm, corporation or association, shall throw, conduct, convey or deposit, or cause to be thrown, conducted, conveyed or deposited into the channel of Bozeman Creek in its course through the corporate limits of the city, or any part thereof, any paper, offal, rubbish, rags, filth, manure, hay, straw, tin cans, hides, dead animals, or anything whatever causing or tending to cause an obstruction or pollution of Bozeman Creek within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9.68.030) 

