7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 1/135
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Havre, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 904, passed April 16, 2018. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
PROVIDING FOR THE OFFICIAL CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF HAVRE, MONTANA.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAVRE, that:
Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the official city code of the city of Havre, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and
hereby approved and accepted shall be the official code of all ordinances of a general and permanent character of the city.
Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplemental
service whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general nature, amending, altering, adding to, or deleting provisions of this official city code is
identified by the proper catchline, and following preparation by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each
such insertion shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of adoption by the council, and each new provision shall become effective upon such
insertion.
Section 3. At least one copy of this city code shall at all times be on file and available for inspection in the office of the clerk.
Passed and approved by the council this 18th day of June, 1962.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This code, embracing all of the general ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code, and one copy of
this code shall at all times be on file in the official office of the city. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to
refer to the position of the same under its appropriate title heading, its chapter heading and its section heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal document. (Ord. 811, 2-18-1997)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 2/135
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of a general and permanent effect of the city. (1962 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient
compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be forwarded annually to the codifiers and such ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in the
copy of the code. (Ord. 812, 2-18-1997)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not havebeen used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons, and females as well as
males and bodies corporate, shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto. (1962 Code)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT AND NEGLIGENTLY: A want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as
a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
OFFICER: Includes officers and boards in charge of departments and members of such boards. The word "city", "clerk", "treasurer", "council", or such
other titles, shall mean this city, city clerk, city treasurer, city council or other such city officers as the use may be applicable.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, association or corporation or any organization of any kind.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished, and every right or
interest therein.
STREETS: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
THOROUGHFARE: Includes streets, alleys, public ways, public squares, or any area used by the public for travel or parking either in a vehicle or on foot,
whether publicly or privately owned.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit theact or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or to injure another or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: May include printing.
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such
board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done. (1962 Code)
1-1-6: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code, the following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any
person.
(B) Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1962 Code)
1-1-7: PENALTIES:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 3/135
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provisions of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of the general penalty clause1 shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1962 Code)
1-1-8: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officeror employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force
or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances, appropriation ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations,
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations, contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants, salary ordinances, ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places,
improvement ordinances, bond ordinances, ordinances relating to elections, ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city, and all special ordinances. (1962 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances only in respect of such provisions. (1962 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any, right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force atthe time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provision upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the
city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or
corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this code. (1962 Code)
1-2-4: VALIDITY:
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this code shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
inoperative or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining portions of this code, but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section of, or part thereof directly adjudged to be invalid and inoperative or unconstitutional. (Ord. 512, 12-6-1965)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PENALTY
1-3-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where no specific penalty is provided shall be fined in a sum not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for any one offense and such person may be imprisoned for a period of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and
imprisonment may be imposed. (Ord. 813, 2-18-1997)
1-3-2: DEFAULT:
(Rep. by Ord. 819, 2-18-1997)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 4/135
1-3-3: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any license previously issued to him by the municipality may be revoked by the court
or by the municipal governing body. (Ord. 614, 2-18-1975, eff. 3-20-1975)
1-3-4: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 614, 2-18-1975, eff. 3-20-1975)
1-3-5: JURISDICTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city police shall have, in addition to all power presently exercised within the city limits, the power to arrest, under a warrant issued by the city court, all
persons found within five (5) miles of the city limits, who have failed to appear in response to any complaint or citation before the city court.(Ord. 677, 8-18-
1980)
Chapter 4
CITY COUNCIL
1-4-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
At the hour appointed for the meeting of council, the mayor shall take the chair and direct a call of the members by the clerk who shall note the absentees.
If a quorum is not present, the mayor may send for the absent members. Upon the appearance of a quorum, the mayor shall call to order and proceed to
the order of business as follows:
(A) Reading, amending and approving the minutes of the previous meetings; but the reading of the minutes of any previous meeting may be dispensed
with, and they may be approved by a majority vote of those present.
(B) Communications from the mayor. (Ord. 193, 10-20-1924)
(C) Communications and reports from the corporation officers. (Ord. 689, 6-1-1981)
(D) Petitions, remonstrances and miscellaneous communications.
(E) Reading of ordinances and referring to committees.
(F) Reports of special committees.
(G) Committee of the whole.
(H) Unfinished business.
(I) Adjournment.
The above order of business shall not be changed, except by the unanimous consent of all the members present. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-2: DUTIES OF PRESIDING OFFICER:
The presiding officer shall possess the powers and perform the duties herein prescribed:
(A) He shall preserve order, decorum and may prohibit smoking in the council chamber.
(B) He shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to the council of the city. On every appeal, he shall have the right in his place to assign the
reason for his decision, and any member may state the grounds for his appeal.
(C) He shall appoint all committees, except where otherwise specifically directed by the council. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 5/135
1-4-3: RULES OF CONDUCT:
While the presiding officer is putting a question, or when a member is speaking, no member shall walk across or out of the room or entertain any private
conversation or pass between the speaker or the chair.
When two (2) or more members address the chair at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak.
Any member may be called to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately cease, the point of order shall be stated at the request
of the presiding officer, by the member raising it, and it shall be decided without debate, before proceeding to other business. (Ord. 756, 5-16-1988)
1-4-4: VOTING:
Every member shall vote when a question is stated by the chair, unless excused by the council, and every member, when voting, shall be in his place.
(Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-5: PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS:
Petitions and other papers may be presented by the presiding officer, or any member, but when presented by a member, he shall first endorse on the
paper or petition the subject thereof, and subscribe his name thereon in ink. All reports and resolutions presented shall also be written and subscribedin
ink. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-6: MOTIONS:
No motion shall be debated or put until it has received a second. When seconded, the motion shall be stated distinctly by the presiding officer before being
put or debated, and shall be reduced to writing by the member making it upon the request of the presiding officer or any member of the council. A motion
may be withdrawn by the member who made it at any time before decision, commitment or amendment by the unanimous consent of the council. (Ord.
756, 5-16-1988)
1-4-7: ROLL CALL VOTE:
When demanded by any two (2) members, the yeas and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered upon the minutes of the council. In taking the
same, if a quorum does not answer to their names, the question shall be deemed to be lost; debate shall be precluded during roll call. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-8: PRIVILEGED QUESTIONS:
When a question is pending, no motion shall be received except as hereinafter specified, which motion shall have precedence in the order herein stated:
(A) For an adjournment of the council.
(B) To lay on the table.
(C) For the previous question.
(D) To postpone indefinitely.
(E) To postpone to a time certain.
(F) To refer to a standing committee.
(G) To refer to a committee of the whole.
(H) To refer to a special committee.
(I) To amend.
A motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, or for the previous question shall be decided without amendment or debate; and all questions of order, and all
questions relating to the order of business, shall be decided without debate. The several questions or motions to postpone or refer shall preclude all
debate upon the main question. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-9: RECONSIDERATION OF MOTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 6/135
When a question has been put and decided, it shall be in order for any member who voted with the majority to move for a reconsideration thereof.
A motion for reconsideration, if lost, shall not again be made at the same meeting of the council, nor shall any question be reconsidered more than once.
(Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-10: DIVISION OF QUESTION:
If any question contains several distinct propositions, it shall be divided by the chair at the request of any member, but a motion to strike out and insert
shall be indivisible.
Any member may have read any paper in the possession of the council, upon request, unless the same be objected to by some other member, and then
the question shall be determined without debate. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-11: AFTER AFFIRMATION:
After the affirmation on any question has been taken, no member shall speak to the question, nor shall any motion be made until the result has been
declared. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-12: REPORTS:
No report shall be received unless the committee, or a quorum thereof, shall have met and considered the question to be reported on. All committee
reports must be made in writing. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-13: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The following standing committees shall be appointed by the mayor at the organizational meeting of the council, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and
whose reports shall be received in the following order, unless otherwise ordered by the council:
(A) Finance.
(B) Sewer and water1.
(C) Ordinance.
(D) Streets, alleys and sidewalks.
(E) Police and fire.
(F) Parks and recreation.
(G) Labor relations. (Ord. 756, 5-16-1988)
1-4-14: STANDING RULES:
No standing rule of the council shall be repealed, rescinded, changed, altered or suspended, except by a vote of five (5) members in the affirmative, nor
shall any new rule be added thereto except by a like vote. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
1-4-15: MEETINGS OF COUNCIL:
The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and the meetings may be
adjourned from time to time and all proceedings had at such adjourned meetings shall be the same as of the regular meetings of the month. Special
meetings of the council may be held upon the call of the mayor or upon request of any three (3) members of the council by giving written notice personally
to the mayor and each member of the council at least three (3) days prior to such meeting, which notice shall state the purpose and object of such meeting
and no business shall be transacted at such special meeting except as stated in the notice of said meeting. (Ord. 853, 3-6-2006)
1-4-16: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the council to attend all meetings of the council at the hour appointed therefor and to remain until the session
closes, unless excused by the presiding officer. The chief of police shall be ex officio sergeant at arms, and shall attend all meetings of the council at the
hour appointed, and remain in attendance until the session closes, unless otherwise ordered. He shall obey all orders of the presiding officer in enforcing
order and decorum, and do and perform such other duties as pertain to his office ex officio. (Ord. 1, 10-20-1904)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 7/135
1-4-17: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES:
Ordinances, when introduced, shall be read as of their first reading, and referred to the appropriate committee by the presiding officer without debate
unless objections thereto be made. After the first reading and adoption, all ordinances must be posted and made available to the public. All ordinances
must be read and adopted by a majority vote of council members present at two (2) meetings of the city council not less than twelve (12) days apart. The
votes shall be recorded by yeas and nays. (Ord. 814, 2-18-1997)
1-4-18: ELECTION OF COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
As soon as convenient after each election of members of the council, the council shall elect a president for a term of two (2) years. In the absence of the
mayor, the president is the presiding officer and may perform the duties of mayor. In the absence of the president, the council may appoint one of its
number to act in his place. (Ord. 756, 5-16-1988)
1-4-19: RESIDENCE OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
All members of the council shall reside in the ward to which they are elected. If a member of the council does not physically reside within the ward to which
he is elected for ninety (90) consecutive days, it shall be presumed that he has established residence outside of the ward, and the council may declare his
seat vacated at a regularly scheduled council meeting. (Ord. 756, 5-16-1988)
1-4-20: FILLING VACANT CITY COUNCIL SEAT:
The following procedure shall be used to fill a vacant seat on the city council, with the exception of any such vacancy that will be filled by a regularly
scheduled election:
(A) The council must determine that a vacancy exists pursuant to section 7-4-4111, Montana Code Annotated, 1989, entitled "Determination Of Vacancy In
Municipal Office".
(B) When the council has determined that a vacancy exists, it shall order the publication of a notice in the local news media soliciting applications for a
replacement council person and shall send the notice to the chairpersons of the local republican and democratic central committees. (Ord. 768, 10-16-
1989)
(C) A written application shall be completed by each applicant and submitted to the council containing the following information:
1. Full legal name.
2. Current address.
3. A statement as to the applicant's administrative philosophy (not mandatory).
4. A statement of the applicant's reason or reasons for seeking appointment to the city council.
5. At the applicant's option, a resume may be attached to the application.
6. The applicant shall sign a statement, under penalty of "unsworn falsification to authorities"2 that he or she possesses the following minimum
requirements for appointment as a council person: that he or she is a citizen of the United States; at least eighteen (18) years of age; registered as a
voter of the city; and, has been a resident of the subject ward for at least sixty (60) days prior to filing the application for appointment. (Ord. 815, 2-
18-1997)
(D) If there are more than seven (7) candidates, each council person shall sponsor one candidate for interviews, and only those candidates who have
been sponsored by one or more council persons shall be interviewed by the council.
(E) A prospective resignee or retiree council person for whom a replacement is being sought, shall not participate in any way regarding the determination
of that council person's successor; however, such council person's presence shall be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.
(F) All interviews shall be before the council, sitting as a committee of the whole, in public after notice, and all council persons shall be allowed to question
the applicants, who will also be allowed to make a statement and submit written material.
The presiding officer of the committee of the whole shall be empowered to administer oaths and to issue summons to compel testimony, and may
receive testimony from any other interested parties as to the qualifications of any of the applicants.
(G) At the next regular council meeting, after the interviews, or a special meeting called for that purpose, the council shall elect a new council person. Only
those applicants who are nominated by a council person and whose nomination has been seconded by another council person, shall appear on the
ballot and be eligible for election.
The election or appointment must be by viva voce or roll call vote, the vote must be recorded and the election or appointment must be by a majority of
the remaining council persons, according to section 7-4-4112, Montana Code Annotated 1989, as from time to time amended.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 8/135
(H) The newly elected council person takes office upon the execution of the written oath of office and the filing of the executed oath in the office of the
county election administrator3. (Ord. 768, 10-16-1989)
Chapter 5
CITY OFFICERS
1-5-1: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
The city officers shall consist of the following:
(A) One mayor elected on a nonpartisan basis.
(B) Two (2) aldermen from each ward elected on a nonpartisan basis.
(C) One city judge. (Ord. 880, 11-5-2013, eff. 7-1-2014)
1-5-2: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
1-5-3: MAYOR; DUTIES:
The duties and powers of the mayor are such as are provided in the political code of the state and amendments thereto1. (Ord. 2, 10-20-1904; amd. 1962
Code)
1-5-4: ALDERMEN; DUTIES:
The duties and powers of the aldermen are such as are provided in the political code of the state and amendments thereto2. (Ord. 2, 10-20-1904; amd.
1962 Code)
1-5-5: CITY JUDGE; DUTIES; COMPENSATION:
(A) The duties, powers and authority of the city judge are such as are mentioned in the revised codes of the state and amendments thereto. The city judge
shall give a bond to the city with two (2) good sureties acceptable to the council in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). He shall receive
as compensation the same fees as are allowed by law to the justices of the peace, or, in lieu thereof, a stated monthly salary to be fixed by the council.
(B) He shall present to the council monthly a report, in writing, showing the number of cases tried in his court for offenses against the laws of the city,
accompanied by a receipt from the treasurer for all fines and costs collected3. (Ord. 2, 10-20-1904; amd. 1962 Code; Ord. 625, 11-3-1975, eff. 12-3-
1975)
(C) Any person acting as city judge shall be compensated on the same basis as the city judge and, in addition, shall be paid mileage if required to travel a
round trip of over twenty (20) miles for each day or portion thereof that the person serves as acting city judge. (Ord. 625, 11-3-1975, eff. 12-3-1975)
1-5-6: CITY CLERK-TREASURER:
The city clerk-treasurer shall have the following powers and duties4: (Ord. 695, 10-5-1981)
(A) Appointment: (Rep. by Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
(B) Duties:
1. The city clerk-treasurer shall perform all the duties required by state law, the ordinances of the city and as may be ordered by the mayor and city
council.
2. The city clerk-treasurer shall countersign all warrants drawn on the city, keep a record of the same, and of the expenditures by the various
departments of the city and shall report to the city council monthly the amount of such expenditures and the amounts remaining unexpended in the
various funds as created by the appropriations; provided, however, that the city clerk-treasurer shall not draw any warrant on the city in payment of
any claim presented against the city, nor pay or cause to be paid any claim presented against the city until the same shall have been duly passed
upon by the committee on finance, and also passed upon and approved by a majority vote of the city council.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 9/135
(C) Oath Of Office; Bond; Surrender Records To Successor: Before entering upon the duties of the office and within ten (10) days after receiving notice of
appointment to the office, the city clerk-treasurer shall become eligible for the office by qualifying for and executing to the city, subject to the approval of
the city council, a bond in a sum reasonably commensurate to the financial duties of the office, conditioned on the faithful and proper performance of
the duties of the office of city clerk-treasurer; shall take the official oath of office; shall deliver over in proper form to a successor in office, all records,
documents, papers and other things pertaining to the office and which belong to the city; and, shall file such bond and oath of office with the city. (Ord.
695, 10-5-1981)
(D) Appointment Of Deputy Clerk-Treasurer: (Rep. by Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
(E) Additional Employees Authorized: The city clerk-treasurer may employ such additional help subject to the approval of the mayor and authorization by
the city council, as may be necessary for the proper performance of the duties of that office. The city clerk-treasurer shall be responsible for the acts
done on behalf of that office by such employees and for the proper performance of their duties.
(F) Depositories; Interest, Contract, Bond: The city clerk-treasurer shall deposit the funds of the city, from day to day, in such banks of the city as shall be
designated by the city council as city depositories. No bank shall be designated as a city depository until it shall have filed its written agreement with
the city clerk-treasurer to pay interest on the daily balances of all such deposits at such rate as may be determined and agreed upon between the bank
and the city and the city council may require such depository to execute a bond to the city, with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city council, in
an amount equal at least to the largest amount to be deposited at any time in such bank, as determined by the city clerk-treasurer. The city council
shall have the power to direct the withdrawal of all such monies from any such bank for any reason. (Ord. 689, 6-1-1981)
1-5-7: OATH; BOND:
Every officer of the city, whether elective or appointive, shall take his oath of office, shall give bonds if required and file the same with the clerk-treasurer
and, in the case of the failure of any officer to take the oath and file his bond within the time required by the laws of the state, such office shall be declared
vacant5. (Ord. 695, 10-5-1981)
1-5-8: ATTORNEY; DUTIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
1-5-9: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS6:
The director of public works shall have the following powers and duties: (Ord. 695, 10-5-1981)
(A) Appointment: The mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the council, a director of public works. (Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
(B) Duties:
1. The director of public works shall perform all the duties required by state law, the ordinances of the city and may be ordered by the mayor and city
council, including any duties which may be required of a city engineer or city surveyor.
2. The director of public works shall supervise in person or by his deputy and carefully watch, when necessary or when directed by the mayor or city
council, all work involved in the construction, improvement or repair of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewers, culverts, public grounds, public
improvements, water mains or water systems and ensure that the same is being done in a proper and efficient manner and in conformance to the
particular ordinance, resolution or order of the city council authorizing the same. The director of public works shall have, so far as directed by the
mayor or city council, exclusive control and supervision over all such work done by the city and shall at all times aid the city council in an advisory
capacity. The director of public works shall have the power and authority to hire and discharge any and all such employees required for the proper
operation of the public works department.
3. The director of public works shall also have control over and be responsible for the wastewater treatment plant and the water treatment plants of the
city and the superintendents of those plants shall be subordinate to and responsible to the director of public works. The director of public works must
prepare and present to the council the proposed annual budget of these two (2) city enterprises.
4. The other duties of the director of public works are such as are specified by state law or as may hereafter be provided for by the law or ordinances of
the city, and any duties heretofore discharged by the city engineer.
(C) Oath Of Office; Bond; Surrender Records To Successor: Before entering upon the duties of the office and within ten (10) days after receiving notice of
appointment to the office, the director of public works shall become eligible for the office by qualifying for and executing to the city, subject to the
approval of the city council, a bond in a sum reasonably commensurate to the financial duties of the office, conditioned on the faithful and proper
performance of the duties of the office of director of public works; shall take the official oath of office; shall deliver over in proper form to a successor in
office, all records, documents, papers and other things pertaining to the office and which belong to the city; and shall file such bond and oath of office
with the city. (Ord. 695, 10-5-1981)
(D) Appointment Of Deputy Director Of Public Works: (Rep. by Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
(E) Additional Employees Authorized: The director of public works may employ such additional help, subject to the approval of the mayor and authorization
by the city council, as may be necessary for the proper performance of the duties of that office. The director of public works shall be responsible for the
acts done on behalf of that office by such employees and for the proper performance of their duties. This may include a general foreman who shall be
subordinate to the director of public works.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 10/135
(F) Department Created: There is hereby created in and for the city the city department of public works, which shall include the wastewater treatment
plant, the water treatment plant, the activities of the city shop crews, the city garbage collection service and all other activities formerly under the control
of the city engineer. (Ord. 695, 10-5-1981)
1-5-10: CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES:
The chief of police shall perform such duties as are laid down in the political codes of the state and amendments thereto7. He shall furnish a bond with
good and sufficient sureties acceptable to the council in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2, 10-20-1904; amd. 1962 Code)
1-5-11: DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION:
(A) There is hereby created the Havre department of parks and recreation which shall have jurisdiction over all boulevards, trees, parks, parks and
recreation department vehicles, city recreation programs, the city swimming pool and the equipment and activities of employees maintaining city park
property and conducting recreation and swimming pool activities of the city.
(B) All expenses incurred by the department of parks and recreation shall be payable from a budget approved by the city council. The director of parks and
recreation shall submit an annual budget to the city council for approval. (Ord. 784, 9-20-1993)
1-5-12: DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION:
(A) The mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the city council, a director of parks and recreation. The compensation of the director of parks and
recreation shall be fixed by the city council annually. The director shall be directly responsible to the mayor. (Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
(B) The director shall have responsibility for:
1. Maintenance and use of city swimming pools, city parks, boulevard trees and plants, skating rinks, tennis courts, ballparks, playgrounds, gardens
and the grounds of any such city parks and recreation areas; and
2. Establishment and conduct of city recreation programs, including the use for such purposes of all city parks and recreation areas which the city or
other governmental entities may from time to time own, provide, rent or otherwise set apart for such use.
(C) The director shall have the authority to hire additional personnel necessary to carry on the functions of the department of parks and recreation.
(D) The director shall make such rules and regulations as deemed necessary or convenient to protect, promote and govern the conduct of recreation
activities and the use of city parks, boulevards, recreation areas, gardens and swimming pools, and to provide penalties for violation of such rules and
regulations which shall have the force of law and be enforced in the same manner as other municipal laws and ordinances. (Ord. 784, 9-20-1993)
1-5-13: INDEMNIFYING CERTAIN OFFICIALS AND CITY EMPLOYEES:
The city, a municipal corporation, will exonerate, indemnify and hold harmless each of its elected officials, officers, department heads, persons appointed
to a position by the city council and employees against all claims, damages, liabilities, costs, suits, penalties or obligations of any and every nature
whatever, arising out of the performance of their duties for the city. (Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
Chapter 6
CITY OFFICERS; SALARIES AND LEAVES
1-6-1: SALARIES OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
(A) The herein named elective officers shall receive the following salary commencing July 1, 2006:
Mayor $1,833.00 per month
Council person 200.00 per month
(Ord. 856, 10-16-2006)
(B) The salary or compensation of all other city officers and employees shall be fixed and determined from time to time by the governing body by budget
appropriation therefor, subject to applicable state law. (Ord. 546, 3-15-1971)
1-6-2: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
The salary or compensation of all other city officers and employees shall be fixed and determined from time to time by the governing body by budget
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 11/135
appropriation therefor, subject to applicable state law. (Ord. 495, 4-15-1963)
1-6-3: SICK LEAVE:
(Rep. by Ord. 819, 2-18-1997)
1-6-4: ANNUAL VACATION LEAVE:
(Rep. by Ord. 819, 2-18-1997)
1-6-5: ALLOWABLE EXPENSES:
The allowable expenses for travel by elected city officials or employees shall be as set forth in subsections (1)(b), 2(b), (3), (4) and (7) of section 2-18-501
Montana Code Annotated. (Ord. 669, 9-17-1979)
Chapter 7
CITY COMPTROLLER
(Rep. by Ord. 731, 11-18-1985)
Chapter 8
FIRE MARSHAL
1-8-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There are hereby created the offices of fire marshal and deputy fire marshal of the city. The chief of the fire department shall be ex officio fire marshal; he
shall receive no additional compensation by reason of his duties as such. Upon the recommendation of the fire marshal, the council may appoint not to
exceed one deputy fire marshal, who shall act under the supervision and direction of the fire marshal, and who shall receive no compensation from the city
by reason of his duties as such. Said officers shall have such powers and prescribe such duties as are prescribed herein, and shall hold office at the
pleasure of the council. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal and his deputy to attend to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and of all other laws pertaining to the
protection of the city from fire, and fire prevention in the city. Nothing contained herein shall be considered as lessening in any way the duties of the heads
of other departments of the city government upon whom the city may impose the duty of enforcing their respective provisions. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The fire marshal and his deputy shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the same. (Ord. 180,
4-5-1921)
1-8-4: INVESTIGATION:
The fire marshal, by himself or deputy, shall make an investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which
property has been destroyed or damaged and shall especially make investigations as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. (Ord.
180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-5: BUILDING ALTERATIONS:
Whenever in the judgment of the fire marshal or deputy any building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any appurtenance or fixture thereto, or chimney,
smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or thing connected with such building or premises, is deemed defective or unsafe as to fire, the said fire marshal or said
deputy shall give the owner or person having control of said property five (5) days' notice of requested changes, alterations or repairs necessary to render
the same safe to life and property from fire, and any person refusing or neglecting to comply with said notice, or to file an appeal to the council with the
clerk, shall be subject to the penalties provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-6: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any unoccupied building which is not properly secured and enclosed is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The fire marshal or deputy shall notify the owner
or person having control of such premises to forthwith secure and enclose the same, so as to prevent evilly disposed persons from gaining access thereto,
and the person so notified shall, within twenty four (24) hours, comply therewith. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 12/135
1-8-7: THEATERS:
The fire marshal shall make such rules and regulations as are necessary to prevent fires from starting in the stage portion of theaters from careless
smokers, and shall cause the owner or manager of each theater to post "NO SMOKING" signs where necessary. He shall cause theaters in which
moveable scenery is used to be inspected frequently during the performance to ascertain whether the rules of the theater in regard to smoking are being
observed, and the general condition of the theater in regard to the safety of life from fire. A violation of the rules and regulations in regard to smoking on
the stage will be considered as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-8: ASHES AND WASTE:
It shall be the duty of every person occupying or controlling any building or any portion thereof in the city to deposit all ashes,cinders or other waste arising
from combustion produced on such premises in some safe depository or receptacle of galvanized iron or other noncombustible material, said depository or
receptacle to be approved by the fire marshal or the deputy fire marshal, and to be placed not closer than one foot (1') to any woodwork or other wooden
structure. It shall be lawful, however, if approved by the fire marshal, to deposit such ashes, cinders or wastes in a cellar, basement or chamber having
noncombustible floors and walls; provided, that no such deposit, whether contained in a receptacle or fireproof or noncombustible cellar, basement or
chamber or deposited outside on the ground, shall exceed eight (8) cubic yards in capacity. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-9: COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, tenant, lessee or occupants of any building within the limits of the city to permit rubbish, wastepaper, straw, hay,
rags, excelsior or any other waste material to accumulate in hallways, areaways, basements, roofs, closets, lightwells or in yards close to buildings. It shall
be the duty of the fire marshal or the deputy fire marshal to notify, in writing, the owner, agent, tenant, lessee or occupant of the buildings in or near which
such accumulations are found, to remove or properly dispose of the same forthwith according to section 1-8-10 of this chapter, and the person receiving
same shall, within twelve (12) hours after receiving notice, comply with the requirements thereof. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-10: NONCOMBUSTIBLE CONTAINERS:
All receptacles for waste, rags, wastepaper and other substances liable by spontaneous combustion to cause fire must be made of noncombustible
materials and of a design approved by the fire marshal. All packing materials such as hay, straw, excelsior and paper scraps shall be kept in metal or metal
lined receptacles or containers so arranged as to be automatically self-closing in case of fire, and to be approved by the fire marshal. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921;
amd. Ord. 674, 5-5-1980)
1-8-11: LIGHTED CIGARS, CIGARETTES:
It shall be unlawful to throw from any building or motor vehicle a lighted cigar, cigarette or anything that is on fire so that the same will fall over or upon the
street or sidewalk or property adjacent thereto; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person throwing from windows the
contents of a building which is on fire. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921; amd. Ord. 674, 5-5-1980)
1-8-12: BONFIRES:
No person shall light or kindle a bonfire or any fire for the purpose of consuming waste material in the open air within the limits of the city regardless of
whether the same be lighted on a public street or other public ground or on private property, without first having obtained a written permit so to do, signed
by the fire marshal or the deputy fire marshal, who shall, in all cases when requested so to do, grant permits therefor, excepting where, in his judgment,
the kindling of such fire would endanger the safety of life and property. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-13: THAWING PIPES:
It shall be unlawful to use any torch or other flame producing device for the purpose of thawing out any pipe in or under any house, building or structure in
the city. Any person who, in consequence of violating the provisions of this section, shall cause a fire, shall, in addition to any penalties, be liable to the city
in damages to the extent of the costs to the fire department for answering any fire alarm and services in extinguishing such fire, such penalty to be
recovered by a civil action. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-14: MAINTAINING FIRE HAZARD UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or suffer to exist in, on or upon any premises in the city owned, leased, occupied or controlled by
such person, any condition which constitutes a fire hazard and a menace to the safety of life and property. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
1-8-15: NOTICE; NONCOMPLIANCE:
Whenever the fire marshall shall ascertain, by any means whatever, that there exists a condition which constitutes a fire hazard and a menace to life and
property, said fire marshal shall notify, in writing, the owner, lessee, occupant or person having control of such premises, or any of them, that such
condition exists and that the same constitutes a fire hazard and a menace to life and property, and direct that immediate steps be taken to eliminate such
fire hazard, and in case such notice is not promptly complied with, the person so notified shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and, in
addition, in case of fire resulting directly or indirectly from the failure or neglect to promptly comply with said written notice of the fire marshal, as provided
in this section, the person so notified shall be liable in a civil action for the payment of all expenses incurred by the city in and about the use of the
apparatus and materials in extinguishing any fire from such cause, the amount of the expense to be fixed by the fire committee. (Ord. 180, 4-5-1921)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 13/135
Chapter 9
ELECTION WARDS
1-9-1: WARDS:
Election wards are hereby established within the city of Havre. That property situated within those certain precincts, as depicted on the official Hill County
election administrator's map, appended to section 1-9-2 of this chapter and set out at the end of this chapter, is hereby assigned to the respective wards
identified on such map. (Ord. 849, 3-21-2005)
1-9-2: MAP ADOPTED:
The map referred to in section 1-9-1 of this chapter, appended to this section and set out below, is hereby officially adopted. The map is to be reproduced
in this chapter as a map describing the election wards in the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 14/135
(Ord. 849, 3-21-2005)
1-9-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The wards adopted by this chapter are to be effective for all elections occurring after May 1, 2005. (Ord. 849, 3-21-2005)
1-9-4: FUTURE CHANGES:
(A) All future changes in the ward boundaries in the city, unless such authority is preempted by the laws of the state, shall be by ordinance, including those
changes brought about by annexation or deannexation to the city or by future reapportionments.
(B) The ordinance changing ward boundaries shall be made after consultations with the Hill County election administrator, and shall, as nearly as possible,
seek the goals of equality between the number of registered voters in each ward, and that the wards be as contiguous as possible. (Ord. 713, 5-16-
1983)
Chapter 10
CITY CONTRACTS
1-10-1: ADVERTISEMENT:
All contracts for the purchase of: a) any automobile, truck, other vehicle, road machinery, other machinery, apparatus, appliances or equipment in excess
of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); b) any materials or supplies of any kind in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); or c) construction,
repair or maintenance services in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00); must be let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for
bids in the official newspaper of the city, once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks, and the second publication must be made not less than five (5)
days or more than twelve (12) days before the consideration of bids. (Ord. 795, 3-6-1995)
1-10-2: TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The advertisement of any contract or contract work must be handled in such manner as the council may order, and it shall contain a general outline of the
proposed contract or work, terms and conditions, place where specifications may be examined, or committee to whom it is referred. (Ord. 21, 12-7-1904)
1-10-3: BIDS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 15/135
All bids must be opened by the clerk at a meeting of the council, or by a committee if so specified, and the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids;
bonds must accompany all bids if the council so orders in the advertisement. (Ord. 21, 12-7-1904)
1-10-4: LOWEST BIDDER; BOND:
After all bids have been opened and read to the council, the contract may be let to the lowest bidder if the council so desires, and the same shall be
entered upon the minutes of the council. If the council has required a bond, the successful bidder shall execute to the city and deliver to the clerk a bond
for the faithful performance of the work which shall besatisfactory to the council, and the attorney shall examine said bond to ascertain if the rights of the
city will be preserved and fully guarded in the event of the contractor's failure to complete the work according to contract. (Ord. 725, 4-15-1985)
1-10-5: EXECUTION OF CONTRACT:
All contracts let by the city shall be executed on the part of the city by being signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk and shall have the seal of the
city attached, and shall, together with the bond, be filed in the office of the clerk. (Ord. 21, 12-7-1904)
Chapter 11
CORPORATE SEAL
1-11-1: SEAL DESIGNATED:
A seal circular in form with the words "THE CITY OF HAVRE, HILL COUNTY, MONTANA" on the outer circle, and the interior of said seal showing the
head of a bull, shall be the corporate seal of the city from and including February 3, 1941, and shall be used in all cases in which by law it is necessary to
use a seal by a corporation. The seal of the city shall be in the custody of the mayor. (Ord. 368, 2-17-1941)
Chapter 12
ANNUAL MUNICIPAL BUDGET
(Rep. by Ord. 838, 7-3-2000)
Chapter 13
CIVIL DEFENSE PLAN
1-13-1: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
The county of Hill and city of Havre civil defense plan is hereby approved. This plan provides for an integrated city-county organization for civil defense
and for operations during periods of emergency, and thereby constitutes the most effective and efficient means of meeting the civil defense needs of the
city of Havre and its citizens, by making maximum use of the existing agencies and capabilities of local government within Hill County, supported by
volunteers and nongovernmental personnel and resources, to prevent or minimize loss of life and property that could be caused by enemy attack or other
catastrophe or disaster affecting the city of Havre. The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to approve such revisions of said civil defense plan as may
be made, from time to time, if he deems the revisions to be reasonably necessary to meet the civil defense needs of the city and its citizens. (Ord. 569, 2-
22-1972)
1-13-2: OPERATION OF ORGANIZATION DURING EMERGENCY:
The mayor of the city and the board of county commissioners of Hill County shall, during periods of emergency caused by enemy attack or other
catastrophe or disaster affecting the city, jointly direct and control the operations of the city-county organization for civil defense established in said civil
defense plan. The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to take, during such periods of emergency, such actions as are reasonably necessary to
prevent or minimize loss of life and property, in cooperation with said board of county commissioners and the civil defense director of Hill County. (Ord.
569, 2-22-1972)
1-13-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The county civil defense director, under policy guidance of the board of county commissioners in coordination with the mayor, is responsible to conduct the
following day to day activities; recommending actions; preparing budget requests; training; assignment of personnel; licensing; marking and stocking of
public shelters; preparation of program paper; administration of civil defense program; coordination of the program with all departments; development of
civil defense plan and supporting documents for approval by the mayor of Havre and commissioners of Hill County. The civil defense director will act as
chief ofstaff to the executives of the county and city. (Ord. 569, 2-22-1972)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 16/135
Chapter 1
CITY-COUNTY PLANNING BOARD
2-1-1: CREATION OF BOARD:
There is hereby created a combined city and county planning board pursuant to and under the provisions of state law1, to be designated and known as the
Havre city-county planning board. (Ord. 499, 10-7-1963)
2-1-2: POWERS:
The city-county planning board shall possess and have all powers and authority granted by the provisions of state law2 and shall perform all duties
required thereunder. (Ord. 499, 10-7-1963; amd. Ord. 826, 4-20-1998)
Chapter 2
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 735, 3-3-1986)
Chapter 3
LIBRARY BOARD
2-3-1: JOINT CITY/COUNTY LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
Pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the city of Havre and Hill County and the provisions of title 22, chapter 1, part 3, Montana Code Annotated,
as from time to time amended, and any other provisions of law giving the city the power and authority to participate in a joint city/county library, a public
library shall be forever kept up and maintained by the city of Havre and Hill County and shall be known as the Havre-Hill County library. (Ord. 829, 4-20-
1998)
2-3-2: CITY/COUNTY LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The city/county library shall be managed and controlled by a board of five (5) trustees pursuant to an interlocal agreement with Hill County. The mayor,
with the advice and consent of the council, shall appoint two (2) members of the board who will represent the city. The term of office of a trustee shall be
five (5) years and a trustee shall serve no more than two (2) full terms in succession. (Ord. 829, 4-20-1998)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
2-4-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Pursuant to an interlocal agreement with Hill County, all statutory powers and duties of the city board of health shall be performed by the Hill County board
of health. The powers and duties hereby delegated to the Hill County board of health are set forth in title 50, chapter 2, part 1, Montana Code Annotated,
as from time to time amended, and any other provisions of the law giving the city the power and authority to create and manage a board of health. (Ord.
827, 4-20-1998)
Chapter 5
HAVRE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-5-1: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created and established a Havre historic preservation commission for the city of Havre, which shall consist of at least five (5) members,
and an historic preservation officer, who shall promote the preservation of historic and cultural sites within the city of Havre. (Ord. 840, 1-22-2002)
2-5-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS AND OFFICER:
The members to the commission and the historic preservation officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the Havre city council. (Ord.
840, 1-22-2002)
2-5-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 17/135
The Havre historic preservation commission shall possess and have all responsibilities and authority provided by state and federal law and shall perform
all duties required thereunder. (Ord. 840, 1-22-2002)
Chapter 6
CITY TREE COMMISSION
2-6-1: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a city tree commission for the city of Havre, which shall consist of the following members: chairman of the parks
and recreation committee, the director of parks and recreation, a designee from the department of parks and recreation, and two (2) volunteer members of
the public appointed by the mayor. (Ord. 872, 11-1-2010)
2-6-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the five (5) person committee shall be as follows: chairman of parks and recreation committee, director of parks and recreation, and
the designee from the department of parks and recreation are automatic and permanent members of the tree commission. The two (2) volunteer members
appointed by the mayor shall initially be selected as follows: one for one year, and one for two (2) years for the purposes of establishing the commission.
All subsequent terms shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any of the designee from the department or the
two (2) volunteer members, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term by the remaining members of the commission. (Ord. 872,
11-1-2010)
2-6-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 872, 11-1-2010)
2-6-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the commission to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually a written plan for the care, preservation,
trimming, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. Such plan will be presented annually to the city
council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city of Havre.
The commission, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter or question
coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. 872, 11-1-2010)
2-6-5: OPERATION:
The commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for
the transaction of business. (Ord. 872, 11-1-2010)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
The police department shall be governed by the provisions of the metropolitan police law of this state, as set forth in sections 7-32-4101 to 4164, Montana
Code Annotated, 1979, as from time to time amended, and any other provisions of law giving the city power and authority to create and manage the police
department. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-2: SUPERVISION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The mayor shall have charge of and supervision over the police department. He shall appoint all the members and officers thereof. Subject to the
provisions of this chapter of the Havre city codes, he shall have the power to suspend or remove any member or officer of the force. He shall make rules,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state, or the ordinances of the city for the government, direction, management, and
discipline of the police force. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS BY CITY COUNCIL:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 18/135
In addition to the provisions of section 3-1-2 of this chapter, the city council may make any ordinances, not inconsistent with any law of the state, for the
government of the police department and for regulating the powers and duties of its officers and members. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
(A) It is the duty of the chief of police:
1. To execute and return all process issued by the city judge or directed to him by any legal authority and to attend upon the city court regularly.
2. To arrest all persons guilty of a breach of the peace or for the violation of any city ordinance and bring them before the city judge for trial.
3. To have charge and control of all policepersons, subject to such rules as may be prescribed by ordinance, and to report to the council all
delinquencies or neglect of duty or official misconduct of policepersons for action of the council.
4. To perform such other duties as the council may prescribe.
(B) The chief of police has the same powers as a constable in the discharge of his duties, but he must not serve a process in any civil action or proceeding
except when a city or town is a party. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-5: MEMBERS:
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such number of patrolpersons as the mayor and council from time to time determine. (Ord.
706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-6: APPLICATION FOR POSITION:
All appointments to the police force must be made by the mayor and confirmed by the council. No such appointment must be made until an application for
such position on the police force has been filed with the mayor, and by him referred to the police commission, and the applicant has successfully passed
the examination required to be held by the police commission, and a certificate from the police commission that the applicant has qualified for such
appointment has been filed with the mayor.
Every applicant who has passed such examination and received a certificate must first serve for a probationary term of not more than one year. At any
time before the end of the probationary term, the mayor may revoke the appointment. Within thirty (30)days after the end of the probationary term, the
appointment of the applicant must be submitted to the council, and if the appointment is confirmed by the council, the applicant becomes a member of the
police force, and shall hold such position during good behavior, unless suspended or discharged as provided by law. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-7: POLICE COMMISSION CREATED:
(A) The mayor shall nominate and, with the consent of the city council or commission, appoint three (3) residents of the city who shall have the
qualifications required by law to hold a municipal office therein and who shall constitute a board to be known by the name of "police commission".
(B) The appointees to the police commission shall hold office for three (3) years, and one such member must be appointed annually at the first regular
meeting of the city council or commission in May of each year. However, a member serving on the commission during the hearing or deciding of a case
shall continue to serve on the commission for that case until a decision has been made; a new member may not sit on the commission for such
business.
(C) The compensation of the members of such board shall be fixed by the city council or commission, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day or more
than fifty dollars ($50.00) per month for any month for each member in cities of the first and second class. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-8: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS BY COMMISSION:
(A) All applicants for positions on the police force, whose application shall have been referred to the police commission, shall be required successfully to
undergo an examination before the police commission and to receive a certificate from said commission that the applicant is qualified for such
appointment for the probationary period upon the police force.
(B) It shall be the duty of the police commission to examine all applicants as to their age, legal, mental, moral and physical qualifications, and their ability to
fill the office as a member of the police force. It shall also be the duty of the police commission, subject to the approval of the mayor, to make such
rules and regulations regarding such examinations not inconsistent with this chapter or the laws of the state.
(C) Any applicant who shall make any false statement to the police commission as to his age or other qualifications required, at his examination before the
police commission, shall be subject to suspension or dismissal from the police force, after trial. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-9: ACTIVE AND ELIGIBLE LISTS:
(A) The council shall have absolute and exclusive power to determine and limit the number of police officers and members to comprise the police force of
the city, and to divide the police membership into two (2) lists: One an active list, who are to be actually employed and receive pay while so employed,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 19/135
and two (2) an eligible list, who shall not receive pay while not actually employed as an officer or member, and to reduce the number of the police force
at any time.
(B) Officers or members of the active list, temporarily relieved from duty, shall become members of the eligible list without pay and shall be first entitled to
reinstatement on the active list, in case of vacancy, according to their seniority in the service, and all others on the eligible list shall be entitled to fill a
vacancy, in the order of their appointment. Such action of the council shall not be subject to review by any court.
In no event shall there be any officers or members placed on the eligible list, except in case of temporary reduction of the police force, when the
number already on the eligible list shall equal in number of twenty percent (20%) of the active list. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-10: QUALIFICATIONS:
(A) The members of the police department at the time of their appointment under this chapter, shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age nor more
than thirty five (35) years of age; provided, that this restriction shall not apply to any member of the present police department, nor to the police reserve
hereinafter provided for, nor to honorably discharged persons who served in the armed forces of the United States in time of war; provided such time of
service was not less than three (3) months, or to applicants for reinstatement.
(B) In every case a police officer must be a citizen of the United States, and meet the minimum qualifying standards for employment promulgated by the
board of crime control.
(C) Additional rules and qualifications may be established by the police commission as set forth in subsection 3-1-8(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 706, 7-21-
1982)
3-1-11: POLICE RESERVE:
Policepersons or officers on the retired list of the city shall retire from the active list of police officers of such city or town but shall be subject to call for
police service or active duty whenever an emergency shall require or the active list be temporarily insufficient for proper policing of such city or town, all
under the rules as the board of police commissioners or city council shall prescribe. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-12: COMMISSION TO HEAR CHARGES AGAINST OFFICERS:
(A) The police commission shall have the jurisdiction and it shall be its duty to hear, try and decide all charges brought by any person against any member
or officer of the police department; including any charge that such member is incompetent, or by age or disease, or otherwise, has become
incapacitated to discharge the duties of his office; or has been guilty of neglect of duty, or of misconduct in his office, or of conduct unbecoming a police
officer; or has been found guilty of any crime; or whose conduct has been such as to bring reproach upon the police force.
(B) Any charge brought against any member of the police force must be in writing in the form required by the police commission and a copy thereof must
be served upon the accused officer or member at least fifteen (15) days before the time fixed for the hearing of such charge.
(C) It is the duty of the police commission, at the time set for hearing a charge against a police officer, to forthwith proceed to hear, try and determine the
charges, according to the rules of evidence applicable to courts of record in the state.
(D) The accused shall have the right to be present at the trial in person and by counsel, and to be heard, and to give and furnish evidence in his defense.
(E) All trials shall be open to the public.
(F) The chairman, or acting chairman, of the police commission, shall have the power to issue subpoenas, attested in its name, to compel the attendance
of witnesses at the hearing and any person duly served with a subpoena is bound to attend in obedience thereto. The police commission shall have the
same authority to enforce obedience to the subpoena, and to punish the disobedience thereof, as is possessed by a judge of the district court in like
case; provided, however, that punishment for disobedience is subject to review by the district court of Hill County.
(G) The police commission must, after the conclusion of the hearing or trial, decide whether the charge was proven or not proven, and shall have the
power, by a decision of a majority of the commission, to discipline, suspend, remove or discharge any officer who shall have been found guilty of the
charge filed against him.
(H) Such action of the police commission shall, however, be subject to modification or veto by the mayor, made in writing, giving reasons therefor, which
shall become a permanent record of the police commission; provided, however, that where and when the police commission decides the charge not
proven, the decision is not subject to modification or veto by the mayor nor subject to any review but is final and conclusive.
(I) Where the police commission decides the charge proven, the mayor, within five (5) days from the date of the filing of suchfindings and decision with the
clerk, may modify or veto such findings and decision.
(J) When a charge against a member of the police force is found proven by the board and is not vetoed by the mayor, the mayor must make an order
enforcing the decision of the commission, or if modified by the mayor, then such decision is modified. Such decision or order shall be subject to review
by the district court in the county on all questions of fact and all questions of law.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 20/135
The district court of the county shall have jurisdiction, however, in a suit brought by an officer or member of the police force, to determine whether the
essential requirements of law as to the method of trial have been complied with, but no suit to review such hearing or trial or for reinstatement to office
shall be maintained unless the same is begun within a period of sixty (60) days after the decision of the police commission or order of the mayor has
been filed with the clerk, and in no case shall any officer or member who has been suspended or discharged, or placed upon the eligible list, be entitled
to any salary or other emoluments of office, during the period of suspension, or during the time he remains upon the eligible list, or from the date of his
discharge by the police commission or the mayor, to the time of his reinstatement if the court should finally find he was entitled to be reinstated. No
court shall have the jurisdiction to hear or determine any question or controversy concerning the salary or compensation of any member of the police
force now or hereafter accrued, except for services actually rendered.
(K) In no case shall any officer or member of the police force be discharged without a hearing or trial before the police commission, as herein provided.
(L) The district court of the county shall have jurisdiction to review all questions of fact and all questions of law in a suit brought by any officer or member of
the police force, but no suit to review such hearing or trial or for reinstatement to office shall be maintained unless the same is begun within a period of
sixty (60) days after the decision of the police commission or order of the mayor has been filed with the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-13: SUSPENSION:
The mayor or chief of police, subject to the approval of the mayor, shall have the power, in all cases, to suspend a policeperson, or any officer, for a period
of not exceeding ten (10) days in any one month, such suspension to be with or without pay as the order of suspension may determine. Any officer
suspended, with or without pay, is entitled to appeal such suspension to the police commission and it shall be the duty of the commission to hear, try and
decide all charges brought by anyperson against any member of the department. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-14: TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT:
The mayor shall have the power and authority, at any time when he deems it expedient, to employ not to exceed two (2) persons at one time for a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days to do police duty who are not members of the police department. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-15: EXEMPTIONS OF POLICE OFFICERS:
No member of the police force shall be liable to military or jury duty, or to arrest on civil process, while actually on duty. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-16: RESTRICTIONS ON ACTIVITIES OF POLICEPERSONS:
(A) No member of the police force may hold any other office or be employed in any other department of the city or town government.
(B) The fact that a person is an officer or member of the police department does not deprive his spouse or any member of his family of the right to
participate in political activity or to hold public or political office.
(C) An officer or member of the police department may participate in political activity provided he does not do so while on duty or in uniform or that it does
not otherwise interfere with the performance of his duties. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-17: POLICE PROMOTION SYSTEM:
(A) Probationary Policepersons: Probationary policepersons shall serve not more than one year on probation. The administrative officers in charge of the
probationary policeperson will submit written evaluations and recommend if the member should be hired as a regular police officer. (Ord. 767, 10-16-
1989)
(B) Patrolperson: A member of the police department shall be classified as a patrolperson after the individual has passed a one year probation. (Ord. 706,
7-21-1982)
(C) Patrolperson First Class: A police officer may be promoted to patrolperson first class after the member has graduated with passing grades from the
basic school at the Montana Law Enforcement Academy and has held the rank of patrolperson for two (2) years.
(D) Senior Patrolperson: A police officer may be promoted to the rank of senior patrolperson after the member has attained therank of patrolperson first
class and has graduated with passing grades from the intermediate school at the Montana Law Enforcement Academy, or its approved equivalent, and
has held the rank of patrolperson first class for one year.
(E) Sergeant: To be eligible for promotion to the rank of sergeant, the individual must have held the rank of senior patrolperson and must have been a
confirmed member of the police department for five (5) years. The member must have graduated from the advanced school or the former major case
school at the Montana Law Enforcement Academy, or its approved equivalent, with passing grades. The police department may have four (4)
sergeants. In the event of more than one senior patrolperson eligible for promotion to sergeant, seniority and POST training points shall be considered.
The promotion to sergeant may be made when openings are available. (Ord. 767, 10-16-1989)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 21/135
(F) Shift Requirements: A senior ranking officer, a sergeant, or a senior patrolperson shall be assigned to each shift, if possible. The senior patrolperson
shall take charge of the shift in the absence of a more senior officer.
(G) Pay Differential: A differential in pay between patrolperson through lieutenant is hereby established for the reason that with each advancement of rank,
more responsibility is expected of the person and the differential in pay will be an incentive to obtain the highest rank possible.
The differential pay shall be that a patrolperson first class shall receive at least twenty five dollars ($25.00) more per month than a patrolperson; that a
senior patrolperson shall receive at least thirty five dollars ($35.00) more per month than a patrolperson first class; and that a sergeant shall receive at
least sixty dollars ($60.00) more per month than a senior patrolperson. A lieutenant shall receive at least sixty dollars ($60.00) more per month than a
sergeant.
The police department shall be headed by a chief of police and an assistant chief of police whose wages shall be set by ordinance. (Ord. 717, 12-19-
1983)
3-1-18: COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCE FOR SICK OR INJURED POLICEPERSONS:
Whenever any member of the police department shall, on account of sickness or disability suffered or sustained while a member of the police department
and not caused or brought on by dissipation or abuse, be confined to any hospital or the member's home and shall require medical attention and care, the
officer of such police department may be allowed, by the city council, the salary as such police officer during the individual's absence and an amount equal
to the member's expenses while confined for such injury or sickness. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-19: PAYMENT OF PARTIAL SALARY AMOUNT OF OFFICER INJURED IN PERFORMANCE OF DUTY:
A member of the police department who is injured in the performance of the individual's duties so as to necessitate medical or other remedial treatment
and render the officer unable to perform assigned duties shall be paid by the city by which the individual is employed the difference between the officer's
full salary and the amount received from worker's compensation until the disability has ceased, as determined by workers' compensation, or for a period
not to exceed one year, whichever shall first occur. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-20: DISCONTINUATION OF SALARY WHEN RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE GRANTED:
Payment of a partial salary amount under section 3-1-19 of this chapter shall be discontinued if the officer is disabled for an undetermined duration and is
granted a disability retirement allowance under title 19, chapters 9 and 10, Montana Code Annotated, 1979. If an application for such a retirement
allowance is not made by the officer, application therefor may be made by the mayor of the city. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-21: ASSIGNMENT TO LIGHT DUTY OR ANOTHER AGENCY:
(A) Whenever, in the opinion of the municipality, supported by a physician's opinion, the officer is able to perform specified types of light police duty,
payment of the member's salary amount under section 3-1-19 of this chapter shall be discontinued if the individual refuses to perform such light police
duty when it is available and offered to the member. Such light duty shall be consistent with the officer's status as a law enforcement officer.
(B) With the member's consent, the officer may be transferred to another department or agency within the municipality. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-22: EFFECT ON PROBATIONARY STATUS:
If the injured officer is on probationary status at the time the officer becomes injured, the balance of the member's probationary time shall be suspended
until he returns to regular duty or is discharged for cause. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
3-1-23: SUBROGATION:
The city has a cause of action for reimbursement of sums it has paid to an officer as salary and for medical treatment against any third party against whom
the officer has a cause of action for the injury which necessitated the payments by themunicipality. (Ord. 706, 7-21-1982)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The fire department is hereby established under the provisions of sections 7-33-4101 to 7-33-4132, Montana Code Annotated, 1979, as from time to time
amended, and all other provisions of law giving the city the power to establish and maintain a fire department. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
The fire department shall consist of the fire chief and as many assistant chiefs and firefighters as the council may from time to time provide, and may
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 22/135
include a city electrician and as many assistant electricians as the council may provide. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-3: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the fire chief and firefighters shall be as provided by the council from time to time by ordinance. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-4: APPOINTMENTS:
(A) Each appointment shall be first made for a probationary term and the mayor may nominate, and, with the advice and consent of the council, may
appoint such chief and assistant chief or chiefs of the fire department and firefighters, who shall thereafterhold their respective appointments during
good behavior and while they have the physical ability to perform their duties. (Ord. 855, 3-20-2006)
3-2-5: SUSPENSION:
(A) The mayor may suspend the chief or any member of the fire department for neglect of duty or a violation of any of the rules and regulations of the fire
department; and the chief of the fire department may suspend the assistant chief or any firefighters and the assistant chief may suspend any firefighter
for a like cause.
(B) In all cases of suspension, the person suspended must be furnished with a copy of the charge against him, in writing, setting forth reasons for the
suspension. Such charges must be presented to the next meeting of the council and a hearing had thereon, when the suspended member may appear
in person or by counsel and make his defense to said charges.
(C) If the charges are found proven by the council, it may, by majority vote of the whole council, impose such penalty as it shall determine the offense
warrants, either in the continuation of the suspension for a limited time or in the removal of the suspended person from the fire department.
(D) Should the charges not be presented to the next meeting of the council after suspension, or should the charges be found not proven by the council, the
suspended person shall be reinstated and be entitled to his usual compensation for the time so suspended. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-6: REDUCTION OF FORCE:
Should the council at any time reduce the number of firefighters in the fire department, those most recently appointed shall be selected for retirement from
the fire department. The city clerk-treasurer shall keep a list of the retired firefighters. Should the number of firefighters be increased again by the council,
the persons on the list shall be called into service, the longest service firefighter being the first selected. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF FIREFIGHTERS:
The qualifications of firefighters shall be that they will be:
(A) Not over the age of thirty four (34) years at the time of the original appointment, and
(B) Shall have passed a physical examination by a practicing physician duly authorized to practice in the state, which examination shall disclose the ability
of the applicant toperform the physical work usually required of a firefighter in performance of their duty, such examination shall be in writing and shall
be on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer, and
(C) Shall be qualified voters of the city provided, however, that the city council of the city may, on an individual case by case basis, allow firefighters to live
outside the boundaries of the city limits of the city but within the boundaries of that certain governmental entity known as Hill County rural fire district
no. 1, such fire district being immediately adjacent to the city limits of the city. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-8: DUTIES OF CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF:
The fire chief shall have the sole command and control over all persons connected with the fire department and shall possess full power and authority over
its organization, government and discipline and to that end, may from time to time establish such disciplinary rules and regulations as he may deem
advisable, subject to the approval of the council including recertification requirements. He shall have charge of and be responsible for the engines and
other apparatus and the property of the city furnished the fire department, and see that they are at all times ready for use in the extinguishing of fires. The
assistant chief shall aid the chief in the work of the department and in his absence, shall perform his duties. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-9: TAX LEVY FOR FIREFIGHTERS' RETIREMENT FUND:
The provisions of chapter 566, section 32 and section 32, laws of 1981 are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-10: ANNUAL REPORT OF CLERK-TREASURER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 23/135
(Rep. by Ord. 819, 2-18-1997)
3-2-11: HOURS OF WORK:
(Rep. by Ord. 819, 2-18-1997)
3-2-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The fire chief shall establish and promulgate rules and regulations governing the employment and promotion of the members of the fire department, and
such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the council. (Ord. 736, 4-21-1986)
3-2-13: LIABILITY OF PERSONS TRANSMITTING FIRE REPORTS:
No person who is authorized by the city to receive any report of fire or who agrees to receive and transmit such report to the fire department shall be liable
in any civil action for damage to property or persons, including death, caused by delay in reporting or failure to report such fire, unless such delay or failure
is the result of gross negligence of such person. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-14: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false alarm, with intent to deceive or to pull the lever of any signal box except in case of fire, or tamper in any
way with the box or any part thereof, or to injure, deface or remove any of the boxes or the wires or supports thereof connected with any part of the alarm
system; or to use the telephone mischievously, wilfully or wantonly without having reasonable grounds for believing that a fire exists, to give any alarm to
the fire department. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
3-2-15: PROMOTION PROGRAM:
(Rep. by Ord. 736, 4-21-1986)
3-2-16: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT:
(A) A mutual aid agreement is an agreement for protection against natural or manmade disasters.
(B) The council may enter such agreement with the proper authority of:
1. Other incorporated municipalities.
2. Fire districts.
3. Unincorporated municipalities.
4. State agencies which have fire protection services.
5. Private fire prevention agencies.
6. Federal agencies. (Ord. 703, 4-19-1982)
Chapter 3
EMERGENCY SERVICES DIVISION
3-3-1: CREATION:
An emergency services division of the Havre fire department is hereby created. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
The emergency services division of the Havre fire department shall be created for the purposes of providing ambulance service and other emergency
services to the people of the city and under contract to any areas within or without the county of Hill, state of Montana. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-3-3: CONTROL:
The division shall be under the control and authority of the fire chief of the Havre fire department who shall have such control over the division as the fire
chief presently has over any other aspect of the Havre fire department. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 24/135
3-3-4: OFFICERS:
The fire chief has the authority to and may appoint an emergency services coordinator and such other officers of the division as he feels, from time to time,
is necessary, such officers to serve at his pleasure and for so long as the fire chief feels is necessary. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-3-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations of the Havre fire department, as from time to time amended, shall apply to members of the Havre fire department serving in the
emergency services division. The fire chief may make, subject to the approval of the Havre city council, such further regulations for the administration of
the emergency services division as he may feel is necessary. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-3-6: CONTRACTS:
The emergency service division will provide such emergency services, including ambulance service, as required of it by the Havre city council within the
city or any area within or without the county of Hill, state of Montana, as might be required by the city council, either directly or through contracts with any
other governmental agency. (Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-3-7: CHARGES FOR SERVICES:
Charges for ambulance service shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Havre city council. (Ord. 745, 11-17-1986)
Chapter 4
WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT
3-4-1: WATER COMMITTEE:
The committee on water, consisting of four (4) members of the council appointed by the mayor at the first regular meeting of the council in January of each
even numbered year, shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the waterworks, and they shall perform all acts that may
be necessary for the prudent, efficient management and protection of said waterworks, subject to the approval and confirmation of the council. (Ord. 696,
10-19-1981)
3-4-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF WATERWORKS:
The director of public works, appointed by the council, is hereby designated as superintendent of waterworks, and shall be responsible for the enforcement
of this chapter. The duties of said superintendent shall be as follows:
(A) To execute to the city a legal bond in a sum to be determined by the council, with such sureties as shall be approved by said council for a faithful
performance of his duties.
(B) To be general executive officer of the waterworks and have charge of all employees and all property pertaining to the waterworks system.
(C) To give written orders for all supplies and materials and preserve a copy of such orders in his office.
(D) To have charge of all contracts and shall see that they are faithfully executed.
(E) To have charge of the erection, alteration or repair of all buildings, engines, motors, pumps, fixtures, wells, reservoirs, equipment and grounds.
(F) To determine the location and size of all water mains, service connections, valves, hydrants and specials.
(G) To keep a correct record of all mains, hydrants, valves and specials, and keep a complete set of books which shall at all times show the distribution of
accounts of the water department.
(H) To submit all bills, payrolls, accounts and monthly statements to the council for approval.
(I) To have the care and safekeeping of all books and papers belonging to the waterworks system and shall deliver them to his successor in office.
(J) To issue all permits for tapping mains, and shall record all taps, service pipes, their size, location, material and all data regarding the same, and to see
that they are properly installed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 25/135
(K) To see that all gates and hydrants are restored to their proper working condition after use by the fire department and shall see that all breaks or defects
are promptly repaired.
(L) To cause to be kept a daily record of the work of each pumping unit, the pressure maintained, the number of gallons pumped and such other data as
may be necessary.
(M) To cause inspections to be made of the premises of any consumer for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, motors and water fixtures to
eliminate all abuses, whether from waste or other improper use of water.
(N) To keep a record of each water meter in use and examine and test them at regular intervals as to accuracy of measurement and remedy any defects.
(O) The director of public works may employ such additional help, subject to the approval of the mayor and authorization by the city council, as may be
necessary for the proper performance of the duties of that office. The director of public works shall be responsible for the acts done on behalf of that
office by such employees and for the proper performance of their duties. This may include a superintendent of the water treatment plant who shall be
subordinate to the director of public works. (Ord. 696, 10-19-1981)
3-4-3: WATER SERVICE RATES:
On and after the effective date of this section, the city shall establish, by resolution from time to time adopted by the city council, all charges, rentals and
rates for water service provided by the city to property owners and consumers. (Ord. 822, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-20-1997)
3-4-4: PROTECTION OF WATERWORKS:
These rates, rules and regulations are for the management, control and protection of the waterworks and shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person who takes water supplied by the city from the waterworks, and every person taking the water shall be considered as having expressed
consent to comply thereby. (Ord. 696, 10-19-1981; amd. Ord. 702, 4-19-1982)
3-4-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following special rules and regulations are hereby established for the management, control and protection of the waterworks: (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
(A) Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT OR CONSUMER: The owner.
OWNER: The legal owner of any premises served or to be served by the city's utility service; "owner" shall not include a tenant or occupant of
premises owned by the owner or another.
UTILITY: The city of Havre water department.
UTILITY SERVICE: Water service or sewer service, or both, supplied by the utility to an owner's premises.
(B) Application For Utility Service:
1. All applications for utility service must be made by and in the name of the owner at the utility's office on forms supplied by the utility for that purpose.
A new application must be made to the utility each time the ownership of the served premises changes and each time the identity of the owner
changes.
2. All applications for utility service must be signed by the owner, or by the owner's duly authorized agent for and in behalf of the owner, and must
include the purpose for which the utility service will be used and the owner's agreement to conform to these rules and regulations as a condition of
receiving utility service. Before utility service is activated and turned on, the utility may require a cash deposit equal to two (2) months' average billing
for utility service to the applicable premises, or a minimum of seventy five dollars ($75.00), whichever is greater, to guarantee payment for the utility
service.
3. The account for utility service shall be kept and accounted for by the utility only in the name of the owner of the premises served by the utility service,
and the owner shall be solely responsible for payment of such account when due and before delinquent. All accounts for utility service are due when
rendered and become delinquent ten (10) days thereafter.
4. The utility shall charge all rates, rentals and other charges for utility service to the account of the owner for the premises to which the utility service is
furnished. In the event any sums owing to the utility for utility service to such premises shall become delinquent, the utility reserves the right to
terminate and turn off water service to the owner's premises for which any utility service account is delinquent. (Ord. 823, 7-21-1997)
(C) Consumer Discontinuance Of Service:
1. Permanent Discontinuance: A consumer who, for any reason, including the vacating of the premises, wishes to have the water service permanently
discontinued, shall give the utility at least twenty four (24) hours' notice and shall specify the date that the service be discontinued. Until the utility has
received such notice, the consumer shall be held responsible for all service rendered to the premises. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 26/135
2. Temporary Discontinuance: If a consumer wants to temporarily discontinue the water service, as in instances of seasonal use, the consumer shall
notify the utility of the request in writing and on forms provided by the utility. Within five (5) business days after the utility has received such notice,
the utility will shut off the water at the curb without a shutoff charge, and allowance will be made on the consumer's bill for the time the water service
is not in use. The consumer may have service restored at any time by notifying the utility in writing and upon payment of a forty five dollar ($45.00)
fee for restoration of service. If the utility fails to shut off the water service within five (5) business days after receiving a written request for temporary
discontinuance, and provided that the shutoff valve is not damaged, seized, frozen or otherwise inoperable, the utility will not charge the consumer
for the water usage occurring after such five (5) business day period. (Ord. 859, 2-5-2007)
3. Frozen Service Lines: Frozen service lines shall not be treated as or deemed a permanent or temporary discontinuance of water service. No
allowance or deduction will be made on the bill for the time the water service is not in use due to frozen service lines. (Ord. 833, 7-19-1999)
(D) Utility Discontinuance Of Service:
1. Notice Of Discontinuance:
(a) Service to any consumer may not be terminated unless written notice is sent by first class mail to the consumer that bills are ten (10) or more
days delinquent, or that the violation of the rules and regulations must cease. If no response to the first notice is received within ten (10) days of
mailing, the utility must send a second notice by first class or certified mail, or personally serve the customer at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the proposed termination. If the consumer's premises is rented to or otherwise occupied by a tenant of the consumer, and if the consumer has
provided to the utility the tenant's name and mailing address in advance and in writing, then the utility will send the above described notices of
discontinuance both to the consumer and to the consumer's tenant.
If no response to the second notice is received within ten (10) days, the utility shall leave notice in a place on the premises conspicuous to the
consumer or to the consumer's tenant that service will be terminated on the second business day unless the delinquent charges have been paid or
the violation of the rules and regulations has ceased. (Ord. 859, 2-5-2007)
(b) Where fraudulent use of water is detected, or where the utility's regulating or measuring equipment has been tampered with, or where a
dangerous condition is found to exist on the consumer's premises, the water may be shut off without notice in advance.
(c) In no case shall the utility discontinue service on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or a day prior to a holiday. All service terminations shall be performed
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
2. Charge For Reconnection:
(a) Whenever the supply of water is turned off for violation of the rules, nonpayment of bills, or fraudulent use of water, the utility may make a charge
of forty five dollars ($45.00) for the reestablishment of service. (Ord. 859, 2-5-2007)
(b) After service has been turned off because of nonpayment, service shall not be turned on again until all back water bills and the turn on charge
have been paid or an agreeable pay arrangement has been made.
(c) Should the occupant or owner of any premises turn on the water or cause it to be turned on after it has been shut off, or refuse to repair a
defective service, or curb cock, it shall be turned off at the main, and the cost of such work will be charged to the owner of the property and the
water service will not be turned on again until all costs of turning it off and on have been paid to the water department.
3. Emergency Service Disruption: Notice will be given, whenever possible, prior to shutting off water, but consumers are warned that owing to
unavoidable accidents or emergencies their water supply may be shut off at any time. In the event of such accidents or emergencies, consumers are
advised to take the necessary precautions to prevent damage to their fixtures and premises. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
(E) Provision Of Meters:
1. All services shall be metered.
2. During the construction period, before the meter is installed, a flat rate monthly charge will be made based on an estimate by the public works
department of the amount of water that would be used.
3. The property owner shall provide and install at their own expense a new meter which meets the requirements of the utility for all new construction
which connects to the utilities water system.
4. Once a meter has been installed to a property connected to the utilities water system, the utility shall own the meter and at its own expense, maintain
and operate all equipment necessary for the regulation and measurement of water, in accordance with the tariff or contract provisions, to its
consumers. Where additional meters are requested by the consumer and are furnished by the utility for the convenience of the consumer, a charge
for such meter will be made to the consumer.
5. The utility will not make collections for any secondary meters, and all water rents of any single building must be paid by one consumer when
supplied by meter measurement from one service. The utility however, may include the readings of the secondary meters with the bill for the whole
building.
6. In no case will the utility furnish water from one meter to two (2) or more houses, regardless of whether they are owned by one person or not.
7. The utility may install or replace any meter at such time as it may see fit and shall determine the size of any meter.
8. Any consumer requiring a service larger than one inch (1") in diameter shall cause to be purchased and installed at his own expense a meter of an
approved pattern and design. Such meter shall be installed and maintained as required in the following subsections of this section. Any upgrades
required to meet the utility's meter reading and/or billing systems shall be made at the owner's expense as required by the utility. (Ord. 896, 2-21-
2017)
(F) Location Of Meters:
1. Protection Of Meters: In all cases where a meter is installed, the consumer must furnish proper protection from frost or other damage, and the meter
must be located where it is easily accessible for reading purposes and repairs. If meters are not placed as directed, and where meters are broken or
damaged by negligence of owners or occupants of premises, the same shall be paid by the owner of the premises, and in case payment is neglected
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 27/135
or refused, the water supply may be turned off and shall not be turned on until payment is made of the amount due, plus forty five dollars ($45.00) for
turning off and on such service. (Ord. 859, 2-5-2007)
(G) Meter Reading:
1. The utility shall normally read meters for all consumers at monthly or bimonthly intervals. The day of the month for reading any meter as determined
by the utility shall as closely as practicable be the same for each reading.
2. If unable to get in to read the meter, the utility may provide the consumer with a card and request the consumer to read the meter and call in the
reading to the utility. If such reading is not received by the utility in time for billing, utility may estimate the meter reading and render a bill accordingly.
(H) Meter Accuracy:
1. Accuracy Dispute: In cases of a dispute as to the accuracy of a meter, the consumer may demand that the meter be removed, and tested as to
accuracy, in his presence. If the meter is found to be registering correctly or in favor of the consumer, the cost of such testing and replacing of the
meter shall be borne by the consumer. If the meter is found to be recording incorrectly and against the consumer, the cost of such testing and
replacing of the meter shall be borne by the utility.
(I) Meter Test:
1. Fast Meters: If, upon test of any meter, the meter is found to have an average error of more than two percent (2%) fast, the utility shall refund to the
customer the overcharge, based upon the corrected meter reading for a period equal to one year. If attributable to some cause, the date of which can
be fixed, the overcharge shall be computed back to but not beyond such date.
2. Dead Meters: If a meter is found not to register for any period, the utility shall compute the water used by taking the average of the water used for the
meter reading period preceding the meter reading period following the date when the meter was found to be dead, which amount shall be assumed
to be the amount of water used by the customer during the billing period in which the meter was found dead. Exceptions will be made to this rule if
the facts clearly show that the above method does not give the correct consumption for the period.
(J) Meter Billing: Water consumers are not permitted to interfere in any way with the meter after it is set in place. In case the meter seal is broken or the
working parts of the meter have been tampered with or the meter damaged, the utility may render a bill for the current month, based on an average of
the last two (2) months, together with the full cost of such damage as has been done to the meter, and may refuse to furnish water until the account is
paid in full.
(K) Irrigation And Lawn Sprinkling: The times when sprinkling and irrigation will be allowed shall be determined by the superintendent and the water
committee, and the consumers shall be notified through the news media. For violations of this rule, the water department may discontinue service to
the offender.
(L) Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the police of the city to give vigilant aid to the water department in the enforcement of its rules and regulations, and
to this end they shall report all violations thereof that come to their knowledge to the superintendent's office. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
3-4-6: RULES GOVERNING PLUMBERS:
The following rules shall be strictly adhered to by all persons performing any plumbing work in and upon any of the mains, connections or appliances
appertaining to the waterworks and any violation thereof or failure to comply therewith shall be considered a violation and breach of the conditions of all
bonds of plumbers hereinafter mentioned:
Rule P-1.No person shall engage in or conduct the business of water connecting or in any manner perform any work upon any of the mains, connections
or appliances pertaining to the waterworks, until he, she or they shall have been granted a proper license for such work and filed the required bond, and
received a permit therefor as provided in title 4, chapter 2 of this code, and subsequent amendments thereto.
No person except a regularly licensed plumber will be permitted to do any work on any pipe or connection made, with the mains or water supply of the
waterworks. Plumbers failing to perform their work according to the established rules and regulations therefor or executing it unskillfully or to the detriment
of the waterworks, may be debarred from making connections with the city mains.
Rule P-2.No plumber shall directly or indirectly allow any other person to do work upon said water mains or appliances under his license and bond.
When an application for new water service has been granted, the utility at the owner's expense will tap the main and furnish corporation cock, and clamp
when necessary, and any other material used or labor furnished in connection with the tapping of the main. All expense of laying and maintaining the
service pipes from the main to the premises of the consumer must be borne by the consumer. The service pipe must be laid below street grade, on the
premises of the consumer and at a standard depth designated by the utility to prevent freezing. A curb cock and curb box of approved pattern must be
installed by the consumer at a point designated by the utility.
Rule P-3. Special care shall be observed with trenches within the streets and alleys, and all surplus material must be removed when work is completed
and any refilling of trenches necessary to maintain the highway in good condition for a period of two (2) years shall be done by the plumber, who shall be
responsible for any damage to the roadway occasioned by his excavation and refilling during that time.
All trenches shall be refilled in a careful and workmanlike manner, and compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of maximum density at optimum
moisture content as determined by AASHTO method T99. Water settling of the trench will not be allowed, and the addition of water shall be limited to that
required for optimum moisture for maximum compaction of the material.
All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, organic or frozen material, asphalt, boulders or other materials that are unsuitable.
If in the opinion of the director of public works or his agent, compaction tests should be taken to determine maximum density and should the tests fail, the
deficiencies shall be corrected and the costs of such tests, both shall be borne by the plumber or contractor.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 28/135
Rule P-4. Excavations in streets and alleys shall be made in such a manner as to impede travel as little as possible, and the superintendent of waterworks
may determine and limit the time such excavation may remain open, and when, in his judgment, the work is unnecessarily delayed, he may direct the
number of workmen be increased to hasten the work to such an extent as he may deem necessary. Red lights shall be maintained upon all unfinished
work at night, from dark until sunrise, and sufficient barricades shall be in place at all times until the work is completed. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
Rule P-5. Any person securing a water permit for any work on or connection to city water mains, connections or appliances pertaining to the city's
waterworks, shall pay a uniform fee for such permit, in an amount from time to time established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 801, 7-15-1996, eff.
8-14-1996)
Rule P-6. No alteration, addition or disconnection in and about any water pipes, or apparatus connected therewith shall be made by any plumber or any
consumer without written permission to do such work being granted by the superintendent of waterworks.
Rule P-7. No pipes laid underground shall be covered and trenches refilled until after the water has been turned into such pipes and said pipes tested and
found to be watertight, placed at the proper depth and all in workmanlike manner.
Rule P-8. Plumbers will be required in all cases to comply with and conform to rules governing consumers in the location and placing of pipes, stop boxes
and cutoffs.
Rule P-9. Plumbers shall not excavate under the sidewalk or area, until after the tap is made for the connection and the public works department may
require twenty four (24) hours' notice to put in a tap on the main, which tap may be made only with the approval of the public works department.
Rule P-10. In case of leaks or other accidents to pipes or other apparatus connected with the waterworks, plumbers may shut off the water to make such
necessary repairs. In all cases where plumbers shall make repairs to pipes or fixtures on any premises, they shall leave the water turned on or turned off
as they found it to be when they entered the premises to make such repairs. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
Rule P-11.Any person not a licensed plumber who shall in any manner interfere with the waterworks, its pipes, hydrants, valves, stop boxes or fixtures of
any kind belonging thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 834, 6-22-1999)
Rule P-12.In no case shall any plumber, after the completion and trial of any plumbing work, if it is the first introduction of service pipes, leave the water
turned on at the premises, but shall in all cases close the stopcock before leaving the premises.
Rule P-13.The director of public works under the direction of the water committee shall have absolute control of the entire water system and all buildings
and apparatus connected therewith. He shall have the authority to order the cancellation of the license of any plumber or may suspend the operation of
said license for noncompliance with the rules and regulations of said public works department, and such suspension or cancellation of license shall take
effect immediately and shall remain in full force until restored by order of the water committee.
Rule P-14.Plumbers must not extend pipes from one street number to another without special permission.
Rule P-15.Water pipes shall not be laid in the same trench with sewer pipes, but an entirely separate trench must, in all cases, be provided for their
accommodation. At least ten feet (10') shall separate a water pipe from a sewer pipe.
Rule P-16.In all cases where water pipes enter a building, plumbers must furnish and install a gate valve of approved pattern. Said gate valve shall be
placed within one foot (1') of the wall where said pipe enters the building.
Rule P-17.All meters set by plumbers shall be set horizontally within two feet (2') of the wall where the water pipe enters the metered premises, and the
plumbers setting such meter must disconnect all water fixtures and apparatus on the premises and grounds belonging thereto, not supplied with water
through said meter.
Rule P-18.Plumbers must first blow out the pipes before setting any meter, and the meter must, in all cases, be set without the use of red lead or any other
substance for packing in the fittings and must be set level and made firm by properly bracing and supporting the piping adjoining the meter.
Rule P-19.The opening of stop boxes by plumbers by any other means than a proper wrench is strictly forbidden. All plumbers must have a stop box
wrench attached to their keys for opening and closing stops. Any plumber breaking stop box covers or bolts will be required to pay for same.
Rule P-20.Whenever it becomes necessary during the progress of the work of replacing or repairing inside water pipes to break the meter seal, such
action must be reported at once to the office of the superintendent.
Rule P-21.All plumbers shall be governed by the general rules and regulations, as far as the same apply to the kind and quality of material used and
manner of doing plumbing work.
Rule P-22.Master plumbers will be held responsible for their workmen and for each violation of any of these rules, said master plumber shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. For a second offense, his license may be canceled.
Rule P-23.Unauthorized persons are not allowed to open or close any fire hydrant or to interfere with, attach or connect to any stop valve, stopcock or fire
hydrant belonging to the water department.
Rule P-24.No person other than an authorized contractor or employee of the waterworks department shall make any tap or connection with any main or
distributing pipe of the waterworks system.
Rule P-25.Whoever shall, by himself or by any other person acting under his authority, use or take water from any part of the waterworks aforesaid without
a license or permit, or shall, without authority from said water department, open or hitch to, dig out, curb over or remove any fireplug or hydrant, stopcock,
valve, valve box or any other fixture appertaining to said waterworks or shall let on or shut off water into or from any water pipe, wherever situated, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 748, 3-16-1987)
3-4-7: CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 29/135
No connection of any sort or nature whatsoever shall be made to the waterworks of the city or the mains connected thereto, by any person, corporation or
organization if the intended connection will service or otherwise benefit real property outside the corporate limits of the city, unless the owner of such real
property has signed and filed with the office of the director of public works of the city: a) an irrevocable petition for annexation; b) an irrevocable petition for
withdrawal from rural fire district 1; and c) an irrevocable agreement establishing the future applicable city zoning district in which the owner's property will
be included upon annexation and a waiver of a change in the applicable county zoning district, if any, affecting such property.
Each and every agreement made between any property owner requesting and accepting water services inside or outside the corporate limits of the city
shall include: a) an irrevocable petition for annexation to the city; b) an irrevocable petition for withdrawal from rural fire district 1; and c) an irrevocable
agreement establishing the future applicable city zoning district in which the owner's property will be included upon annexation and a waiver of a change in
the applicable county zoning district, if any, affecting such property; all of which shall be imposed upon the land as a covenant and easement running with
the land for the benefit of the public. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
3-4-7-1: REBATE FOR PRIVATELY FINANCED EXTENSION OF WATER SERVICE MAIN OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
An owner of real property lying outside of the corporate limits of the city may install, at such owner's sole expense, a public water main within public rights
of way or public easements, after obtaining approval from both the city and all applicable state agencies, and after obtaining all applicable permits for
construction and installation of such water main. In addition, the owner must comply with all of the provisions of section 3-4-7 of this chapter.
Such property owner must install the water main in conformance with the rules and regulations of both the city and the state of Montana, and under the
direction of the city's director of public works. The property owner must grant to the city any and all easements required by the city for the operation and
maintenance of any such water main which is connected to the city municipal water system.
Prior to commencement of construction and installation of such water main and subject to the city's acceptance and approval of such water main as finally
installed, the property owner who financed such installation may request the city to enter into and establish a written rebate agreement and procedure by
which some portion of the cost of installation of such water main may be rebated to such property owner by charging "latecomer fees" to other property
owners who later connect to that water main during the fifteen (15) year period after installation. The property owner agrees to prepare and file with the city
such data as the city requires to establish the rebate, itemizing all expenses in connection with the installation, including construction and engineering
costs. Before the city's final acceptance and approval of the water main, the city and the property owner must agree in writing on a specific dollar amount
of the rebate for each such later connection to the water main, taking into consideration the total cost incurred by the property owner in the installation, an
estimate of the number of additional parcels that may become connected to the water main at a future date, and any other factors that the parties deem
appropriate.
Upon acceptance and approval by the city of the water main as installed, and for a term of fifteen (15) years thereafter, the city agrees to charge and
collect the agreed latecomer fees, up to the agreed upon rebate amount, from all other property owners desiring to tap into such water main for the
purpose of providing public water service to their respective properties. Any such property owner desiring to tap into such water main shall not be issued a
connection permit until the specified latecomer fee has been paid to the city. The latecomer fee is in addition to all connection fees and other charges
required by the city. No latecomer fees may be charged or collected by the city and the property owner is not entitled to any rebate for any connection to
the water main occurring after the applicable fifteen (15) year period.
The city treasurer shall establish a separate rebate fund for each approved water main rebate agreement as provided under this chapter, and shall
disburse the rebate funds, when received, to the property owner who financed the installation, or to such party's proven heirs, devisees, personal
representatives, successors or assigns. If no qualified payee can be located or if any funds remain unclaimed at the end of the applicable fifteen (15) year
term, the rebate funds so collected shall revert to the general water funds of the city. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
3-4-7-2: IMPLIED CONSENT TO ANNEXATION:
The city may, at any time, require a property owner's consent to annexation as a condition of continued water service. When the city determines to require
such consent from a particular property owner, the city may notify the property owner, in writing, that the city seeks such consent and that if such consent
is not given, the city will require that the property owner discontinue receiving water service. The property owner may notify the city in writing of his or her
consent to annexation. If within thirty (30) days of the property owner's receipt of such notice, the property owner contacts the city and makes firm
arrangements, in writing, to discontinue sewer and water service, then the city shall not further pursue obtaining the property owner's consent. If, however,
the property owner has not, within such time period, made firm written arrangements to discontinue sewer and water service, then the city shall be entitled
to treat the property owner as having consented to annexation of his or her property upon the expiration of such time.
If the property owner consents to annexation under any of the methods described above, the property owner may not thereafter withdraw his or her
consent to any proposed annexation of his or her property. If the property owner consents to annexation under any of the methods described above, then
the city shall be entitled to disregard any protest that such property owner makes to a proposed annexation of his or her property. Nothing herein shall
prevent the city from seeking consent even if the city has previously obtained a waiver of protest from such property owner or from his or her predecessor
in interest. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
3-4-8: APPROVAL OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon approval by the city council through the authority granted to the city council by 69-7-101, Montana Code
Annotated, 1983, and as adopted by resolution 2682 by the city council of the city. (Ord. 720, 1-16-1984)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 30/135
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
(A) The city adopts by public ordinance the current edition of the building code and all accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications as
adopted by the building codes bureau, Montana department of labor and industry applicable to local government jurisdictions, subsequent editions of
building codes may be adopted by administrative action as authorized by Montana Code Annotated section 50-60-301(1)(b); as published in ARM
section 8.70.1501 and sections 24.301.202, 24.301.901 through 24.301.905. The building code is applicable to all buildings within the city limits. (Ord.
852, 2-21-2006)
(B) The adopted building code(s) shall regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city and its jurisdictional area and provide for
issuance of permits and collection of fees and penalties. (Ord. 846, 2-18-2003)
4-1-2: HOUSING CODE ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-3: ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-4: SIGN CODE1:
(Rep. by Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-1-5: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The "building official" provided for in the model technical code shall be the city director of public works. (Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-6: BOARD OF APPEALS:
The "board of appeals" provided for in the model technical code shall be the board of adjustment of the city established in subsection 11-1-19(A) of this
code. Board powers and appeal procedures are provided in section 11-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-7: ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENA:
Failure to respond to a subpoena duly issued by the board of appeals shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 746, 2-2-1987)
4-1-8: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both, for any
person to violate any provision of the codes adopted by this chapter or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the building official pursuant to
authority granted by this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 746, 2-2-1987)
4-1-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health regulation or code of
the city existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other regulation or code of
the city, existing on the effective dateof this chapter, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other regulations or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or other phrase of this chapter, or of the codes
adopted herein, should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall
remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 746, 2-2-1987)
4-1-10: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
The city adopts by public ordinance the current edition of the international energy conservation code, 2003 edition, as provided in ARM 24.301.161, and all
accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications adopted by the building codes bureau, Montana department of labor and industry, except any
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 31/135
fee schedules for building and other permits, as published in the administrative rules of Montana. This code is applicable to all new building construction
within the city limits. (Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-11: ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The city adopts by public ordinance the accessibility rules and all accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications adopted by the building
codes bureau of the Montana department of labor and industry, as published in the administrative rules of Montana, and as published in ARM sections
24.301.901 through 24.301.905. These rules establish the accessibility requirements to ensure newly constructed public buildings and certain altered
public buildings are readily accessible and usable by persons with disabilities within city limits. (Ord. 852, 2-21-2006)
4-1-12: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED:
The city adopts by reference the current edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, except any fee schedules for building and
other permits set forth therein, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as the code is adopted and amended by the building codes
division of the Montana department of commerce, as and for the rules, regulations and conditions governing the repairs, replacement or demolition of
dangerous buildings within the limits of the city, as well as within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction area of the city. (Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-1-13: BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
The city adopts by reference the current edition of the uniform code for building conservation, except any fee schedules for building and other permits set
forth therein, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as the code is adopted and amended by the building codes division of the
Montana department of commerce, as and for the rules, regulations, requirements and conditions governing the conservation of existing building, within
the limits of the city, as well as within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction area of the city. (Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-1-14: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
The city of Havre hereby adopts, as its schedule of building permit fees for all building permits issued under this chapter, the building permit fees
established and set forth in the 1991 edition of the uniform building code (UBC), published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as
amended, changed or altered from time to time by resolution of the city council. The office of the director of public works will maintain a copy of the
schedule of the current building permit fees on file and open for public inspection during normal business hours. All building permit fees will be based on
the valuation of the proposed improvements, determined by reference to the most current edition of the building valuation data published in the "Building
Standards Magazine" by the International Conference of Building Officials, or the actual cost of such improvements as established by written construction
contract between the owner and the owner's contractor, whichever valuation is less. (Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-1-15: APPLICABILITY:
The technical codes and standards adopted by reference in this chapter are applicable to all buildings within the building code enforcement area of the city
of Havre, Montana, including, without limitation, residential buildings containing less than five (5) dwelling units or their attached to structures, any farm or
ranch building, and any private garage or private storage structure used only for the owner's own use as provided by section 50-6-102(1)(a), Montana
Code Annotated. (Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-1-16: AVAILABILITY:
One copy of each code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 846, 2-18-2003)
4-1-17: EFFECTIVE DATES OF FUTURE ADOPTIONS:
Any codes or amendments adopted by the building codes bureau which apply to local government jurisdictions, including the adoption of the latest editions
of the model technical codes or applicable administrative rules of Montana, shall become effective in the city upon order of the mayor within ninety (90)
days after the date that the bureau notifies the city of said amendments. (Ord. 846, 2-18-2003)
4-1-18: LIABILITY:
The adoption of this code by the city is not an assumption of any liability by the city to any permittee of this code or to any third person by reason of the
inspection, failure to inspect, issuance or nonissuance of any certificate under this code, approval or disapproval of any equipment or process authorized
by this code. This code shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer or employee liable for any damage to persons or property for any matters
regulated by this code. This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any
building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects. (Ord. 846, 2-18-2003)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING CODE
4-2-1: BOND REQUIRED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 32/135
The city will not grant any permit required under this chapter to any person, or to the owner of any property where plumbing work is to be done, until such
person files a bond with the city clerk, as follows:
Any person ("plumber") engaged in the business of plumbing, drain laying, sewer construction or the running of water pipes for commercial or domestic
water supply, either from street mains or any other connections, must file with the city clerk a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for
the protection of the city, and any person, resident or property owner within the city, against any and all loss or damage that the city, any person, resident
or property owner may suffer by reason of any work performed in or by the plumber's business within the city when caused by any negligence or
carelessness on the part of the plumber or the plumber's employees. Said bond shall be in the form approved by the city attorney and shall be signed by
two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties, or a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to be approved by the city attorney. Upon the
filing and approval of said bond, the plumber is entitled to perform work within the boundaries and the jurisdictional area of the city and to apply for any
required permits during the term of said bond. (Ord. 834, 6-22-1999)
4-2-2: REGULATIONS AS TO WATER AND SEWER SERVICE:
(A) Excavations: Any person must secure a permit from the director of public works before opening any street or alley for any purposes whatsoever, except
under municipal contracts.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used any sewer, plumbing or heating, gas or street opening permit for any building or
structure other than that described thereon and no such permit shall be transferable.
2. Trenches in public streets or alleys shall be excavated so as to impede public travel as little as possible. The director of public works or his
authorized assistant or inspector shall have the power to determine or limit the time such street oralley may be kept open and, when necessarily
delayed, he may direct that the number of workmen be increased to hasten the work to such an extent as he may deem necessary for public
interests. Trenches four feet (4') or more in depth in "filled in" or otherwise treacherous soil or near brick buildings shall be properly shored to prevent
any caving in which might occur.
3. The crossing of gutters and all other ways shall be left in such shape as to admit ready escape of water during storms.
4. Warning lights shall be kept around all unfinished work at night from dark until sunrise, and sufficient barricades shall be placed around excavations
at all times.
5. Planks shall always be provided when sidewalks or crossings are opened so as to facilitate easy crossing over trenches.
6. The refilling of all trenches shall be well and thoroughly done in uniform layers, not exceeding nine inches (9") and tamped with a tamper of no less
than forty (40) pounds' weight, or with puddled earth as may be directed by the director of public works, his assistant or the inspector entrusted with
the supervision of such work, so as to replace all excavated material and leave the surface in as good condition as found before the commencement
of the work. This section shall apply to the excavation of all trenches within the limits of the city for any purpose whatsoever, and no excavation shall
be made or begun without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works.
7. No person shall excavate any trenches for sewer pipes, or open, uncover or in any manner make connections with or lay any sewer or drain or
attach or modify appurtenances to sewer connections with sewer within the public streets, alleys, or other grounds of the city, or with any private
sewer or drain without having first obtained a permit therefor as required above, and such permit shall be on the grounds at all times during the
progress of the work and must be shown to any officer in authority upon demand.
(B) Sewers:
1. Independent Connection: Every building except as herein provided shall have an independent connection with the sanitary sewer.
2. Sewers Extended To Other Buildings: No conductors, soil, waste or drain pipe from one building shall connect to a similar pipe from another, except
where one is in the rear of another, and no sewer is available for the rear building. In such case, the sewer from the front may be extended to the
rear and the whole be considered as one sewer.
3. Cesspools, Etc.: There shall be no private cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults in the city.
(C) Property Owner's Liability: Every property owner having plumbing installed is equally responsible with the plumbing contractor in having material
installed and labor performed in accordance with and in strict compliance with the foregoing rules and regulations.
(D) Complaints: Plumbing and drainage complaints shall be investigated by the director of public works or his assistants.
(E) Licensure Of Plumbers: All work involving plumbing and drainage shall be performed by journeyman plumbers, duly licensed by the state of Montana,
under the supervision of an employing or master plumber, duly licensed by and registered with the state of Montana and bonded as required by
Montana law. Any change in a plumbing or drainage system shall be governed by the rules applicable to new construction.
(F) Water Services: Each building in the city shall have an independent connection with the public water system. All water services or connections shall be
installed or repaired in accordance with rules and regulations of the city water department. (Ord. 834, 6-22-1999)
4-2-3: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both, for any
person to violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the administrative authority pursuant to the authority
granted by this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 834, 6-22-1999)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 33/135
4-2-4: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the provision of any other ordinance of the city, or other safety or health
regulation or code of the city existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
other regulation or code of the city, existing on the effective date of this chapter, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other regulation or code is hereby declared to be
repealed to the extent that it may be found in conflict with this chapter. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or other phrase of this
chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decisionshall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full
force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 834, 6-22-1999)
Chapter 3
MECHANICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
Chapter 4
GAS REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 881, 8-5-2013)
Chapter 5
RADIO INTERFERENCE
(Rep. by Ord. 882, 8-5-2013)
Chapter 6
SIGN CODE
4-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the HAVRE SIGN ORDINANCE, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as this chapter. (Ord. 780, 10-19-
1992)
4-6-2: SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, quality of
materials, construction, location, electrification and maintenance of all signs and sign structures.
(A) Restrictions:
1. No sign shall be erected or placed in such a manner as to confuse or obstruct the view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal or device.
2. No sign shall exceed in area the requirements of this chapter as herein provided.
(B) Intention: The provisions of this chapter are not intended to permit any violation of any other ordinance or code of the city. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-3: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) Authority: The director of public works and the division of inspection and compliance is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this
chapter.
(B) Right Of Entry: Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director of public works or his duly authorized representative may enter, at a reasonable
time, into or upon any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 34/135
(C) Inspection Warrant: Upon application to the city court, the city magistrate may, for probable cause and in the same manner and form as a criminal
search warrant, issue an inspection warrant which shall have the same force and effect as a search warrant. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-4: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision, order, or action of the director of public works arising out of his enforcement of this chapter, may appeal said
decision, order, or action to the board of adjustment of the city by following the procedure for appeal as set forth in section 11-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 835,
6-22-1999)
4-6-5: INSURANCE:
The applicant for a permit shall, prior to issuance of said permit, file with the director of public works of the city a current general liability insurance policy
with bodily injury limits in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per
accident, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) aggregate, and property damage limits of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per accident aggregate
issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in the state; such insurance shall be kept in full force as a condition of the issuance of such
permit. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-6: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
APPROVED PLASTICS: Only those slow burning plastics of no greater combustibility as now approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., for sign
use (UL 48).
BENCH SIGNS: Off premises signs painted upon benches which are located upon public property including sidewalks, surfaced boulevards and
immediately adjacent property. Bench signs are only allowed because they provide a public service.
COMBINATION SIGN: Any sign incorporating any combination of the features of ground, projecting and roof signs.
CURB LINE: The line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by the director of
public works.
DISPLAY SURFACES: The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
ELECTRIC SIGN: Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A freestanding sign is a sign not designed to withstand a twenty (20) pound wind load, which approximates a wind force of eighty
(80) miles per hour.
GROUND SIGN: Any sign which is supported by more than one pole and/or braces upon the ground other than a "combination sign" or "pole sign", as
defined by this chapter.
MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property.
MOBILE OR PORTABLE SIGNS: Mobile or portable signs are those signs designed and constructed so as to be readily and easily moved or transported
from one location to another, such as:
(A) Signs constructed on a trailer chassis, with a display area on two (2) sides thereof, which may be towed from location to location where they can
then be situated and stabilized by the use of outriggers, blocking or other rigid supports; and
(B) Signs which are otherwise readily portable; placed on the surface of the ground; and, not supported by walls, buildings, poles or other permanent
structures.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE OR INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (1,200F), during an exposure of five (5) minutes, and which will not continue to burn or glowat that temperature, as specified in the
current uniform building code.
NONSTRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, caps, nailing strip, latticing, cutouts or letters and walkways which are attached to the sign structure.
POLE SIGN: Any sign supported wholly by a pole in the ground which is not a part of the building.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of the building or structure.
PROJECTION: The distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the building line.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign attached to roof framing, walls and/or columns of the building on which the entire advertising display is above roof level.
SIGN: Any medium including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for
advertising purposes.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign.
TEMPORARY SIGNS: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other
light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE: The current uniform building code, published by International Conference of Building Officials.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 35/135
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to the wall of a building or structure when the exposed face of the sign is a plane parallel to the plane of said wall. (Ord.
780, 10-19-1992; amd. Ord. 771, 5-6-1991; Ord. 781, 10-19-1992; Ord. 790, 10-3-1994; Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-6-7: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected, constructed or altered except as provided by this chapter and a permit for the same has been issued by the
building official. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-8: APPLICATION:
Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building official. Such applicationshall contain the location by street and
number of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. The inspector of buildings may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information where, in
his opinion, such information is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The following signs shall not require a sign permit. These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign of responsibility for its
erection, maintenance and compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
(A) Servicing: Painting, repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure or the changing of the advertising copy or message thereon shall not be
considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit unless a major structural change is made.
(B) Flags Or Emblems: Flags or emblems of political, civic, philanthropic, educational, religious organizations.
(C) Governmental Bodies: Signs of duly constituted governmental bodies, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices or warnings at
railroad crossings.
(D) Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, not exceeding nine (9) square feet of surface area or not more than two (2) signs totalling not over eighteen (18)
square feet of surface area, on any lot appertaining to campaigns, drives or events of political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organizations.
(E) Plaques, Cornerstones: Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets and the like.
(F) Doorbells, Mailboxes: Signs posted in conjunction with doorbells or mailboxes, not exceeding one hundred forty four (144) square inches in surface
area.
(G) Signs Posted By Law: Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, unless specifically prohibited, limited
or restricted.
(H) Small Signs: Small nonilluminated, nor projecting signs, not exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area, not otherwise prohibited.
(I) Construction Signs: Construction signs giving names of general contractors, mechanical contractors, electrical contractors and architect-engineers
located on the construction site.
(J) Interiors: All signs that are entirely constructed,erected, and/or placed within the interior of the building served.
(K) Advertising: A sign placed upon the premises of a lot or building for the purpose of advertising said premises for sale or rent, provided the sign does
not exceed nine (9) square feet of display surface, and is of a temporary nature. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-10: FEES AND PAYMENT:
The following fees shall be required for all signs as outlined in this chapter:
(A) Sign Permit Fee: A basic fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each sign up to and including sixteen (16) square feet of display area. An additional five
cents ($0.05) per square foot for each additional square foot or fraction thereof of display area shall be paid to the director of public works for each
permit required by this chapter.
(B) Mobile Or Portable Signs: Each "mobile" or "portable sign" as defined in section 4-6-6 of this chapter shall be required to have a permit which will be
issued upon receipt of an annual fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per sign per year for each such annual permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 780, 10-
19-1992)
4-6-11: MAINTENANCE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 36/135
All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation and working order. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained
in accordance with these provisions. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-12: INSPECTION:
All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the director of public works.
(A) Electrical Inspection: All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing electrical code.
(B) Reinspection: All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the building official at any time during the life of the sign, and the permit shall be a
consent for such inspection. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-13: DESIGN:
Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in the uniform building code as from time to
time adopted by the city. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-14: MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as approved by the director of public works, and:
(A) Restrictions And Combustible Materials: All signs and sign structures erected in fire zone no. 2 shall have structural members of "heavy timber
construction" as defined in the uniform building code, as from time to time amended, or of incombustible materials. Ground signs may be constructed of
any material meeting the requirements of this chapter, except as provided above. Combination signs, roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, and signs
on marquees shall be constructed of incombustible materials, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section. No combustible materials other than
approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs.
(B) Nonstructural Trim: Nonstructural trim may be made of wood, metal, approved plastics or any combination thereof, the nonstructural trim may not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the total area of the sign.
(C) Fastenings: Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved
expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied, all building fastenings must be of galvanized or noncorrosive
materials. (Ord. 835, 6-22-1999)
4-6-15: HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL CLEARANCE:
Signs shall not be located with less than six feet (6') horizontal or twelve feet (12') vertical clearance from overhead electric conductors which are
energized in excess of six hundred (600) volts. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-16: POLE SIGNS:
(A) Location: All supports of pole signs shall be placed upon private property.
(B) Projection: Pole signs may not project over public property.
(C) Height: No pole sign shall be more than thirty five feet (35') in height above the mean average of the lot on which it is constructed.
(D) Area Limitation:
1. A total area of one and one-half (11/2) square feet for each linear foot of building frontage or one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of lot
frontage, whichever results in the larger sign area, but the maximum total area of all signs permitted for any establishment shall not exceed a total of
two hundred (200) square feet for all pole signs on the premises facing the street frontage upon which the sign is constructed.
2. Where the frontage is on more than one street, only the signs computed with the frontage of that street shall face that street.
3. A double face sign shall be considered as two (2) signs for the purpose of establishing the allowable size of the sign. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-17: GROUND SIGNS:
(A) Projection: Ground signs shall not project over public property or beyond the required building line setback for buildings in the zoning classification for
the tract upon which the sign is erected.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 37/135
(B) Maintenance: Every ground sign and the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the owner of such sign in a clean, sanitary and
inoffensive condition and kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
(C) Area Limitation: The total area of one or more ground signs may not exceed five percent (5%) of the area of the plot of ground upon which such ground
signs are located; however, the total area of all ground signs may not exceed six hundred seventy two (672) square feet of display area on any one plot
of ground. A back to back sign shall be considered two (2) signs for the purpose of establishing the size allowed. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-18: ROOF SIGNS:
(A) Securing: Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frame of the building over which they are constructed and erected.
(B) Clearance And Access: Passage clear of all obstructions shall be left under or around and immediately adjacent to all signs exceeding a height of four
feet (4') above the roof thereunder. Such passage shall not be less than three feet(3') wide and four feet (4') high and shall be at parapet or roof level.
(C) Passage Or Access Opening: There shall be one passage or access opening as follows:
1. For each roof sign upon a building.
2. One access opening for every fifty (50) linear feet of horizontal roof sign extension.
3. Proximity to walls: Within twenty feet (20') of walls and parapets when roof signs are at right angles to a face of the building. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-19: WALL SIGNS:
(A) Projection: Wall signs shall project not more than twenty four inches (24") except they may not project into any alley more than one foot (1').
(B) Maximum Height: Wall signs shall not extend more than twelve inches (12") above the highest point of parapet or roof supporting building.
(C) Vertical Clearance: Wall signs shall maintain the following minimum vertical clearance where they project over:
1. Alley: Minimum of fourteen feet (14').
2. Other public property: Minimum of ten feet (10').
(D) Area: No wall sign may cover any required window or required exit. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-20: PROJECTING SIGNS:
(A) Projection: Projecting signs may not project over public property beyond six feet (6') or more than two thirds (2/3) the distance to the curb line,
whichever is less. They may not project into an alley more than one foot (1').
(B) Size: Projecting signs must be no larger in size than two (2) square feet for each linear front foot of the property.
(C) Vertical Clearance: Projecting signs shall maintain the following minimum vertical clearance where they project over:
1. Alleys: Minimum of fourteen feet (14').
2. Other public property: Minimum of ten feet (10'). (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-21: COMBINATION SIGNS:
The individual requirement of roof, projecting pole and ground signs shall be applied for combination signs incorporating any or all of the requirements
specified in the respective sections. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-22: FREESTANDING SIGNS:
Freestanding signs are prohibited on all tracts of ground located within the city. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-23: MARQUEES:
Signs may be placed on, attached to, or constructed in a marquee. Such signs shall, for the purpose of determining projection, clearance, height and
material, be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements for a marquee as specified in chapter 45 of the uniform building code, as from time to
time adopted. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 38/135
4-6-24: ILLUMINATION:
(A) No excessively bright signs will be permitted. A determination shall be made by the director of public works or the division of compliance and inspection
as to whether a sign is "excessively bright" on a case by case basis, considering the nature of the neighborhood, the type of sign and any other factors
they consider relevant. The director of public works' decision is to be given great preference by the board of adjustment.
(B) No blinking, strobe or other pulsating lights may be used. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-25: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
(A) Sizes: No temporary sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. Temporary signs of rigid material shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in area in commercial or industrial areas and shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area in residential areas.
(B) Cloth Signs: Cloth signs shall meet the following requirements:
1. Support: Every temporary cloth sign shall be supported and attached with wire rope of three-sixteenths inch (3/16") minimum diameter. No strings,
fiber ropes or wood slats shall be permitted for support or anchorage purposes other than nonloading tie down purposes. Cloth signs and panels
shall be perforated over at least ten percent (10%) of their area toreduce wind resistance. When placed over a public street or highway, the cloth sign
shall maintain a minimum clearance of twenty feet (20') from the public street or highway.
2. Permits: All permits for temporary signs shall be made by written application to the department of buildings and shall be subject to approval by the
inspector of buildings prior to any installations.
(C) Other Temporary Signs: Temporary signs (other than cloth) when eight feet (8') or more above the ground may project not more than six inches (6")
over public property or beyond the building line.
(D) Time Allowance: Temporary signs may remain in place for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, except that political signs shall not be erected more
than forty five (45) days in advance of a primary or general election and shall be removed within ten (10) days after the election. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-26: MOBILE OR PORTABLE SIGNS:
The physical characteristics, placement and operation of such signs shall be governed as follows:
(A) The display area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet per side of such signs.
(B) No blinking, strobe or other pulsating lights may be used.
(C) The placement shall be on privately owned property; provided that on any corner lot there shall be no such sign within a forty foot (40') radius from the
intersection of the property lines of any street or avenue.
(D) The sign shall be properly and adequately secured to avoid any inadvertent movement thereof by the elements or otherwise which would result in an
encroachment on public ways or which may cause any injury or inconvenience to those using such public ways.
(E) The owner or permit holder shall provide public liability and property damage insurance in the amount set forth in section 4-6-5 of this chapter, and
shall provide evidence thereof upon the request of the city through its director of public works or such director's representative.
(F) The owner or permit holder shall inform the department of public works of the placement and movement of such signs. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-27: BENCH SIGNS:
Designs of bench signs shall be submitted in three (3) copies to the department of public works and be approved prior to permit issuance.
(A) Benches shall not exceed a maximum of six feet (6') in length and shall weigh a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) pounds. Benches shall be
placed on a concrete pad.
(B) The owner or permit holder shall provide public liability and property damage insurance in the amount set forth in section 4-6-5 of this chapter, and
shall provide evidence thereof with each application for permit or renewal.
(C) Permits to occupy public space for the bench sign shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per sign, payable for one year in advance and prior to permit
issuance. This permit fee shall be renewed annually by January 10 for the following year. Fees may be prorated for periods less than one year at five
dollars ($5.00) per month.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 39/135
(D) The location of each bench sign shall be approved by the public works department. A minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed sidewalk shall be
maintained at each bench location.
(E) Bench signs are prohibited from districts of the city zoned for residential use only. Bench signs may be placed in public parks at the discretion of and
approval of the parks and recreation director and the public works department.
(F) The owners of private property located nearest to the public property upon which the bench sign is proposed to be located shall indicate their approval
of the location by signing the permit application prior to permit issuance.
(G) The owner or permit holder shall maintain the bench signs in a safe, clean and attractive state and shall maintain the area within ten feet (10') of the
bench sign so as to be clear of all garbage, rubbish, weeds, tall grass and snow.
(H) Bench signs shall be limited to one bench per block face.
(I) The bench sign permit may be revoked at any time for lack of adequate maintenance or other sufficient cause, after which the bench sign shall be
removed by the sign owner within seven (7) days. If the owner fails to remove the bench sign, the city may remove the bench sign, which shall become
the property of the city. The bench sign owner may reclaim the bench sign by paying removal costs plus a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee. (Ord. 771, 5-
6-1991)
4-6-28: EXISTING SIGNS; SIGNS NOT IN USE:
Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business, product or service shall be removed by the owner, agent orperson having the beneficial use of
the premises upon which such sign may be found within thirty (30) days after the written notice from the building official. Upon failure to comply with the
notice within the specified time, the building official is hereby authorized to cause removal of the sign as provided in subsection 4-6-29(D) of this chapter.
(Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-29: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
(A) Removal Order: The department shall order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of the law as it existed prior to the effective date
hereof. Removal shall be in accordance with subsection (D) of this section.
(B) Continuance Of Nonconforming Signs: Subject to the termination hereinafter provided or provided in section 4-6-28 of this chapter, any nonconforming
sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date hereof or annexation of the property into the city; provided, however, that no
sign shall be changed in any manner that will increase the noncompliance of such sign; and further, that the burden of establishing a sign to be
nonconforming under this section rests entirely upon the person claiming a nonconforming status for a sign.
(C) Termination Of Nonconforming Signs:
1. Abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.
2. Any violation of this chapter shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.
3. The right to maintain any nonconforming sign shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent that
repair will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the sign, from any cause whatsoever; or becomes obsolete or substandard under any
applicable ordinance of the city to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard or a danger.
(D) Removal Of Signs: The department shall order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. Ten (10) days' notice in writing
shall be given to the owners of such signs, or of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into
compliance with this chapter. Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with the notice, the department shall remove the sign. The department shall
remove the sign immediately and without notice if it reasonably appears that the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the
safety of the public. Any cost of the removal incurred by the department shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which sign is located and
may be collected inthe manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on such property. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-30: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, enlarge, alter, move or convert any sign or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment
in the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each day of violation. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
4-6-31: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any sign or structure constructed or maintained in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be prosecuted as such as is
provided for in this code1. (Ord. 780, 10-19-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 40/135
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
5-1-1: DEFINITION:
The word "handbill" as used herein shall mean any printed, written, mimeographed, stenciled or other circular, paper, card or cardboard, whether folded or
otherwise, which shall be distributed by carrier or otherwise in the city. (Ord. 451, 2-1-1954)
5-1-2: WHEN DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED:
When the owner or occupant of any property or premises in the city shall post in a conspicuous place upon such property or premises, a sign "No
Handbills", no person shall peddle, distribute, throw or otherwise place or cause to be peddled, distributed, thrown or otherwise placed, any handbills upon
any such property or premises, or go upon such property or premises for the purpose of peddling, distributing, throwing or otherwise placing any handbills
thereon. (Ord. 451, 2-1-1954)
5-1-3: POSTING OF SIGN:
(Rep. by Ord. 843, 6-3-2002)
5-1-4: LITTERING THOROUGHFARES PROHIBITED:
No person shall peddle, distribute, throw, or otherwise place or cause to be peddled, distributed, thrown, or otherwise placed upon the streets of the city or
in or upon any property within said city any handbills in such a manner that the same may be blown from such premises or property upon lawns,
boulevards or streets of the city. (Ord. 451, 2-1-1954)
5-1-5: WHERE DISTRIBUTION PERMISSIBLE:
The peddling, distributing, throwing or otherwise placing orcausing to be peddled, distributed, thrown, or otherwise placed upon the streets or in or upon
premises or property within the city of any handbills shall be permissive in the residential area of said city, and said peddling, distributing, throwing or
otherwise placing or causing to be peddled, distributed, thrown or otherwise placed of any handbills in the business district or any portion thereof or in or
upon any automobile in both business and residential areas is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 451, 2-1-1954)
5-1-6: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The peddling, distributing, throwing or otherwise placing or causing to be peddled, distributed, thrown, or otherwise placed upon the streets or in or upon
any property or premises within the city of any handbills contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance.
When any person shall have been notified that any person employed by him is violating provisions of this chapter, any future violation of the same by any
person employed by said person shall be prima facie evidence that such person caused such person in their employ to violate such provisions. (Ord. 451,
2-1-1954)
5-1-7: POSTING OF BILLS:
No person shall, within the limits of the city, post, paint, or distribute any advertisements upon any private wall, door, gate or fence; or upon any curbstone,
flagging, gutterstone, sidewalk, lamppost, gateway, telephone or telegraph pole, fireplug, or any public building of the city, or upon the public grounds, or
the wooden or iron railings or fences surrounding the same, of the announcement for sale or barter of any description of merchandise, or of the treatment
of any disease, or of any public amusement or lottery, or any notice of general public character, or any advertisement whatever, without the previous
written consent of the mayor; or upon any property belonging to any person without the previous written permission of the said person. (Ord. 46, 8-20-
1906)
5-1-8: LICENSE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 843, 6-3-2002)
5-1-9: DESTROYING BILLS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure, any bill or poster posted in such a place as may be
permitted, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 46, 8-20-1906)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 41/135
Chapter 2
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
(Rep. by Ord. 843, 6-3-2002)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the following interpretations:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a drink that contains more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of
alcohol by volume.
BEER: A malt beverage containing not more than seven percent (7%) of alcohol by weight.
LIQUOR: An alcoholic beverage except beer.
WINE: An alcoholic beverage made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe fruit or other agricultural products without addition or
abstractions, except as may occur in the usual cellar treatment of clarifying and aging and that contains not less than seven percent (7%) nor more than
twenty four percent (24%) of alcohol by volume. "Wine" may be ameliorated to correct natural deficiencies, sweetened and fortified in accordance with
applicable state and federal regulations and the customs and the practices of the industry. Other alcoholic beverages not defined as above but made in the
manner of "wine", labeled and sold as "wine" in accordance with the federal regulations are also "wine". (Ord. 623, 10-20-1975,eff. 11-19-1975)
5-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell beer, wine or liquor without first obtaining a license from the state for that purpose and a license from the city. (Ord. 623, 10-20-1975,
eff. 11-19-1975)
5-3-3: ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE:
The clerk is hereby empowered, authorized and directed to issue licenses to qualified applicants as herein provided to whom a state license has previously
been issued, whereby the licensee shall be authorized and permitted to sell beer, wine or liquor at retail within the corporate limits of the city, and upon the
issuance of such license the licensee therein named shall be authorized to sell the alcoholic beverage authorized therein within the city, but only in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Montana alcoholic beverage code and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-4: LICENSE FEES:
Each licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall pay an annual license fee for each license as follows:
License Fee
Beer only Each retailer holding a state beer license $200.00
Beer and wine Each retailer holding a state beer and wine license 300.00
All beverages Each retailer holding a state all beverage license 500.00
Fraternal organizations Each fraternal or veterans' organization holding a state all beverage license 325.00
(Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-5: PAYABLE ANNUALLY:
Said annual license fees shall be payable in advance at the office of the treasurer on July 1 of each year, and shall expire the same date as the companion
state licenses. All persons who fail to pay for their licenses at the time and place specified shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Special beer permits are
authorized to be issued where all requirements stipulated by the state of Montana are met by the applicant and the amount of thepermit will be equal to the
license fee set by the state. The permit will be in effect for the period established by the state and will expire at the end of that period. (Ord. 842, 5-20-
2002)
5-3-6: INVESTIGATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-7: FORM OF LICENSE; POSTING:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 42/135
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-9: PERSONS TO WHOM LICENSE REFUSED:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-10: UNLAWFUL SALES:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-11: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any beer, wine or liquor to be sold, offered for sale or given away on any premises licensed to sell beer, wine or liquor at retail in the
corporate limits of the city during the following hours: (Ord. 623, 10-20-1975, eff. 11-19-1975)
(A) On any day between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
(B) During the hours when the said licensed establishments where beer, wine or liquor is sold at retail are required by this chapter to be closed, it shall be
unlawful to sell, offer for sale or give away any beer, wine or liquor and during such hours all persons save employees of such licensed establishment
shall be excluded therefrom; provided however, that when a licensed establishment is operated in conjunction with a hotel, restaurant, bus depot,
railway terminal, or other lawful business other than that of the sale of intoxicating liquor, wine or beer, then such lawful business need not be closed,
but only the part thereof where such beer, wine or liquor is sold. (Ord. 623, 10-20-1975, eff. 11-19-1975; amd. Ord. 676, 7-7-1980)
5-3-12: RESTRICTIONS AS TO LOCATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-13: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for any such business to be conducted in a residential district or portion of the city. (Ord. 623, 10-20-1975, eff. 11-19-1975)
5-3-14: PURCHASE OF LIQUOR BY LICENSEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-15: UNLICENSED SALE PROHIBITED:
Any person who has not been issued a license under this chapter who shall sell or keep for sale any alcoholic liquor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 623, 10-20-1975, eff. 11-19-1975)
5-3-16: DUTY OF POLICE TO CONFISCATE:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-17: MONTANA ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE:
(Rep. by Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
5-3-18: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
Any and all police officers of the city shall have the right at any time to make an examination of the premises of such licensee as to whether the laws of
Montana and of the city are being complied with. (Ord. 842, 5-20-2002)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 43/135
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: WEAPONS:
(A) Any person carrying an unconcealed, concealed or partially concealed weapon at a public assembly, in a publicly owned or leased building, in a city
park, or on school property located within the city limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) This section shall not apply to:
1. Peace officers and judges in the discharge of an official duty;
2. Any officer of the United States government authorized to carry a concealed weapon;
3. A person in actual service as a national guardsman;
4. A person summoned to the aid or any of the persons named in subsections (B)1 through (B)3 of this section;
5. A civil officer or his deputy engaged in the discharge of official business;
6. A probation and parole officer authorized to carry a firearm;
7. An agent of the department of justice or a criminal investigator in the county attorney's office;
8. The legitimate display of unloaded firearms at shows or other public occasions by collectors and others; or
9. Training and educational programs involving firearms if the sponsor obtains the prior written approval of the city council and mayor.
(C) As used in this section the term "weapon" is defined as any gun, rifle, pistol, shotgun, handgun, other firearm, electronic stun gun, dirk, dagger,
slingshot, sword cane, billy, knuckles made of any metal or hard substance, knife with a blade four inches (4") or longer (not including a safety razor),
or any other "weapon" as defined in section 45-2-101(76), Montana Code Annotated, 1995, and as such statute may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 800,
7-15-1996)
6-1-2: DESTROYING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-3: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-4: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-5: DRUNKENNESS:
(Rep. by Ord. 682, 4-6-1981)
6-1-6: HOUSE OF ILL FAME:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-7: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-8: LEAVING ANIMALS UNHITCHED:
(Rep. by Ord. 683, 4-6-1981)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 44/135
6-1-9: LUG WHEELS; HAULING LOOSE MATERIALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 684, 4-6-1981)
6-1-10: OPIUM DENS; HARMFUL DRUGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-11: PETIT LARCENY:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-12: SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit, hawk or expectorate upon any sidewalk or street crossing in the city. (Ord. 119, 4-21-1913)
6-1-13: TRESPASSING ON GRASS:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-14: VAGRANCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 632, 7-19-1976)
6-1-15: LOITERING:
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 6-3-2002)
6-1-16: PUBLIC DRINKING AND DISPLAY:
(A) Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, or the hydrated oxide of ethyl.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a drink that contains more than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) of alcohol by volume, and includes, but is not limited to, such beverages as those commonly known as liquor, malt liquor, beer and wine.
PUBLIC DISPLAY OR EXHIBITION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Includes transporting, carrying and exhibiting open cans, bottles, glasses or
other types of containers of or for alcoholic beverages, either empty or containing alcoholic beverages, to, in, on or within any vehicle or any public
place; provided, however, that this definition does not include transporting or carrying alcoholic beverages to and from retail or wholesale liquor or
beer establishments in sacks, cases, boxes, cartons or other similar containers with unbroken seals when no display or exhibition is made.
PUBLIC DRINKING: Includes the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages in, on, or within any public place or in, on or within any vehicle in, on,
or within any public place.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means and includes:
1. All public streets, avenues, alleys, boulevards, sidewalks, parking lots, roads, ways, dedicated park lands, restrictive deeded parks and all city
owned lands used for parks within the city limits, whether or not such parks are actually developed and used, within the city limits, with the
exception of the Sixth Avenue Ballpark and the Slow Pitch Ballpark.
2. All public buildings, structures and other improvements, excepting therefrom any privately owned building, structure or other improvement
unless the same is occupied and used for and by a public or publicly owned office, agency, entity or organization.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn in or within a public place.
(B) Public Display And Drinking Prohibited: The "public display or exhibition of alcoholic beverages" and "public drinking", as defined in this section, are
prohibited, except by special use permit, and it is unlawful for any person to engage in the public display or exhibition of alcoholic beverages within the
limits of the city.
(C) Penalty: A violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both. (Ord. 865, 4-19-2010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 45/135
6-1-17: LITTERING PUBLIC WAYS1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit wastepaper, bottles, beverage containers, hay, waste, clothing, hats, boxes or other coarse or
inflammable material or rubbish in any of the streets or alleys, or upon any sidewalk or any public grounds in the city. (Ord. 638, 12-20-1976)
6-1-18: USE OF WEAPONS WITHIN CITY:
No person shall shoot, discharge, throw or use in any way any BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, slingshot, wrist rocket, crossbow, compound bow, longbow,
throwing star, butterfly knife, nunchaku, or bolo, or similar device, whether known by the above listed name or not, within the city. The prohibition of this
section shall not apply to shooting galleries or private grounds or premises when such devices may be used in such a manner as not to endanger persons
or property and also in such a manner as to prevent any BB, bullet, pellet, bolt, arrow, projectile or any object propelled or thrown by any of such devices,
from going beyond or traversing any space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds, or premises. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord.
738, 5-19-1986)
6-1-19: ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE USAGE WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED:
(A) Prohibited: No person shall use or have in their immediate physical possession a handheld electronic communications device while operating a motor
vehicle, motorcycle, quadricycle, or a bicycle on a public highway within the city limits.
(B) Devices: "Handheld electronic communications device" includes wireless or cellular phones, PDAs, Blackberries, smartphones, laptop and notebook
computers utilizing VoIP (voice over internet protocol) technology, wireless and cellular phones utilizing push-to-talk technology, GPS systems,
navigational systems, and any other mobile communication device that uses shortwave analog or digital radio transmissions between the device and a
transmitter to permit wireless communications to and from the user of the device.
(C) Possession: "Immediate physical possession" means touching the handheld electronic communications device, or physically holding the device in
one's hand or up to one's ear. Simply having the electronic communications device on one's person or in a motor vehicle does not constitute immediate
physical possession.
(D) Exceptions:
1. This provision shall not apply to any person reporting a health, fire, safety, or police emergency.
2. This provision shall not apply to governmental fire agencies, ambulance services, law enforcement agencies, emergency responders, or any other
"authorized emergency vehicle" as defined in Montana Code Annotated 61-8-102(2)(a).
3. This provision shall not apply to passengers in a motor vehicle, or persons using a handheld electronic communications device while maintaining a
motor vehicle in a stationary position, not in gear, while in a parking lane or space out of moving traffic lanes.
4. This provision shall not apply to persons using a "hands free device". A "hands free device" is an external device that connects to a wireless
telephone, wireless communications device or electronic communications device that allows use of the device without touching the telephone or
wireless or electronic communications device with one's hands, and includes voice activated technologies that can be utilized without touching the
device. Use of a hands free device is permitted while operating a motor vehicle provided the driver does not touch the wireless telephone or wireless
or electronic communications device with one's hands while operating a motor vehicle.
5. This provision shall not apply to drivers using two-way radios while in the performance and scope of their work related duties.
6. This provision shall not apply to drivers holding a valid amateur radio operator license issued by the federal communications commission while using
a two-way radio.
(E) Penalties: Any person found in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 879, 6-6-2011, eff. 10-1-2011)
6-1-20: ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION BY MINORS:
(A) Purpose: To prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons and parties where underage persons consume alcoholic beverages.
(B) Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol, or the hydrated oxide of ethyl.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a drink that contains more than five-tenths percent (0.5%) of
alcohol by volume.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS: Includes, but is not limited to, law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical service personnel and other
persons having emergency response duties.
ENFORCEMENT SERVICES OR RESPONSE COSTS: Includes the salaries and benefits of emergency responders for the amount of time actually
spent responding to or remaining at an event, gathering or party and administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs for medical
treatment for any injured emergency responder; the costs of repairing any damage to emergency responder equipment or vehicles; and the cost of
use of such equipment of the vehicles.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 46/135
GATHERING: A party or event where a group of three (3) or more persons has assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.
INTOXICATING QUANTITY: A quantity of an alcoholic beverage that is sufficient to produce:
1. A blood, breath, or urine alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05; or
2. Substantial or visible mental or physical impairment2.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile, including natural parent, adoptive parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or a person to whom
legal custody has been given by court order.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, company, partnership, association or society, as well as a natural person or individual.
PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, hall or meeting room, park or any
other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether owned, leased, rented or used with or
without permission or compensation.
SOCIAL HOST: Any person or persons who knowingly conducts, allows, organizes, supervises, controls, or permits a gathering, or aids another in
conducting, allowing, organizing, supervising, controlling or permitting a gathering. The term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Any person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise controls the premises where a gathering takes place;
2. The person in charge of or responsible for the premises;
3. The person who organized the gathering.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
(C) Prohibited Acts: It is a violation of this section for a social host who knows that an underage person has possessed or consumed alcohol or an
alcoholic beverage in any amount at a gathering to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent the underage consumption or possession by the underage
person. The social host does not have to be present at the gathering at the time the prohibited act occurs.
(D) Penalties: Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished as provided in section 1-3-1 of this
code. In addition to penalties provided therein, the city judge shall consider any response costs incurred by the city associated with any gathering
resulting in a violation of this section, and may order restitution to the city for such response costs upon conviction.
(E) Exceptions: The provision of an alcoholic beverage in a nonintoxicating quantity to an underage person by the person's parent or guardian, physician
or dentist for medicinal purposes, a licensed pharmacist upon the prescription of a physician, or an ordained minister or priest in connection with a
religious observance shall not constitute a violation of this section3. (Ord. 878, 5-2-2011)
Chapter 2
DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS
6-2-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
AGGRESSIVE ANIMAL: An animal that destroys property or pets, attempts to bite or chases after persons not trespassing on the property of the owner, or
injures or attempts to injure the owner, family or property of the owner.
ANIMAL: An animal, including male and female, that can become infected with the disease of rabies and is kept or harbored by a person within the City
limits.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The Chief of Police or such person as designated shall serve as the animal control officer.
AT LARGE: An animal that is off the premises of the owner or keeper of said animal and not under the control of the owner or any other person either by
leash, cord, chain, or other physical means of control.
NUISANCE ANIMAL: An animal that causes frequent or long continued noise, disturbing the peace of two (2) or more persons in different households.
OWNER: Any person, firm, association or corporation, who owns, keeps, habitually feeds or harbors an animal.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal that bites in any manner, causing injury to human or animal. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-2: REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION REQUIRED:
(A) Requirements: All dogs kept, harbored or maintained in the City shall be vaccinated and registered as herein provided on or before March 1 of each
year. Registration tags shall be issued by the City Clerk upon proof of vaccination for rabies. A dog must be six (6) months of age to be vaccinated for
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 47/135
rabies. The owner shall state at the time of registration the owner's name, address, animal's name, breed, color and sex of each dog, licensed and
practicing veterinarian. The City Clerk shall issue the registration tag upon payment of the registration fee. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to dogs brought into the City for the purpose of participating in any dog show or to service animals properly trained to assist individuals in need of aid.
(B) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-3: TAG AND COLLAR:
(A) Requirements: Upon receipt of proof of vaccination and the license fee, the City Treasurer or license agent shall issue to the applicant a metallic tag.
The shape of the tag shall be changed each year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with
the number on the certificate. Every owner is required to provide each dog with a substantial collar, to which the license tag shall be affixed at all times.
A dog found off the owner's premises without a license tag shall be deemed to be not licensed, even though a license has been issued for such dog. In
the event a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Treasurer. The owner shall produce a receipt or duplicate receipt
showing payment of the license fee for the current year and the owner shall pay a fee for such duplicate. License tags are not transferable from one
dog to another and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a license tag to be placed upon a dog for which it was not issued. A dog found
with a license tag issued to another dog shall be deemed to be not licensed. No refunds shall be made on a dog license fee because of the death of
the dog or the owner leaving the City before the expiration of the license period.
(B) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-4: ESTABLISHING FEES:
All fees set forth under this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council of the City of Havre. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-5: ANIMAL RUNNING AT LARGE:
(A) Violation: An animal that is off the premises of the owner or keeper of said animal and not under the control of the owner or any other person by leash,
cord, chain, or other physical means of control is hereby declared to be an animal running at large.
(B) Unaltered Animals: If an unaltered animal that is six (6) months of age or older has been determined to be an animal running at large twice within a
twelve-month period, the animal owner, custodian, or guardian shall be required to purchase a spay/neuter certificate when the animal is reclaimed.
This spay/neuter certificate shall expire within thirty (30) days and is redeemable at a veterinarian of the animal owner's choice. The owner must pay
any additional veterinarian fees accrued and all other impound and board fees before the animal is released. If the unaltered animal is found to be an
animal running at large a third time within twelve (12) months, or five (5) times over the life of the animal, the mandatory sterilization rule will be strictly
enforced and the animal shall be transported by animal control for spay or neuter to a veterinarian of the animal owner's choice. The animal owner
shall be responsible for all veterinarian fees and shall pay all impound fees before the animal will be released to the owner. The animal owner has ten
(10) days from the date of the notice to appeal this mandatory sterilization to City Court. The order of sterilization shall be stayed until the appeal time
has expired.
(C) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 900, 8-21-2017)
6-2-6: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
(A) Biting: An animal biting in any manner, causing injury to human or animal is hereby declared to be a vicious animal.
(B) Confinement By Owners: The owner shall confine, within a building or secure enclosure, every vicious animal and shall not take such vicious animal
out of such building or enclosure unless it is securely muzzled. When an animal is used for guarding a premises, such premises shall be posted
warning of the presence of such animal.
(C) Quarantine After Biting A Person: An animal impounded under this section shall be quarantined until it is determined the animal does not have rabies
or other diseases that constitute a danger to persons in the City.
(D) Authority Of Animal Control Officer To Dispose Of Biting Animals: An animal that has bitten persons under the circumstances set forth in this section
may, upon petition to the City Court, notice to the owner and a finding that said animal constitutes a danger to the persons and property in the City, be
put to death by the animal control officer.
(E) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-7: IMPOUNDING AND QUARANTINE FEES:
(A) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to take up and impound any such animal known to him to be within the City limits contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 48/135
(B) The animal control officer shall collect a daily fee for each animal for impounding. Once collected, these fees must be paid by the animal control officer
into the treasury.
(C) If an animal is required to be quarantined under the provisions of this chapter, the owner shall pay a quarantine fee. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-8: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
It is hereby declared the duty of every owner of an animal to know its whereabouts at all times. In the event an animal is impounded, the owner shall
redeem the same within ninety six (96) hours without any formal notice or it shall be subject to disposal by the animal control officer as hereinafter
provided. The owner of any impounded animal may redeem the same within such period of time by paying an impounding fee for keeping the animal for
each twenty four (24) hour period, or part thereof, that it is impounded. Any unlicensed animal that is impounded may only be redeemed by the owner
procuring a license, in addition to paying the fees herein prescribed. The animal control officer may issue a ticket to the person redeeming an animal
impounded for violation of any provision of this chapter and file a complaint in city court. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-9: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all animals so impounded for a period of ninety six (96) hours. Any unregistered animal required by
law to be registered, or an animal that appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease
shall not be released but may be destroyed or disposed of. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-10: CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
No animals of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities and no female in heat shall be released from confinement except upon approval of the chief of
police after payment of the fees provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-11: DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal is found running at large and cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such animal may be slain by any
policeman. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-12: RABIES; NOTICE:
(A) If an animal is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, such animal shall be confined by a leash or by a
chain on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner of the animal for a period of two
(2) weeks. The owner shall notify the animal control officer of the animal's exposure to rabies. At the animal control officer's discretion, such animal
may be removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and placed there under observation for a period of two (2) weeks at the expense of
the owner.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting an animal has rabies to allow such animal to be taken off the premises or beyond the limits of
the city without the written permission of the animal control officer. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining an animal is rabid, shall
immediately notify the animal control officer or a policeman who shall either remove the animal to the pound or summarily destroy it. (Ord. 877, 5-2-
2011)
6-2-13: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER APPOINTED:
The city council shall provide for the method of obtaining and hiring an animal control officer, shall provide for the salary and shall fix the amount of salary
from time to time. The chief of police may appoint an animal control officer. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-14: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
(A) Noise: An animal that causes frequent or long continued noise, disturbing the peace of two (2) or more persons in different households is hereby
declared to be a nuisance animal. Any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a nuisance animal on any premises occupied or controlled by him that
allows an animal to make frequent or long continued noise shall be in violation of this section. Officers or agents of Havre police department have the
discretion to issue a citation under this section.
(B) Disposal Of Fecal Material: An owner of an animal is responsible for the disposal of any fecal material left by the animal.
(C) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-15: ANIMALS PROHIBITED FROM CITY PARKS:
Animals shall be prohibited from the city parks. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 49/135
6-2-16: PENALTIES:
An owner violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Minimum and maximum fines for the city of Havre violations:
Zero dollars ($0.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Up to six (6) months jail time.
Code
Section Penalty
6-2-2 No less than $100.00 fine; and
Proof of vaccination to the court or animal control within 10 days after sentencing.
6-2-3 No less than $50.00 fine; and
Proof of city license to the court or animal control within 10 days after sentencing.
6-2-5 First offense: No less than $100.00 fine.
Second offense: No less than $150.00 fine.
Third offense: No less than $200.00 fine.
Fourth or more offense: No less than $250.00 fine.
6-2-6 First offense:
a. No less than $300.00 fine;
b. Sign a presurrender form;
c. Post a $50,000.00 surety bond or liability insurance within 5 days after sentencing;
d. Restitution for any medical expense;
e. Animal banned from city limits; or
f. Court order to euthanize animal.
(Note: Any combination of a through f may be court ordered.)
Second offense:
a. No less than $500.00 fine;
b. Animal banned from city limits; or
c. Court order to euthanize animal.
6-2-14 First offense: No less than $50.00 fine.
Second offense: No less than $100.00 fine.
Third offense: No less than $150.00 fine.
Fourth offense: No less than $200.00 fine and animal may be banned from city limits.
6-2-15 No less than $75.00 fine.
6-2-17 First offense:
a. No less than $100.00 fine;
b. Sign presurrender form; and
c. Must provide name of homeowner's insurance, agent's name, phone number and policy number. If owner is a renter, owner must
provide landlord's name, address and phone number within 5 days of sentencing.
Second offense:
a. No less than $200.00 fine;
b. Sign presurrender form; and
c. Must provide name of homeowner's insurance, agent's name, phone number and policy number. If owner is a renter, owner must
provide landlord's name, address and phone number within 5 days of sentencing.
Third offense:
a. No less than $300.00 fine;
b. Animal banned from city limits; or
c. Court order to euthanize animal.
6-2-19 Misdemeanor offense with a minimum fine of $0.00 to a maximum fine of $500.00 and up to 6 months jail time.
6-2-20 Misdemeanor offense with a minimum fine of $0.00 to a maximum fine of $500.00 and up to 6 months jail time.
6-2-22 Misdemeanor offense with a minimum fine of $0.00 to a maximum fine of $500.00 and up to 6 months jail time.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 50/135
(Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-17: AGGRESSIVE ANIMALS:
(A) Violation: An animal that destroys property or pets, attempts to bite or chases after persons not trespassing on the property of the owner, or injures or
attempts to injure the owner, family or property of the owner is hereby declared to be an aggressive animal. It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor,
keep or maintain an aggressive animal and it shall be the duty of the animal control officer and all law enforcement officers to issue tickets and file
complaints for all such violations occurring in their presence. Any person aggrieved by an aggressive animal may file a complaint at the City of Havre
Police Department, charging the owner with violating this section, where the offense is not committed in the presence of the animal control officer or a
law enforcement officer.
(B) Confinement By Owners: The owner shall confine, within a building or secure enclosure, every aggressive animal and shall not take such aggressive
animal out of such building or enclosure unless it is securely muzzled. When animals are used for guarding a premises, such premises shall be posted
warning of the presence of such animal.
(C) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-18: DELIVERY OF ANIMALS TO ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It shall be lawful for any other person to take up an animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and to take the same to the animal
control officer, but no compensation or reward shall be paid for such taking up or delivery. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-19: DAMAGING POUND UNLAWFUL:
(A) Violation: Any person breaking open or otherwise injuring, or in any manner directly or indirectly aiding, counseling or advising the breaking open or
injuring of the pound shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-20: OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
(A) Violation: Any person who hinders, delays or obstructs the animal control officer or police or other persons while engaged in taking an animal to the
pound shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-21: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER NOT TO BE INTERESTED IN SALE:
The animal control officer shall not purchase or be directly or indirectly interested, in the purchase of animals sold under the provisions of this chapter,
under penalty of a fine and the forfeiture of the animal control officer position. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-22: FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE:
(A) Violation: It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any domestic fowl, such as turkeys, ducks, geese or chickens, to permit such fowl to trespass
upon the premises of any person or upon any of the streets, avenues or boulevards within the City. Such owner or keeper, if permitting them to so
trespass, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-23: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
(A) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to receive into such pound all animals brought there in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter, to
take care of and properly feed all animals impounded, to deliver to the owner thereof all such animals as may be redeemed by such owner, give notice
of such impounding to the owner when known, and any other duties delegated to animal control officer.
(B) Enforce all City ordinances pertaining to animal control. (Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
6-2-24: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
(A) Montana Code Adopted: Pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-23-4104, the City has power to prohibit and punish cruelty to animals, and for
the purposes of this section, the City of Havre adopts Montana Code Annotated 45-8-211, Cruelty to Animals - exceptions.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 51/135
(B) Cruelty Further Defined; Shelter For Dogs Kept Outside: In addition to the above, a person commits the offense of cruelty to animals if that person
knowingly, negligently or purposely subjects an animal to mistreatment or neglect by failing to provide an animal in the person's custody with proper
food, drink, or shelter. Dogs kept outside must be provided a shelter/dog house that is moisture proof and windproof and of a suitable size to
accommodate the dog being kept and allow for retention of body heat. The shelter/dog house shall be made out of durable material with a solid,
moisture proof floor or a floor that is raised from the ground at least two inches (2"). Between November 1 and March 31 the shelter must have a
windbreak at the entrance. The shelter shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material consisting of hay, straw, shavings,
blankets, or the equivalent, to provide insulation and protection against the cold and dampness and promote retention of body heat.
(C) Penalties: See section 6-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 901, 8-21-2017)
Chapter 3
ANIMALS
(Rep. by Ord. 877, 5-2-2011)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED CONTAINERS
6-4-1: UNLAWFUL ACT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded
icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door, lock or snaplock which may not be released for opening from the inside of
said icebox, refrigerator or container without first removing the said snaplock or doors from said icebox, refrigerator or container. (Ord. 450, 12-7-1953)
Chapter 5
MINORS
6-5-1: CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain away from his home at late and unusual hours of the nighttime. It is
recognized that what is a late and unusual hour of the nighttime may vary with the circumstances and from time to time, and, in determining whether a
minor has violated the provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officers and the courts shall take into account all the surrounding circumstances,
such as: whether gainfully employed, and whether such employment requires said minor to be away from his home at times which would otherwise be
considered late and unusual; whether such minor is attending or en route home from legitimate places of recreation, entertainment, education and
worship, including sports events, moving picture theaters, and drive-in theaters, youth centers and church services, and finally, the amount of time which
should reasonably be spent to effect a return home from such places and functions.
To serve as a guide for parents and minors in observing this chapter, the following hours shall be presumed late and unreasonable and any arrest based
thereon shall be lawful:
(A) For all minors under the age of thirteen (13) years:
1. The period of time between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the day following on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday.
2. The period of time between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following day on Friday and Saturday and any day
preceding a legal holiday.
(B) For all other minors under the age of eighteen (18) years:
1. The period of time between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
and Thursday.
2. The period of time between twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and all legal holidays. (Ord. 502,
1-6-1964)
6-5-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow said
minor to remain away from his home at late and unusual hours of the nighttime, unless said minor is accompanied by said parent or guardian or custodian;
any parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years whose ward shall have been
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 52/135
found guilty by the proper court of a violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. In any prosecution under this chapter it shall not constitute a
defense that said parent or guardian or adult person did not have knowledge that his ward did remain away from his home at late and unusual hours of the
nighttime, nor shall it be a defense that he gave his consent thereto. (Ord. 502, 1-6-1964)
Chapter 6
NONOPERABLE AUTOMOBILES
6-6-1: DEFINITION:
A "nonoperable automobile" (or other motive equipment) is one that is presently inoperable and that, in all likelihood, will not be restored to the use
intended and, in its present condition, can no longer be used for the purpose for which it was intended. (Ord. 571, 4-17-1972)
6-6-2: ILLEGAL ACT:
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant or lessee of said property to maintain on said premises a nonoperable automobile or vehicle or other
nonoperative mobile equipment. (Ord. 631, 7-6-1976)
6-6-3: NOTICE TO BE SERVED:
When the city receives information, or otherwise ascertains, that there is a nonoperable automobile or other nonoperable vehicle or mobile equipment
stored on property not inside a garage or other structure, then the chief of police shall have the person owning, buying, renting, leasing, occupying or
otherwise in charge of such property served with a written notice of such violation, with said notice to provide that such nonoperable motor vehicle shall not
be permitted to remain inoperative and outside of a garage or other structure for any period greater than sixty (60) days from the date of the service of said
notice by or on behalf of the chief of police (Ord. 631, 7-6-1976)
6-6-4: VIOLATION:
Any person who does not, during such sixty (60) day period of notice, remove said nonoperable vehicle from the premises or otherwise conform to the
requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 571, 4-17-1972)
Chapter 7
REMOVAL, PRESERVATION AND CUSTODY OF MOTOR VEHICLES
6-7-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES:
(A) Removing Vehicles: The police department of the city, or any of its duly authorized representatives, employees or designees, all herein referred to as
"police", are hereby authorized to remove or have removed any "motor vehicle" or motor vehicles, or "vehicle" or vehicles, as defined in section 6-7-2 of
this chapter, herein referred to as "vehicle", whether one or more, from any public street, way or parking lot, including any way generally and ordinarily
used by the public, all herein referred to as "public way" within the city, when such vehicle:
1. Is left unattended and situated upon any public way so as to cause or constitute a safety hazard or obstruction to traffic.
2. Is disabled and situated upon any public way so as to cause or constitute a safety hazard or obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in
charge of such vehicle are incapacitated and unable to properly provide for the care, custody and removal of such vehicle, or because of the violation
of a law or laws, are forbidden from properly providing for the care, custody and removal of such vehicle.
3. Is parked in a "no parking zone" which is conspicuously so marked by signs, curb markings or street markings.
4. Is parked in a parking zone for an interval of more than six (6) hours.
5. Is parked on any public way and has not moved at least a vehicle length for more than five (5) consecutive days.
6. Has been parked on a public way in a parking zone marked as reserved for handicapped persons for more than six (6) hours.
7. Is parked in violation of section 10-6-13 of this code.
(B) Penalty: Any person whose vehicle or motor vehicle shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). It is intended that this is the
absolute liability of the person whose vehicle or motor vehicle is found to have violated this section, unless that person can conclusively prove that the
vehicle was at the time of the violation stolen or similarly beyond the registered owner's custody or control. (Ord. 897, 2-21-2017)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are adopted for use with this chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle propelled by its own power and designed primarily to transport persons or property upon the highways of the state,
except that this term also includes trailers, semitrailers, and house trailers. This term does not include a bicycle as defined in Montana Code Annotated
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 53/135
section 61-1-1231.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by
animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks2. (Ord. 718, 12-19-1983)
6-7-3: DETERMINE AND NOTIFY OWNER:
Whenever a vehicle is removed and impounded as hereinabove provided, the police will as soon as reasonably possible:
(A) Determine the owner of such vehicle;
(B) Notify the owner of the:
1. Removal and impoundment of the vehicle and the reason therefor;
2. Location of such vehicle;
3. Procedure required to obtain the return of such vehicle. (Ord. 660, 3-6-1978)
6-7-4: PROCEDURES TO DISPOSE OF VEHICLE:
The police department or Hill County sheriff shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 61-12-401 through 61-12-407, Montana Code Annotated, to
dispose of impounded vehicles. (Ord. 730, 11-18-1985)
6-7-5: REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE BY OWNER:
Before the owner, person or persons, entitled to possession of any vehicle removed and impounded as hereinabove provided, shall be permitted to
remove such vehicle from the custody of the police, he shall:
(A) Furnish evidence of his identity;
(B) Furnish evidence of his ownership of the vehicle or right to possession thereof;
(C) Sign a receipt for such vehicle;
(D) Pay all costs regarding the removal, preservation and custody of such vehicle. (Ord. 660, 3-6-1978)
6-7-6: PAYMENT OF COSTS:
The payment of costs referred to in the preceding section shall not operate to relieve the owner, person or persons entitled to possession of such vehicle
from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance which resulted in such removal and impoundment of the vehicle. (Ord. 660, 3-6-
1978; amd. Ord. 715, 12-19-1983)
Title 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE LIMITS
(Rep. by Ord. 820, 2-18-1997)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS
7-2-1: SELLING, PURCHASING, DISCHARGING, DATES AND TIMES:
(A) Discharging: The discharging of fireworks within the incorporated limits of the City of Havre shall be July 2 through July 4 from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and on December 31 from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. January 1.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 54/135
(B) Sale: The sale of fireworks within the incorporated limits of the City of Havre shall be July 2 through July 4 from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and December 31 from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Fireworks may not be sold within the
incorporated City limits except as provided in section 7-2-8 of this chapter.
(C) Special Circumstances: The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall determine if there are special circumstances that warrant the discharge of fireworks not
provided for and authorize such use if the circumstance is community wide and of national, State and local significance.
(D) Professional Fireworks Displays Using Display Fireworks: These rules and regulations do not exempt the public displays of fireworks by a licensed,
bonded pyrotechnic operator. Permits for any public display by a licensed bonded pyrotechnic operator from the Fire Department are required to
conduct a public fireworks display. "Display fireworks" means an aerial shell, salute, flash shell, comet, sky battle, mine, and any similar Class C or
Class B 1.3g (display fireworks) and 1.4g (consumer fireworks) explosive as defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation in part 173, title 49,
Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 902, 10-2-2017)
7-2-2: POSSESSION ILLEGAL:
(A) Possession of fireworks not allowed to be sold or discharged within the City limits by the State of Montana shall be illegal.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or custodian of any child, the child being age seven (7) or younger, to permit or consent to the possession
or discharge by the child of any fireworks as defined herein, unless that parent, guardian or custodian be in direct supervision of the child at the time of
discharge. For purposes of this subsection "direct supervision" means the overall direction and control of an individual and requires the individual
furnishing direct supervision to be present and immediately available to furnish assistance while he or she is in possession of or is discharging any and
all fireworks. Direct supervision also requires the individual directly supervising to control the application of flame or other means of discharge of the
firework and must be no greater than ten feet (10') away from the individual being directly supervised at time of the firework's discharge. (Ord. 876, 4-4-
2011)
7-2-3: PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS:
Permissible fireworks, excluding skyrockets, roman candles, and bottle rockets, include, and are limited to, those that meet the definition of "common
fireworks" as set forth in the U.S. Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials Regulations, 49 CFR, parts 173.88 and 173.100, as they read on
January 1, 1985, and that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission,
as set forth in 16 CFR, part 1507, as it read on January 1, 1985. (Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
7-2-4: LITTERING ILLEGAL:
It shall be illegal for anyone to leave debris from discharged fireworks on any public place including, but not limited to, parks, sidewalks, streets, and alleys,
or on private property not owned by the individual discharging the fireworks. (Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
7-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) City police officers and firefighters shall enforce these rules and regulations.
(B) Any official charged with enforcing these rules and regulations may:
1. Issue a notice to appear to City of Havre Municipal Court for violations of this chapter; and
2. Seize illegal fireworks that are offered for sale, sold, or in the possession of any individual in violation of this chapter; and
(C) Any person who violates these rules and regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the following fines:
First offense $ 100.00
Second offense 200.00
Third offense 300.00
Fourth and subsequent offense 1,000.00
(Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
7-2-6: PUBLIC DISPLAYS:
These rules and regulations do not exempt the public display of fireworks by a licensed, bonded pyrotechnic operator. Permits from the Fire Department
are required to conduct a public fireworks display.
"Display fireworks" means an aerial shell, salute, flash shell, comet, sky battle, mine, and any similar Class C or Class B explosive as defined by the U.S.
Department of Transportation in part 173, title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 55/135
7-2-7: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED ON ALL PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All fireworks are banned from all City parks. Fireworks may not be discharged in any City park or on any public sidewalk, street, public right-of-way, public
easement or alley. (Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
7-2-8: FIREWORKS STANDS AND PERMIT FEES:
(A) Anyone, group or organization wishing to sell fireworks within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Havre shall obtain a special permit. The fees
collected from the permit shall cover the costs to issue said permit; to inspect the fireworks stands; and costs of enforcement.
(B) Operators of fireworks stands shall educate all patrons of the following:
1. Legal, safe use of fireworks;
2. The dates and times allowed for fireworks to be discharged; and
3. The requirement to clean up all debris left from discharged fireworks.
(C) All fees set forth under this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council of the City of Havre. (Ord. 876, 4-4-2011)
Chapter 3
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 820, 2-18-1997)
Chapter 4
SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
7-4-1: SMOKING:
Whoever, by reason of careless, wilful, or wanton conduct in smoking or in the use of lighters or matches for smoking, shall set fire to any bedding, carpet,
curtains, drapes, furniture, household equipment or other goods or chattels or to any building shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 452, 4-4-1955)
7-4-2: DEFINITION:
The term "careless conduct in smoking" shall include as used herein, any of the following acts, commission or omission: permitting a spark or sparks from
a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe to fall upon or into anything inflammable; placing any lighted smoking material on or about or in close proximity to any
flammable article or articles; falling asleep with lighted smoking material of any kind at hand; throwing lighted smoking material out of a window or into an
elevator pit or elsewhere than in a proper receptacle therefor; dropping a lighted cigarette or cigar or part thereof into a mail chute in any building; failure to
extinguish the fire of a match or any kind of lighter device after use of the same; failure to destroy the lighted part of a cigar or cigarette when disposing of
it; failure to destroy the burning smidgen or smidgens of tobacco from a pipe when cleaning or unloading a pipe. (Ord. 452, 4-4-1955)
7-4-3: NOTICE TO BE POSTED:
A plainly printed notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every sleeping room of every hotel, rooming house,
tourist home, tourist court, or other place renting rooms for the accommodation of the public. Such notice shall be posted by the owner, proprietor, lessee
or managing agent of such establishment. (Ord. 452, 4-4-1955)
Chapter 5
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
7-5-1: FIRE PREVENTION:
(A) The city of Havre adopts the current edition of the international fire code and all accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications as adopted
by the state fire prevention and investigation section of the department of justice applicable to local government jurisdictions. Subsequent editions of
fire codes may be adopted by administrative action as authorized by Montana Code Annotated section 50-3-102 as published in ARM section
23.12.601.
(B) Rules promulgated by the department of authority shall include, but not be limited to, requirements as authorized by Montana Code Annotated section
50-3-103. (Ord. 885, 2-3-2014)
7-5-2: FIRE LANES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 56/135
Owners or operators of premises used for commercial purposes may request the fire department designate fire lanes upon such premises in addition to
those required by the fire code. Such request shall be made in writing to the fire department designating the fire lane's size, location and markings. Upon
approval by the fire chief, the fire lane shall be established.
Obstructing a fire lane, whether designated under this section or required by the fire code, in any manner, including parking a vehicle thereon, shall be
unlawful and a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 818, 2-18-1997)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
MILK
(Rep. by Ord. 686, 4-6-1981)
Chapter 2
MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS
(Rep. by Ord. 687, 4-6-1981)
Chapter 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be known and may be cited as the REFUSE CHAPTER. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
ASSESSMENT: The fee imposed for recovery of garbage collection costs incurred for benefiting particular property of any person which is levied on
pursuant to this chapter.
BRUSH: Tree limbs and shrubbery clippings exceeding four feet (4') in length.
BULK RUBBISH: Wooden and cardboard boxes, crates, appliances, large items of household furniture, and other refuse items which by size and shape
are not readily containable.
COLLECTION EMPLOYEE: Individual employed by the department of public works of the city for the purpose of effectuating the provisions of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE GENERATOR: Any person in charge of, owning, leasing, renting or occupying any business, industrial or commercial building
other than a private residence, including, but not limited to, a store, office, factory, hotel, tourist court, motel, motor court, motor hotel, trailer court,
apartment hotel or residential building ordinarily leased for a period of less than three (3) months.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE: Material from construction, remodeling, construction site preparation, including, but not limited to, rocks, trees, debris, dirt,
brick, fill, plaster, and all types of scrap building materials.
CONTAINABLE REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including, but not limited to, wrapped garbage, wrapped small dead animals,
wrapped or boxed ashes, wastepaper, excelsior, rags, bottles, crockery, bedding, clothing, carpets, leather, tin cans, metal scraps, small mechanical parts,
shavings, floor sweepings, grass and weed clippings, twigs, tree limbs not exceeding four feet (4') in length and other similar waste or debris. It does not
mean prohibited substances; wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof; unwanted dead animals; construction wastes; brush; bulk rubbish; undrained
wet garbage; unflattened cartons; large or medium quantities of soil, sand, rocks or asphalt; hot or unwrapped ashes; coals or clinkers; large amounts of
waste or any other fluid; filth in more than a small, limited amount to be set by the director of public works if necessary; or any substance or material which
shall be declared to be noncontainable by the director of public works or the division of sanitation.
FILTH: Manure, excrement, or similar substances.
GARBAGE: Putrescible and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
LIEN: A charge which attaches in favor of the city to real property benefited by the collection of any brush, trash, bulk rubbish, containable rubbish, filth,
construction waste, or refuse; said lien also attaches to any other real or personal property of a person or any refuse generator, owning or in charge of
benefited property, to secure the payment of unpaid monthly collection costs as hereinafter described.
OPEN AREA: Any park, street, gutter, sidewalk, sewer, boulevard, alley, greenbelt, square, vacant lot, space, ground or other area where refuse material
may accumulate.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution, or other entity acting as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee for himself or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 57/135
itself, or for any other individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution or other entity, who owns, leases, rents or occupies any real property within the
city limits.
PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE: Any liquid, solid, or with an ignition temperature or flash point of less than two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200F) including,
but not limited to, gasoline, benzine, naphtha, or other flammable or explosives; any material having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9 or having any
other corrosive property that could cause damage to equipment; any noxious or malodorous substance offensive to the senses and depriving a
neighborhood or a considerable number of persons of the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; any hypodermic needle or syringe, any radioactive
substance, any poison, insecticide or pesticide or hazardous wastes.
REFUSE: All putrescible or nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals;
abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof; brush and containable rubbish, filth, construction wastes and prohibited substances when these
terms are not specifically noted in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE GENERATOR: Any person in charge of, owning, leasing, renting or occupying any building or buildings used solely for a family or
private residential domicile, including, but not limited to, single- and multiple-family dwelling units, apartments, townhouses, cooperatives, condominiums,
boarding and rooming houses.
TRASH: Rubbish, waste, debris or refuse.
VICIOUS ANIMALS: Any animal of a vicious species or an animal of a domesticated species, including, but not limited to, cats and dogs which, without
provocation, is prone to attack persons. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-3: AUTHORITY TO COLLECT REFUSE, UNAUTHORIZED HAULING:
(A) The city, its duly authorized agents, servants, or employees, have the exclusive right to collect refuse within the city without limitations. Nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit the city from contracting with some reasonable person or company for the collection or disposal of refuse and garbage should it
become necessary and advisable to do so. Any contract for such collection or disposal shall be done under the provisions of Montana state law.
(B) All refuse containers shall be provided by the city and shall be of the type in nature described by the city and resistant to disturbance by animals and
insects. Plastic bags or other containers approved by the director of public works may be used to contain garbage placed within the containers. Wet
garbage shall be placed in garbage bags in the container. Garbage placed in the receptacles shall be drained free of water. Big cartons and cardboard
boxes shall be flattened.
(C) It shall be the duty of every person and commercial or residential refuse generator to properly dispose of any refuse not disposable by subsection (A)
of this section to dispose of the said refuse. They may do so privately or through contract with the department of public works, division of sanitation. If
disposal is privately, it must be with the permission of the director of public works. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-4: CONTAINERS:
(A) Sanitary containers or receptacles shall be:
1. Such containers as shall be approved by the city council or the director of public works and which containers ore compatible with the refuse system
and the refuse to be removed.
(B) Containers Required:
1. Sanitary containers, or containers authorized by this section, shall be provided by the city. All containers shall be maintained in good condition at
ground level. The director of public works shall have the authority to refuse collection for failure to comply herewith. It shall be the duty of the user or
users to maintain the container in a reasonably sanitary condition in keeping with reasonable health standards. The director of public works shall
have the responsibility of inspecting containers and notifying the user or users of any failure to maintain the same in a reasonably sanitary condition.
(Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-5: STORING OF REFUSE:
(A) No person shall place any rubbish, refuse, or other objectionable material, in any street, alley, or other public place, or on any private property, whether
owned by such person or not, within the city except it be in proper containers at ground level, for collection under the method provided pursuant to the
authority of this code. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or garbage or rubbish or other unsuitable material on any premises is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the director of
public works shall be deemed a violation of this section. This section may also be enforced under the provisions of section 8-3-13 of this chapter.
(B) No person shall case, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse or garbage in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements onto any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place or in or on an occupied premises within the city. Such accumulation is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and additionally shall be enforced through the provision of section 8-3-13 of this chapter. The city may authorize
storage of refuse on streets and alleys for spring and fall cleanup. The city shall designate, through the director of public works, such places and times
for such accumulation as allowed. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-6: RESIDENTIAL REFUSE GENERATORS AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
(A) The director of public works may require any residential generator regularly exceeding ninety (90) gallons or one hundred twenty (120) pounds of
refuse within a collection period, any resident regularly generating refuse requiring special handling, or any other generator in the discretion of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 58/135
director of public works, to use a commercial disposal system or to make other approved disposal arrangement, or to contract with the department of
public works, division of sanitation, for special handling with additional costs.
(B) Residential refuse generators with ninety (90) gallon containers shall place the refuse containers on the scheduled collection days at the curbline in
front of the residence, or any other places described by the director of public works. Containers shall be placed for collection on said curbline before six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the day preceding the day of collection, and after such containers are emptied, they shall be removed from the curbline by six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the day of collection.
(C) City owned containers shall be distributed and positioned as scheduled by the director of public works. Containers serving more than one residence
shall be positioned along rear or side alleys as reasonably close as practical to all the property lines of any residence so served by such containers. If
there are no alleys or if the alleys are not suitable for use with city garbage system, individual portable containers may be supplied by the city.
(D) Residential refuse generators equipped with city owned containers shall first place or cause to be placed in such containers all garbage followed by
other containable rubbish.
(E) Tree branches and shrubbery cuttings shall be securely tied in bundles not exceeding four feet (4') in length, and grass clippings shall be securely
fastened in small containers or plastic bags before being placed in the said containers.
(F) To ensure optimal use of city owned containers and the ancillary equipment used therewith, the contents of the individual containers shall not, both
ninety (90) and three hundred (300) gallon sizes, exceed a one thousand (1,000) pound weight limit.
(G) Each residential refuse generator or group of residential refuse generators are responsible for the maintenance of the sanitary condition of the
containers servicing these generators. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-7: COMMERCIAL REFUSE GENERATORS; DUTIES GENERALLY; USE OF THE CITY OWNED CONTAINERS:
(A) All commercial refuse generators shall maintain their alleys and the area surrounding the refuse containers free from refuse and other potential
hazards to the public health, safety, or welfare. Where unusual or inordinate waste material is generated or refuse of a noncontainable or prohibited
nature is generated, special collections shall be arranged therefor with the city, under a contract with the department of public works, according to the
rates or charges as set by section 8-3-16 of this chapter.
(B) Commercial establishments may, by contract, receive city refuse collection services and city owned containers. These containers shall be positioned
by the city as directed by the director of public works in his absolute discretion, provided, however, that the department of public works, division of
sanitation employees shall have, at all times, a convenient access to the containers. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-8: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; METHOD OF COLLECTION; EXCEPTION:
(A) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any refuse container which is serviced by the city any "prohibited substance" as defined in section
8-3-2, "Definitions", of this chapter. All prohibited substances shall be separated from containers used for regular collections and placed in special
containers, and the contents thereof shall be clearly labeled.
(B) Every refuse generator shall call the director of public works for special collection of these items; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
any refuse generator who has secured the prior written approval of the director of public works. The department of public works, division of sanitation,
shall be entitled to charge an additional fee for these services, which fee is to be set in the discretion of the director of public works. (Ord. 711, 12-20-
1982)
8-3-9: COLLECTION CHARGES PERSONAL DEBT; CIVIL SUIT FOR PAYMENT; CUMULATIVE REMEDY:
Every charge, cost, or fee levied by or pursuant to this chapter shall become, from and after it is due and payable, in the discretion of the director of public
works, a personal debt of the person, commercial or residential refuse generator receiving collection services, and may be collected by a civil suit instituted
in the name of the city, in city court, by the city attorney, upon the request of the director of public works. Notwithstanding any other provision to the
contrary, the remedy provided by this section shall be cumulative and supplement other remedies provided by this chapter, and shall in no way interfere
with the assessment of the charges against the various refuse generators as a tax. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-10: COST OF HANDLING GARBAGE:
The cost of collecting and disposing of garbage and refuse from the streets, alleys and private premises of the city shall, in all cases possible, be assessed
and taxed against the real estate from which garbage or refuse is collected.
Each lot from which garbage or refuse is produced shall, as far as practical, bear each share of the expense of collecting and disposing of garbage or
refuse in proportion to the amount of garbage or refuse collected. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-11: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 59/135
(A) Place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private property not owned or under his control;
(B) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped putrescible waste in any refuse container, unless all liquid shall have been drained therefrom;
(C) Place or cause to be placed more than a limited amount of filth in a refuse container, limits to be set by the director of public works or his deputy;
(D) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped filth in any refuse container unless the container is used only for that purpose, as allowed by the director
of public works in writing;
(E) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped dead animal in a refuse container, or any large dead animal;
(F) Failure to make arrangements for the removal of construction waste within thirty (30) days after it is generated, but in no case before:
1. Final building inspection;
2. Clearance of public utilities;
3. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(G) Place or cause to be placed refuse in a container not owned or maintained by the city, without the permission of the director of public works.
(H) Burn or cause to be burned any refuse or garbage in any container, or to set fire to any container in any way.
(I) Permit or cause, wilfully or negligently, the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to result in flooding, and impeding of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, thereby causing damage to public rights of way, private premises not owned by said person responsible for such generation, or creating a
hazard to such traffic and a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare;
(J) Fail to restrain any vicious animal and prevent interference with collection employees acting in the course of their employment;
(K) Remove, haul or cause to be removed any refuse, on or along any city right of way, street, or alley, unless the same is contained in watertight and
covered containers so constructed as to prevent any such refuse from falling, leaking or spilling therefrom.
(L) To place any prohibited waste in any refuse container.
(M) To vandalize, deface or destroy any city owned refuse container. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-12: DUTY TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
It is the duty of the director of public works, the deputy director of public works, or their authorized deputies and representatives to enforce the terms of this
chapter. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-13: PENALTIES:
(A) A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and a violator, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or be both fined and imprisoned.
(B) Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 711, 12-20-
1982)
8-3-14: DIVISION OF SANITATION CREATED:
The city shall provide for the disposal of all garbage and other refuse within the city and to that end shall have the power to create and hereby does create
a division of sanitation within the department of public works for the purpose of so collecting and disposing of all such refuse or garbage.
The director of public works shall have the same power and authorities over this division as he shall have over any other division of the department of
public works, including, but not limited to, those powers incidental and necessary to the fulfillment of the function of the division. Such powers may be
exercised through appropriate rules and regulations in the same manner as rules and regulations may be issued for the department of public works as a
whole or for any division thereof. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-15: LEVY AUTHORIZED:
The city shall, annually, by resolution, adopt a special assessment as authorized by sections 7-14-4105 and 7-14-4106, Montana Code Annotated, 1981,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 60/135
as from time to time amended. The special assessment shall be adopted in the same manner as other special assessments, and shall consist of the
certain rates and charges set by this chapter, together with any special service costs to be assessed. (Ord. 711, 12-20-1982)
8-3-16: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL RATES:
The city council shall establish by resolution schedules of commercial and residential service rates for collection within the city, as the need occurs.
(A) Residential Lots: All residential lots shall be assessed a standard charge under such schedules.
(B) Commercial Properties: Commercial properties using city garbage shall be assessed appropriate charges based upon volume and the number of
collections per week, as shown on such schedules.
(C) Vacant Lots: Owners of vacant lots shall not be assessed a standard charge under such schedule as the council directs.
(D) Billing: Billing will be accomplished on a yearly basis through the city special assessments on the county tax notices. Additional pick up charges for all
roll-off containers will be billed on a monthly basis.
(E) Schedules To Be Available: The director of public works shall maintain the schedules of commercial and residential service rates, and the schedules
shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time during business hours. (Ord. 889, 10-6-2014)
Chapter 4
SEWER REGULATIONS
8-4-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works shall have general supervision over the sewage treatment and sewerage system of the city. His duties shall be as follows:
(A) Treatment Plant Operations: Adequately maintain and operate treatment plant.
(B) Testing: Perform the needed physical, chemical and bacteriological tests recommended by the state board of health.
(C) Treatment Plant Records: Maintain records of treatment plant operation.
(D) Connection Records: Keep an accurate and complete record of connections made to the sewer, and keep posted to date a sectional map of wye
branches furnished him for this purpose.
(E) Sewer Maintenance: Keep the city sewers and appurtenances clean and in good working order.
(F) Permits: Issue permits for sewer connections.
(G) Violations: Report violations of rules and regulations set forth in this chapter to the city council.
(H) Additional Employees Authorized: The director of public works may employ such additional help, subject to the approval of the mayor and authorization
by the city council, as may be necessary for the proper performance of the duties of that office. The director of public works shall be responsible for the
acts done on behalf of that office by such employees and for the proper performance of their duties. This may include a superintendent of the
wastewater treatment plant who shall be subordinate to the director of public works. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-2: LICENSES AND PERMITS:
No person shall engage in or conduct the business of sewer connecting and house draining, or excavate any trenches for sewer pipes, or open, uncover
or in any manner make connection with, or lay, any sewer or drain or attach to, modify or repair any appurtenances to sewer connections with the sewer in
the streets or alleys, or with any private sewer or drain in the city without holding the proper license and permit for such work from the council excepting
only persons operating under special contract with the city to do such work. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for license shall be presented to the council and endorsed by the director of public works and no person shall receive such license who
does not have an established place of business within the corporate limits of the city and who shall not first have furnished the director of public works
satisfactory evidence of his responsibility and qualifications to ply their trade in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the director of public
work's rules for the conduct of such work. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 61/135
8-4-4: BOND:
After favorable action by the council granting a license and before the same shall be issued, the applicant or applicants shall file with the clerk-treasurer a
bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) which bond shall be approved by the mayor and attorney and conditioned upon the protection of the
city against all loss or damage which may occur on account of such license through any carelessness or negligence in either the execution or protection of
his work, or by reason of any unfaithful or inadequate work done by such person, or by his or their employees, and that said license as such will also
conform to the conditions and requirements of the city for his government or in default thereof, will submit to such penalties as are or may be prescribed by
the director of public works. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-5: USE OF LICENSE:
No person engaged in the business of sewer connecting or drain laying shall allow his name to be used by any person directly or indirectly either to obtain
a permit or to do any work under his license or bond. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-6: PERMIT:
Before commencing the construction, modification or repair of any sewer, drain or cesspool, the drain layer shall first obtain a written permit from the
director of public works and such permit shall be upon the ground at all times during the progress of work and must be shown any officer in authority or
demand. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All applications for permits must be made in writing upon the proper blanks for that purpose, and signed by the owner or his authorized agent, and, when it
is required, they shall be accompanied by a plan showing the whole course of the drain which is to be constructed, together with the size of the same, the
location of all branches, depth of the drain below the floor of the buildings, and such other information as may be required by the director of public works
for the proper direction of the work. If the drain is to be connected with a sewer built by private parties, or to pass through property not owned by the
applicant, the written consent of the owner must be procured and filed with the application before the permit is issued. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-8: FEE FOR CONNECTION:
Any person securing a sewer permit for any work on or connection to city sewer mains, drains or other sewage collection and transportation systems, shall
pay uniform fees for such permit and for capital improvements and replacement of infrastructure, in those amounts from time to time established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 801, 7-15-1996)
8-4-9: USE OF CITY SEWERS REQUIRED:
The owners of all occupied buildings containing toilets and situated within the city boundaries are hereby required, at their expense, to connect their
building sewer with the city sewer. Exception to the above is when the building to be served is over one hundred fifty feet (150') from the city sewer and a
nuisance is not being created. At such time that the city sewer is extended to within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the building, it shall be connected within
ninety (90) days. The city council may, if in the public interest, grant temporary variances in cases of general sewer hookup moratoriums, such variances
ceasing at the end of the moratorium, unless terminated earlier by the council. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-10: SEWER CONNECTION:
The piping in the building or home, and to a point four feet (4') outside the building or home, is to conform to the requirements of the plumbing code of the
state.
(A) Permit: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works. The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by
the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
director of public works.
(B) Costs; Indemnification: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(C) Separate Sewers To Be Provided:
1. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court and/or driveway. The building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
2. The city council may, if it finds such exceptions to be in the public interest, by formal action, allow exceptions to this requirement; provided, that the
following conditions are met:
(a) That the property be a mobile home court and all the underlying real property be in one undivided legal ownership and not be subdivided or
legally divided in any way.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 62/135
(b) That such mobile home court has been approved by the Montana department of health and environmental sciences, the state board of health and
any other state requirements for mobile home courts; and
(c) That such mobile home court has met the subdivision regulations for Havre and Hill County, the city ordinances concerning mobile home courts,
where applicable, and has been approved by the Havre-Hill County planning board.
(D) Prohibited Connections: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the city sanitary sewer.
(E) Specifications For Sewer: The minimum size sewer from building to city sewer shall be four inches (4"), the minimum grade of this sewer shall be oneeighth
inch (1/8") per foot (1'). The sewer shall be cast iron sewer pipe, vitrified clay sewer pipe, PVC sewer pipe or asbestos-cement sewer pipe. Joints
shall be watertight and rootproof.
(F) Trenches: When the character of the material will permit, the bottom of the trench shall be shaped to conform to the bottom of the sewer. Where the
bottom of the trench cannot be shaped or rocks and boulders are present, the contractor shall provide a minimum of three inches (3") of bedding
material below the service pipe and a minimum of six inches (6") of bedding material on the sides and the top of the service pipe. The bedding material
shall be crushed with stone or pea gravel with not less than ninety five percent (95%) retained on the no. 4 screen. The bedding material is to be
compacted by slicing with a shovel. Special care shall be taken to bed the pipe firmly to exact line and grade. All pipe, when joined in the trench, shall
form a true and uniform line of sewer.
(G) Inspections; Connections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director of public works or his deputy when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. No service pipe building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by
the director of public works or his deputy. The connection to the public sewer shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works or his
deputy.
(H) Connection To Sewer: Connection to the city sewer will be made at the wyes provided in the city sewer. If wyes have not been provided near the point
of desired connection, then an approved saddle shall be installed for the connection. Where a saddle is used, a neat hole shall be first cut in the pipe
so that the sewage can pass into the city sewer without obstruction and the saddle can adequately cover the hole. The entry into the city sewer shall be
made in a downstream direction at an angle of about forty five degrees (45).
(I) Backfilling: After the pipes have been laid and properly joined, the space between them and the sides of the trench and for one foot (1') over the top of
the pipe shall be carefully filled with fine sand, gravel or earth which shall be thoroughly tamped, care being taken not to loosen the joints or to disturb
the alignment of the pipes. The backfill may be completed by either tamping layers of twelve inches (12") in thickness or thoroughly soaking with water
the entire depth of the trench, or both, as the inspector may direct; the object being to have the least possible settlement after the work is completed.
The contractor, plumber or other person doing the excavation and refilling shall be responsible for the trench and liable for any damage occasioned by
its construction for a period of two (2) years after completion. Material not needed for backfilling shall be considered the property of the contractor and
he shall be responsible for its disposal.
(J) Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in the manner satisfactory to the
director of public works. Backfilling of the sewer trench will, in general, require compaction under public streets. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-11: MATERIALS NOT PERMITTED IN CITY SEWERS:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to the city sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(A) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(B) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or in interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(C) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures,
equipment and personnel or the sewage works.
(D) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(E) Grease, oil, sand interceptors and other treatment devices shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city council, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, organic materials in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors or treatment devices shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
or treatment devices shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city council and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 63/135
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-12: TOILETS:
Any office, store, factory, wholesale house or warehouse in which more than five (5) persons are employed shall have toilet accommodations in connection
with such store, factory, wholesale house or warehouse for the convenience of said employees and said accommodations must be installed within ninety
(90) days after adoption of this chapter. When more than four (4) persons are employed and are of each sex, one toilet shall be provided for each sex.
(Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-13: INSPECTION:
The director of public works may adopt such rules as he may deem necessary to provide for proper inspection of the work and no work shall be covered
until it has been approved by the inspector who will endorse a certificate of final inspection upon the permit issued for that particular work or connection.
(Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-14: SEWER RATES:
(A) Rates: On or after the effective date of this section, the city shall establish, by resolution from time to time adopted by the city council, all charges,
rentals and rates for sewer services provided by the city to property owners in areas served by the city's wastewater treatment system.
(B) Rate Review: Not less often than every two (2) years, the city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance of its wastewater
treatment system, as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage, and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of the service
charges and rates established by the city and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment
system. The city shall apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the
next year and adjust the rate accordingly. If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in plant modifications which would change that user's
wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, such factual information, and the city
shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible
after such meeting.
(C) Monthly Billing: All charges and rentals for sewer service shall be made a part of the current monthly statement for charges and rentals for water
service provided to that same property owner or consumer. Such sewer charges or rentals shall be shown by separate item or surcharge on such
statement. The city will not accept a separate payment of either the charge for water or the charge for sewer rental. Both charges must be paid at one
and the same time.
(D) Rate Adjustments: In cases where property owners or consumers claim such sewer rentals to be unfair, unreasonable, or not in proportion to charges
made to other water and wastewater system users, such person or persons may apply to the city clerk-treasurer or the city council for an adjustment,
stating the circumstances. The council may, subject to any applicable regulations of the public service commission of this state, make such adjustment
of such sewer rental rate as is deemed necessary, fair and equitable. (Ord. 822, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-20-1997)
8-4-15: COLLECTION OF SANITARY SEWER CHARGES:
The sanitary sewer charges for each premises shall be obligations of the same party or parties who are obligated for payment of city water bills for such
premises, according to the regulations respecting the city water utility. All such collections of sanitary sewer charges shall be deposited in the sanitary
sewer system fund, which is and shall be comprised of all charges collected from the sanitary sewer system. It is hereby made the duty of the water
department of the city to prepare, issue and mail, as near as may be to the fifteenth day of each calendar month, a statement of the sanitary sewer charge
for each user of the sanitary sewer system. In all cases, the sanitary sewer charge shall appear as a surcharge, separately stated, upon the water bill as
rendered. Each such charge shall be due and payable at the same time and place as the water bill on which it is shown, and no payment shall be
accepted by the city or any of its officers or employees on a water bill without concurrent payment of the sanitary sewer charge; and all of the penalties,
including the shutting off of the customer's water supply, shall be applied to each case of nonpayment of the sanitary sewer charge in like manner as for
nonpayment of the water charge. Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall be deemed to have contracted and agreed to pay the sanitary sewer
charges hereby imposed, and such charges may be collected by actions at law whenever the same are more than thirty (30) days overdue, and shall bear
interest, at the highest rate allowed by law for contract indebtedness, from and after the tenth day of the month in which the charge became delinquent. To
the full extent now or hereafter permitted by law, overdue sanitary sewer charges shall constitute a lien upon and be enforceable against the real estate
constituting the premises that was the user of the sanitary sewer system for which such charges were imposed. No subsequent owner or occupant of any
premises for which any sanitary sewer charge is overdue shall be entitled to water or sanitary sewer services until the overdue charge is paid,
notwithstanding that each subsequent owner or occupant may not have been personally obligated therefor. (Ord. 894, 10-3-2016)
8-4-16: MANHOLES:
Entrance into manholes or opening the same for any purpose whatever, except by the director of public works or his deputy or other persons duly
authorized, is strictly prohibited. (Ord. 697, 10-19-1981)
8-4-17: CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
No connection of any sort or nature whatsoever shall be made to the wastewater disposal system of the city, or the sewers and sewer mains connected
thereto, by any person, corporation or organization if the intended connection will service or otherwise benefit real property outside the corporate limits of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 64/135
the city, unless the owner of such real property has signed and filed with the office of the director of public works of the city: a) an irrevocable petition for
annexation; b) an irrevocable petition for withdrawal from rural fire district 1; and c) an irrevocable agreement establishing the future applicable city zoning
district in which the owner's property will be included upon annexation and a waiver of a change in the applicable county zoning district, if any, affecting
such property.
Each and every agreement made between any property owner requesting and accepting sewer services inside or outside the corporate limits of the city
shall include: a) an irrevocable petition for annexation to the city; b) an irrevocable petition for withdrawal from rural fire district 1; and c) an irrevocable
agreement establishing the future applicable city zoning district in which the owner's property will be included upon annexation and a waiver of a change in
the applicable county zoning district, if any, affecting such property; all of which shall be imposed upon the land as a covenant and easement running with
the land for the benefit of the public. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
8-4-17-1: REBATE FOR PRIVATELY FINANCED EXTENSION OF SEWER MAIN OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
An owner of real property lying outside of the corporate limits of the city may install, at such owner's sole expense, a public sewer main within public rights
of way or public easements, after obtaining approval from both the city and all applicable state agencies, and after obtaining all applicable permits for
construction and installation of such sewer service main. In addition, the owner must comply with all of the provisions of section 8-4-17 of this chapter.
Such property owner must install the sewer service main in conformance with the rules and regulations of both the city and the state of Montana, and
under the direction of the city's director of public works. The property owner must grant to the city any and all easements required by the city for the
operation and maintenance of any such sewer main which is connected to the city municipal sewer system.
Prior to commencement of construction and installation of such sewer main and subject to the city's acceptance and approval of such sewer main as
finally installed, the property owner who financed such installation may request the city to enter into and establish a written rebate agreement and
procedure by which some portion of the cost of installation of such sewer main may be rebated to such property owner by charging "latecomer fees" to
other property owners who later connect to that sewer service main during the fifteen (15) year period after installation. The property owner agrees to
prepare and file with the city such data as the city requires to establish the rebate, itemizing all expenses in connection with the installation, including
construction and engineering costs. Before the city's final acceptance of the sewer service main, the city and the property owner must agree, in writing, on
a specific dollar amount of the rebate for each such later connection to the sewer main, taking into consideration the total cost incurred by the property
owner in the installation, an estimate of the number of additional parcels that may become connected to the sewer main at a future date, and any other
factors that the parties deem appropriate.
Upon acceptance and approval by the city of the sewer main as installed, and for a term of fifteen (15) years thereafter, the city agrees to charge and
collect the agreed latecomer fees, up to the agreed upon rebate amount, from all other property owners desiring to tap into such sewer main for the
purpose of providing public sewer service to their respective properties. Any such property owner desiring to tap into such sewer main shall not be issued
a connection permit until the specified latecomer fee has been paid to the city. The latecomer fee is in addition to all connection fees and other charges
required by the city. No latecomer fees may be charged or collected by the city, and the property owner is not entitled to any rebate for any connection to
the sewer main occurring after the applicable fifteen (15) year period.
The city treasurer shall establish a separate rebate fund for each approved sewer main rebate agreement as provided under this chapter, and shall
disburse the rebate funds, when received, to the property owner who financed the installation, or to such party's proven heirs, devisees, personal
representatives, successors or assigns. If no qualified payee can be located, or if any funds remain unclaimed at the end of the applicable fifteen (15) year
term, the rebate funds so collected shall revert to the general sewer funds of the city. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
8-4-17-2: IMPLIED CONSENT TO ANNEXATION:
The city may, at any time, require a property owner's consent to annexation as a condition of continued sewer service. When the city determines to require
such consent from a particular property owner, the city may notify the property owner, in writing, that the city seeks such consent and that if such consent
is not given, the city will require that the property owner discontinue receiving sewer service. The property owner may notify the city in writing of his or her
consent to annexation. If within thirty (30) days of the property owner's receipt of such notice, the property owner contacts the city and makes firm
arrangements, in writing, to discontinue sewer and water service, then the city shall not further pursue obtaining the property owner's consent. If, however,
the property owner has not, within such time period, made firm written arrangements to discontinue sewer and water service, then the city shall be entitled
to treat the property owner as having consented to annexation of his or her property upon the expiration of such time.
If the property owner consents to annexation under any of the methods described above, the property owner may not thereafter withdraw his or her
consent to any proposed annexation of his or her property. If the property owner consents to annexation under any of the methods described above, then
the city shall be entitled to disregard any protest that such property owner makes to a proposed annexation of his or her property. Nothing herein shall
prevent the city from seeking consent even if the city has previously obtained a waiver of protest from such property owner or from his or her predecessor
in interest. (Ord. 863, 12-1-2008)
8-4-18: NOTIFICATION:
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to
wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
8-4-19: WASTES PROHIBITED FROM BEING DISCHARGED TO THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM:
The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard in or have an adverse
effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works is hereby prohibited.
Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the Havre treatment works
shall pay for such increased costs. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 65/135
8-4-20: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be limited to discharges to municipal systems to concentrations of quantities which
will not harm either the sewers, the sludge of any municipal system, the wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The director of public works may set limitations lower
than the limitations established in the regulations below if, in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In
forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the director of public works will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the director of public works are as follows:
(A) Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) (65C).
(B) Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil
origin.
(C) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease.
(D) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purposes of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
(E) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director of public works for such
materials.
(F) Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the director of public works in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(G) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director of public works in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(H) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined in section 8-4-24 of this chapter.
(I) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reductions by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(J) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, from suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
8-4-21: REJECTION AUTHORIZED:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 8-4-20 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the director of public works, may have a deleterious effect upon
the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director
of public works may:
(A) Reject the wastes,
(B) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers,
(C) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
(D) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section 8-4-14 of this chapter.
If the director of public works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to review and approval of the director of public works and the department of health and environmental sciences. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
8-4-22: AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 66/135
8-4-23: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
(A) The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) The director of public works or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential.
The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. (Ord. 722, 5-21-
1984)
8-4-24: SLUG DEFINED:
"Slug" shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. (Ord. 722, 5-21-1984)
Chapter 4A
STORMWATER REGULATIONS
8-4A-1: STORM SEWER CHARGE:
(A) Application And Classification: For the services and facilities provided by the storm sewer portion of the system, a special storm sewer charge is
hereby imposed on each lot and parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city, excepting therefrom exempt land and those properties described in
exhibit A on file with the city, which are deemed not to contribute storm or surface water, in any event, to the city's storm sewer system.
(B) Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: (Ord. 861, 1-22-2008)
COMMERCIAL LAND: Each single lot or tract with one or more commercial, business, governmental or other nonresidential structures or
improvements of any kind, including, without limitation, multi-family (more than two-family) residential structures, garages, outbuildings, paved parking
lots or areas, or other impervious surface improvements, located thereon.
EXEMPT LAND: Each single lot or tract that is a public park or cemetery or that is owned by the city or by the United States or a federal agency of the
United States.
RESIDENTIAL LAND: Each single lot or tract with one one-family or one two-family residential structure thereon occupied for residential purposes.
VACANT LAND: Each single lot or tract on which no physical improvement of any kind is constructed that creates, in the opinion of the public works
director, any impervious surface on the lot or tract. If, in the opinion of the public works director, a lot or tract contains any improvement creating an
impervious surface, but it is not residential land, then such lot or tract shall be classified as commercial land. (Ord. 861, 1-22-2008; amd. Ord. 862, 9-
15-2008)
(C) Classifications: For purposes of imposing the storm sewer charge, all lots and parcels within the city, except those areas exempted hereby, shall be
classified and assessed as follows:
1. Category 1A: Vacant land up to but not exceeding two (2) acres in area; to be assessed at rates set annually by resolution of the city council for
vacant land up to and including two (2) acres in area.
2. Category 1B: Vacant land exceeding two (2) acres in area; to be assessed a total amount not exceeding the storm sewer charge for two (2) acres of
vacant land.
3. Category 2A: Residential land up to but not exceeding one-half (1/2) acre in area; to be assessed at rates set annually by resolution of the city
council for residential land up to and including one-half (1/2) acre in area.
4. Category 2B: Residential land exceeding one-half (1/2) acre in area, but not exceeding two (2) acres in area; to be assessed a total amount not
exceeding the storm sewer charge for one-half (1/2) acre of residential land.
5. Category 2C: Residential land exceeding two (2) acres in area; to be assessed a total amount not exceeding the storm sewer charge for two (2)
acres of vacant land.
6. Category 3: Commercial land, up to ninety percent (90%) covered with impervious surfaces; to be assessed at rates set annually by resolution of the
city council for commercial land, ninety percent (90%) or less of the area of which is covered by impervious surfaces, provided that the total amount
assessed shall not exceed the storm sewer charge for a thirty five (35) acre tract.
7. Category 4: Commercial land, ninety percent (90%) to one hundred percent (100%) covered with impervious surfaces; to be assessed at rates set
annually by resolution of the city council for commercial land, more than ninety percent (90%) of the area of which is covered by impervious surfaces.
8. Category 5: Exempt land, which shall not be assessed any storm sewer charge under this section, unless or until its use changes to or becomes, in
the opinion of the public works director, residential, commercial or vacant land.
The public works director shall prepare and regularly update and maintain a list of all lots and parcels within the corporate limits of the city and the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 67/135
areas thereof and, in accordance with the foregoing categories, shall assign the applicable category to each such lot or parcel and file such list, as
updated from time to time, with the finance director/clerk on or before the first Monday of each September following the effective date hereof. (Ord.
862, 9-15-2008)
(D) Storm Sewer Charge And Collection; Delinquency: On or before September 30 of each year, the finance director/clerk shall submit to the county
assessor a list of every owner of a lot or tract within the city, with the exception of owners of exempt land, together with the annual charges for each
such lot or tract for storm sewer services for the current fiscal year, according to the applicable property classification set forth in subsection (C) of this
section. Such ownership shall be determined on the same date and in the same manner as ownership is determined for real property tax assessment
purposes. Such charges shall be due and payable with, and at the same times and dates as, the real property taxes on such lots and tracts, or as
otherwise provided by Montana law. If such storm sewer charges thereafter remain unpaid, such charges shall be deemed delinquent, shall thereafter
bear interest and be assessed penalties at the same rates and in the same amounts that are charged and assessed to delinquent real property taxes,
and shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent real property taxes are collected under Montana law. (Ord. 861, 1-22-2008)
(E) Deposit Of Collections: All collections of the storm sewer charge shall be deposited in the storm sewer system fund. (Ord. 894, 10-3-2016)
(F) Adjustment Of Charge: Any person who considers the charges applicable to such person's lot or parcel to be unjust or inequitable may apply to the
public works director for adjustment thereof, stating in writing the grounds of the complaint. The public works director shall conduct an investigation
thereof and report the findings to the city council for review, if said complaint is not withdrawn. The city council shall promptly review such report and
hear the complaint. If the city council determines that an adjustment of the charges for any such lot or parcel is necessary to provide for the just and
equitable application of the storm sewer charge, it shall so provide, either by ordinance amendatory hereto or by directives to the finance director/clerk
fixing special charges for individual lots or parcels. (Ord. 861, 1-22-2008)
Chapter 5
NUISANCES
8-5-1: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Any person, who shall, within the city limits, keep or maintain swine, cattle, horses, or other large animals or raise fowl, shall be declared guilty of
maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-2: OFFENSIVE ODORS:
If any person shall suffer any cellar, vault, pool or privy, private sewer, cesspool or sewage drain field upon any premises occupied by him, the person so
offending shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-3: DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or of any person responsible for the care at the time of its death of any animal dying within the city limits, forthwith, or with
all reasonable dispatch, and before such animal becomes offensive from decomposition, to remove the same in accordance with the garbage ordinance
and under the direction of the director of public works and any owner or person responsible for the care of such animal at the time of its death, who shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to remove the same as aforesaid after two (2) hours' reasonable notice, or who shall throw or leave any dead animal in any public
way or grounds, oron any private grounds, or in any watercourse, or in any pit or vault unburied, shall be deemed guilty of having maintained a public
nuisance. The reasonable notice and time to respond to the provisions of this chapter are for the purposes of this section reduced to two (2) hours. (Ord.
712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-4: STORAGE OF REFUSE AND LITTERING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall place any garbage, rubbish, refuse or other objectionable material, in any street, alley or other public place, or on any private property,
whether owned by such person or not, within the city except it be in proper containers at ground level, for collection under the method provided pursuant to
the authority of the Havre city codes. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or garbage or rubbish or other unsuitable material on any premises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within twenty four (24) hours after notice from
the director of public works shall be deemed in violation of this section. This section may also be enforced under the provisions of section 8-3-13 of this
title.
No person shall cause, place, sweep or deposit anywhere in the city any refuse or garbage in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the
elements onto any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place or in or on an occupied premises within the city. Such accumulation is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and additionally shall be enforced through the provisions of section 8-3-13 of this title. The city may authorize storage of refuse on
streets and alleys for spring and fall cleanup. The city shall designate, through the director of public works, such places and times for such accumulation
as allowed. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-5: SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS:
If any person shall slaughter or kill any cattle, calves, sheep or swine within the city limits or within one mile of the city limits, or shall occupy or use any
yard, pen or enclosure or building for the purpose aforesaid within the city limits, or within one-half (1/2) mile thereof, without written permission from the
council, every such person shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 68/135
8-5-6: LITTERING PUBLIC WAYS1:
It shall be the duty of the occupants of any premises within the city limits to keep sidewalks in front of and adjoining the premises occupied clean and safe,
and free from any obstructions of every kind whatsoever for pedestrians and such occupantsshall, with all reasonable dispatch, remove therefrom all snow,
slush, ice, mud or other impediments for safe and convenient foot travel and prevent the continuance of accumulation of the same thereon; and every
person failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have committed a nuisance.
If any person within the limits of the city shall throw or deposit wastepaper, straw, hay, waste, clothing, hats, boxes or other coarse, inflammable material or
rubbish in any of the streets or alleys, or upon any sidewalks or in any public grounds, or allow the same to accumulate on premises occupied by him, so
as to become dangerous to such or adjoining premises or in violation of the garbage ordinance, such person shall be deemed to have committed a
nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-7: OBSTRUCTING DITCHES:
If any person shall dump, empty, or throw any manure, tin cans, coarse rubbish, dead animals, brush, trees, branches or any grass clippings of any sort
into an open or covered drain, sewer, water ditch, flume or natural watercourse within the limits of the city, or in violation of the garbage ordinance, such
person shall be deemed to have committed a nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-8: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
It is hereby constituted and declared a nuisance to allow within the limits of the city any vehicles, motorized or otherwise, to obstruct the passage of any
street, sidewalk, or alley or other public way or place and any person who shall so obstruct any place, alley or sidewalk shall be deemed guilty of
maintaining a nuisance. A person or persons who shall personally or through employees, customers or suppliers, on a regular basis, i.e., more than three
(3) days out of any five (5) day period, violate this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and the notice provision shall only apply to the first such
obstruction. The reasonable notice and time for notification provision of this chapter are hereby reduced to two (2) hours. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-9: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to erect and maintain any barbed wire fence, and is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord.
712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-10: OBSTRUCTIONS:
Whenever any street, alley, public way or utility easement or right of way or any portion thereof in the city shall be obstructed by any fences, buildings or
other structures of any kind, or other obstructions; the obstruction is hereby declared to be a public nuisance provided the council shall have annexedor
incorporated the said property into the city and accepted the dedication to the public of the streets, alleys, public ways, utilities, easement or right of way.
(Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-11: DANGEROUS HAZARDS:
Any dangerous or hazardous to the public, artificial condition; including, but not limited to, open foundations excavations, open ditches, wholly or partially
or diseased trees or tree limbs, which, in the opinion of the director of public works, are likely to fall of their own accord and cause possible injury, are
declared public nuisances. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-12: VIOLATIONS OF CITY CODES:
Any violation of any ordinance or code of the city designed to enhance the safety, health or general well being and enjoyment of the citizens of the city;
including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance, building ordinance, housing ordinance, plumbing ordinance, mechanical ordinance, sewer and
waterworks ordinances, garbage ordinance, and in addition to and not intended to be a limitation in any way on any other remedies provided in the
ordinances of the city or the laws of the state are hereby declared to be public nuisances. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-13: BUILDING AND PLUMBING PERMITS:
The construction of a structure of any kind without the necessary building and plumbing permits, or any attempted construction of any structure in which a
building or plumbing permit was originally granted but the structure was not completed within the original time limits of the permit or any extension thereof,
and any construction in violation of any building or plumbing permit issued is declared to be a public nuisance. A "building or plumbing permit" is defined
as those certain permits issued by the department of public works, after application, which ensure that construction within the city will be in compliance
with the ordinances of the city. All construction authorized by a building permit shall be completed with reasonable diligence and a certificate of occupancy
secured. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-14: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
(A) "Public nuisance" means:
1. A condition which endangers the safety or health, is offensive to the senses, or obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of the life or property by the entire community or neighborhood or by any considerable number of persons;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 69/135
2. Any premises where persons gather for the purpose of engagingin unlawful conduct;
3. A condition which renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right of way or waters used by the public;
4. Any other situation or condition declared to be a nuisance, a public nuisance or otherwise unlawful by this chapter or any provisions of the codes of
the city.
(B) A person commits the offense of maintaining a public nuisance if he knowingly creates, conducts, or maintains a public nuisance.
(C) An act which affects an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons (as specified in subsection (A)1 hereof) is no less a
nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals is unequal.
(D) Before any person shall be convicted of any offense herein defined as a public nuisance, such person must be, prior to the issuance of any complaints,
unless a shorter time is indicated in the chapter, be served with reasonable notice, or that a reasonable attempt was made to locate such a person, not
less than ten (10) days, in written form by the director of public works or the chief of police to abate the same, and that he failed, refused or neglected
to do so. In such cases where a violation of this section has occurred, it is the duty of the director of public works, the city attorney, or the chief of police
to enter a complaint before the city judge to enforce the prescribed penalty.
(E) A person convicted of maintaining a public nuisance shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of such conduct
constitutes a separate offense.
(F) The city judge may also direct the chief of police or the director of public works to abate the nuisance complained of and to add the cost thereof to the
other costs of the case and enforce the payment of the same.
(G) In any case where such abatement is ordered by the judge and must be carried out either through contract or by the department of public works of the
city, because of the refusal or neglect of the person responsible, the cost of the same may, by a resolution of the city council of the city, be assessed
against the real property involved as a special assessment thereto. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-15: REASONABLE NOTICE:
When reasonable notice is required by any provision of this chapter. The director of public works or his deputy or the chief of police shall serve the notice
on the person or persons who owns or exercises apparent control or who last owned or exercised apparent control over the premises on which or in which
thenuisance is being maintained, or is otherwise connected with the nuisance. Service on a corporation, nonresident, partnership or nonperson owner, is
accomplished by service on any agent of the corporation with real or apparent authority.
If no agent or principle can be found, notice is accomplished by posting notice on or near the nuisance on the official bulletin board at city hall, and by
mailing notice to the last property owner of record at the last property tax assessment by first class mail, if possible.
The director of public works or his deputy may take such reasonable steps to give notice as they may deem necessary and if the method used is not
specifically mentioned above, the court shall review the method used and if it would have had a reasonable chance of notifying the affected party, then the
court shall conclude that the party was notified in the same manner as if the listed methods were used. The evidence contained in a certificate of service
by the director of public works or his deputy shall be conclusive unless contradicted by clear and convincing evidence.
The fact that a person, persons or corporation was not served shall not prohibit any prosecution under this chapter as long as a reasonable effort to locate
the concerned party was made and the notice would have notified a reasonable person keeping reasonable care, control and supervision of the property
of which complaint was made. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-16: REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS HAZARDS AND SITUATIONS:
The department shall order the removal in connection with any dangerous situation which causes a public nuisance, or a threat to the public safety and
well being, which is erected or maintained in violation of city ordinances. Ten (10) days' notice in writing shall be given to the owners of such situations, or
buildings, structures or premises, to remove the situation or to bring it into compliance with the ordinances. Upon failure to remove the situation or to
comply with the notice, the department shall correct the problem. The department shall correct the situation immediately and without notice if it reasonably
appears that the condition is such as to present an immediate threat to the health, safety, or enjoyment of the public or if a short period is provided in the
ordinance for that situation. Any cost of the removal incurred by the department shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which such situation is
located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in a manner of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on such property. (Ord. 712, 5-2-
1983)
8-5-17: ABATEMENT AT EXPENSE OF OWNER:
(A) In case any public nuisance is declared to be such by the terms of any section of this chapter, or any other provision inthe Havre city codes, and it shall
be in, about, or upon any unoccupied lot or lots within the city, or tenement or other structures thereon owned by nonresidents of the city, the council,
may, by resolution, after reasonable notice, direct the director of public works to remove or contract to remove or abate such nuisance which shall be
done at the expense of such owner and recovered by an action against him as and for money laid out and expended for his use, together with all costs
of suit, and such property may be sold to satisfy the same in the normal manner of a debt. In addition, such costs may be assessed, by a resolution of
the city council of the city, as a special assessment against the real property involved in the same.
(B) Every public nuisance may be abated and the persons maintaining such nuisance and the possessors of the premises who permit the same to be
maintained may be enjoined from such conduct by an action in equity in the name of the city of Havre, a Montana municipal corporation, by the city
attorney or his deputy, filed in either city court or in justice or state court.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 70/135
(C) Upon the filing of the complaint in such action, the judge may issue a temporary injunction.
(D) In such action, evidence of the general reputation of the premises is admissible for the purpose of proving the existence of the nuisance.
(E) If the existence of the nuisance is established, an order of abatement shall be entered as part of the judgment in the case. The judge issuing the order
may, in his discretion:
1. Confiscate all fixtures used on the premises to maintain the nuisance and either sell them and transmit the proceeds to the city general fund, destroy
them, or return them to their rightful ownership;
2. Close the premises for any period not to exceed one year, during which period the premises shall remain in the custody of the court;
3. Allow the premises to be opened upon posting bonds sufficient in the amount to assure compliance with the order of abatement. The bonds shall be
forfeited if the nuisance is continued or resumed.
4. Revoke all licenses or permits issued to him or to the structures on the property which has been declared a nuisance. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-18: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of any section of this chapter, any license previously issued to him by the municipality may be revoked by the court, by the
director of public works where appropriate or by the city council of the city. (Ord. 712,5-2-1983)
8-5-19: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the director of public works or his authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation or a violation of any city
ordinance which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the director of public works or his authorized representative may enter
such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the director of public works by any ordinance
or code of the city; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such building
or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the director of public works or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry including that remedy allowed by this section.
When the director of public works or his authorized representative shall have first obtained the proper inspection warrant or any other remedy provided by
law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper
request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection
and examination for violations of this chapter or any violation of any code or ordinance of the city. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
8-5-20: SEARCH WARRANT:
The city judge is authorized to issue inspection warrants to authorize searches of any building or premises or other area for evidence of violations of this
chapter or any other ordinance or code of the city in the same manner and form as is provided for criminal search warrants.
This authority is in addition to and shall be cumulative with any authority conferred upon the city court for the issuance of inspection warrants or other
remedies by any other ordinance or code of the city or state or federal law. (Ord. 712, 5-2-1983)
Chapter 6
DRAINS
8-6-1: DRAINS FOR WASHRACKS:
Any garage or other building wherein automobiles or other vehicles are washed for hire and the water from such washings is permitted to and does drain
into the city sewers, shall be so equipped that mud, dirt, grease and other refuse resulting from the washing of such automobiles and other vehicles are
not permitted to enter such sewer.
Every person who washes automobiles or other vehicles for hire in any garage or other building within the city shall equip the rack or place where such
washing is done with such appliance or appliances for the purpose mentioned in this section as shall meet the approval of the engineer. (Ord. 204, 1955)
8-6-2: DISPOSAL OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE:
In order to protect the health and welfare of the residents of the city, all restaurants, service stations, garages and any and all other persons are hereby
prohibited from disposing of any fats, oils and greases, including vegetable, animal and mineral fats, oils and greases, by depositing said fats, oils and
greases in any manner whatever in any storm sewer or sanitary sewer within the city. (Ord. 435, 7-2-1951)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 71/135
Chapter 1
SIDEWALKS
9-1-1: COUNCIL MAY ORDER CONSTRUCTION:
Whenever it is deemed necessary to construct any cement sidewalks and curbs in the City, the Council may, by an order duly made and entered upon its
minutes, order the construction of such sidewalks and curbs, specifying in such order the names of the streets along which and the number of the lots or
blocks in front of which such sidewalks and curbs are to be constructed. (Ord. 422, 3-30-1950)
9-1-2: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
Upon the Council ordering the construction of any sidewalks or curbs, the Clerk or engineer shall immediately give written notice thereof to the holder of
the record title of the premises along which such sidewalks or curbs are to be constructed. Service of such notice must be made by letter, addressed to
such owner at his last known place of residence and deposited in the United States Post Office in this City, with postage prepaid thereon, and by
publication thereof once a week for a period of four (4) consecutive weeks in a paper published in the City.
If service of such notice be made by publication, all sidewalks and curbs ordered constructed by the Council on the same date may be included in one
notice, and such notice, when published, shall not be directed to any person but shall be entitled "Notice To Construct Sidewalks And Curbs".
Such notice shall refer to the order of the Council ordering the construction of such sidewalk and curb and shall fully describe the termins, cavice, length,
width and character of the sidewalk or curb ordered constructed, designating the name of the street along which and the number of the lots and blocks in
front of or along which such sidewalk or curb has been ordered constructed, and said notice shall state that if the holder of the second title of the property
in front of or along which such sidewalk or curb has been ordered constructed shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct such sidewalk or curb for a period of
thirty (30) days from and after the date of the first publication of such notice, if service thereof be made by publication, or for a period of thirty (30) days
from and after the date of mailing of such notice if service of such notice shall be made by mail, such sidewalk or curb will be constructed by the sidewalk
or curb contractor and the cost of the construction of the same, together with all the expenses connected therewith, will be assessed against the premises
in front of or along which the same has been ordered constructed and will become a lien thereon.
Copies of all notices mailed with the registry receipts attached thereto, and copies of all notices published with the publisher's affidavit of publication
attached thereto, shall be by the engineer filed in his office and shall be conclusive proof of the service thereof. (Ord. 422, 3-30-1950)
9-1-3: FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT:
If the owner of any premises in front of or along which any sidewalk or curb has been ordered constructed in the manner herein provided shall fail, neglect
or refuse to construct the same for a period of thirty (30) days after the date of the first publication of such notice, or for a period of thirty (30) days after the
date of mailing of such notice, the engineer may, by written order, direct the sidewalk and curb contractor to construct the same and said sidewalk and
curb contractor shall, within forty five (45) days after receiving such written order, construct and fully complete the same in accordance with the terms and
conditions of his contract with the city in force at the time of such construction, and the cost of such construction together with all expenses connected
therewith shall be assessed against the premises in front of or along which such sidewalk or curb is constructed and shall be collected in the manner
prescribed by law. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-4: CONSTRUCTION BY CONTRACT:
The construction of all sidewalks and curbs ordered constructed in the manner hereinbefore provided and which the owner of the premises in front of or
along which the same have been ordered constructed shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct, shall be by contract and the city shall, annually, let a
contract to the lowest responsible bidder for the construction of all sidewalks and curbs which shall be ordered constructed during the ensuing year and
which the owners of the premises in front of or along which the same has been ordered constructed shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct. Such sidewalk
or curb shall be constructed by such sidewalk or curb contractor, in accordance with the specifications and subject to the conditions contained in this
chapter and his contract, and all such constructions shall be under the immediate supervision and control of and to the satisfaction of the engineer. (Ord.
97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-5: BOND:
Such sidewalk and curb contractor shall execute a bond in the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) conditioned for the faithful
performance of all the terms and conditions of his contract, and shall also execute a bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) conditioned so as
to save harmless the city and also all owners of property along which or in front of which such contractors shall construct sidewalks or curbs under his said
contract from all loss or damages, whatsoever, by reason of or on account of any sidewalk or curb constructed by such sidewalk and curb contractor under
his contract becoming unsafe or defective, within two (2) years from the date of construction thereof, on account of materials used therein or workmanship
thereon.
Such bonds shall run to the city and shall be signed by at least two (2) resident freeholders within the city or by some bonding company authorized to
transact business in the state, and shall be approved by the mayor and city attorney.
Actions may be maintained upon the last mentioned bond by either the city or by any person whomsoever who shall suffer any loss or damage by reason
or on account of any sidewalk or curb constructed by such sidewalk and curb contractor becoming unsafe or defective within said two (2) year period on
account of materials used therein or workmanship thereon1. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-6: COST OF CONSTRUCTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 72/135
The total cost of all sidewalks and curbs constructed by the sidewalk and curb contractor, or that may be repaired by the engineer in accordance with the
orders of the council or in the maintenance of sidewalks and curbs (which total cost shall include that of the sidewalk and curb proper as well as that of any
notice, publication, inspection, grade, fill, handrailings, manholes, manhole covers, trap doors, private crossings and all other necessary expenditures),
together with interest at six percent (6%) per annum from the date of issuance of the warrant therefor, shall be assessed as a special tax against the
property in front of or along which any sidewalk or curb is built or constructed or repaired.
The property occupying street corners to be assessed for that part of such sidewalk or curb or repairs thereon lying within the street intersections. (Ord.
97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-7: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
It shall be the duty of the council to annually levy an assessment and tax for the payment of the principal and interest of all concrete sidewalk and curb
special fund warrants which may be issued by order of said council on and after the adoption of this chapter in payment for the construction of all concrete
sidewalks and curbs constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
All costs and expenses of building and constructing any and all cement and concrete sidewalks and curbs in the city, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, shall be defrayed by special assessment payable in installments and extending over a period of eight (8) years from and after the completion
of such sidewalk and the council for such installments may issue concrete sidewalk and curb special fund warrants. When one payment becomes
delinquent, the whole special assessment shall become so and the property shall be sold in the same manner as other property is sold for special
assessments. (Ord. 110, 6-3-1912)
9-1-8: CONFORMITY TO GRADE:
All sidewalks and curbs must conform with the established grade and sidewalk line to the satisfaction of the engineer, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to build or construct any sidewalk or curb until the grade therefor and line thereof shall be established and marked upon the ground by the
engineer. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-9: CONDEMNATION:
All sidewalks which are now or which may be by reason of natural deterioration or decay or by reason of unevenness, steps, rapid slopes or from any
cause whatsoever, become dangerous to the public safety, may be condemned by the engineer and may be by him immediately removed, remodeled or
repaired, as in his judgment may be most expedient and the cost thereof shall be assessed against and collected as a special tax upon the lot or lots
abutting upon such sidewalks. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-10: REMOVAL OF OLD SIDEWALK:
All old plank and concrete sidewalks upon the site of any proposed new concrete sidewalk shall be carefully removed and neatly piled up by the contractor
constructing such sidewalk upon the adjoining roadway or upon the adjoining lots, immediately within the near property line of the same, if requested by
the owner or tenant of the property in front of or along which new sidewalks are to be constructed.
The debris of all old sidewalks or crossways which are to be rebuilt by them shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed and
disposed of by him without extra cost. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-11: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks hereinafter constructed in the city shall be of the following width: sixteen feet (16') including a six inch (6") curb; twelve feet (12') including a
six inch (6") curb; eight feet (8') including a six inch (6") curb; and five feet (5').
In the business district the sixteen foot (16') sidewalk will be the standard, and in the residence districts, five foot (5') will be the standard. Other widths
herein mentioned may be used upon the advice of the engineer and the sidewalk committee or upon being ordered by them.
All five foot (5') and eight foot (8') walks in width shall be spaced every five feet (5') horizontal. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-12: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No cement sidewalks or curbs shall hereafter be constructed within the corporate limits of the city except in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications therefor on file in the office of the engineer. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-13: PERMIT:
No curb shall be constructed upon or along any residence street until the location thereof shall have been fixed by the council and a permit for the
construction thereof shall have been obtained from the engineer. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-14: ENTRANCES; STAIRWAYS:
No entrances to areaways and no outside stairways to basements shall be made or constructed unless permission therefor be first obtained from the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 73/135
council and when constructed shall be subject to the approval of the engineer, and in no case shall the entrance to any areaway or outside stairways to
basements be within five feet (5') of the corners of any buildings at street intersections.
All such entrances shall be provided with a substantial metallic railing and also with gates when required by the engineer, thoroughly guarding such
openings against accidents to the public and in no case shall such railings be provided with spikes or permanent angular or other projections. (Ord. 97, 8-
5-1910)
Outside stairways to basements or areaways shall be confined to that part of the sidewalk adjacent to the building line and shall not exceed three feet (3')
in width. (Ord. 124, 12-1-1913)
9-1-15: TRAP DOORS:
Trap doors in sidewalks for the moving of merchandise to and from the area spaces and cellars shall be substantially constructed of iron suitably
roughened and when closed shall be firm and unyielding and in strength equal to that required in the sidewalk proper and shall in no case be allowed to
project above or to be depressed below the surface of the surrounding sidewalk.
Coal holes or openings through sidewalks for the admission of coal, wood and light shall not exceed twenty four inches (24") in maximum dimensions and
shall be provided with cast iron (or other metallic) rims and covers suitably roughened having top surface of same set into the surface of the sidewalk, flush
with the top of the walk. Such cover may be cast solid or may have prismatic lights of glass set therein and in no case shall rings or ring bolts be allowed to
project above the surface of such sidewalk.
Trap doors, coal holes and all like openings shall at all times be kept closed and securely fastened from the lower side, except when in use. During such
time as they remain open, they shall be guarded by an attendant who shall remain continually thereby. Covers or rims that are not properly roughened or
that may have become smooth by the wear of street traffic or other causes must be removed and replaced by others in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-16: BARRICADES:
All contractors engaged in the construction or repairing of sidewalks must, during the time of construction or repairing and until such time as the walk is
open for traffic, keep the same constantly enclosed by a woven wire fence of sufficient height and so constructed as to prevent persons or animals from
crossing such walk, or walking on the same and must keep and maintain red lights burning thereon from sunset to sunrise and the engineer shall have
control over the same and may at any time require additional enclosures to be placed around the same or the enclosures to be made more substantial and
may require additional red lights to be placed thereon. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-17: TEMPORARY SIDEWALK:
All persons engaged in the construction or repairing of sidewalks shall construct and maintain a temporary sidewalk in the street, which temporary
sidewalk shall be of planks not less than two inches (2") thick, and shall not be less than three feet (3') in width, and shall extend from sidewalk to sidewalk
around such sections of sidewalk in course of construction or repair, and such temporary sidewalk shall be constructed before any work whatever is
commenced on the permanent walk and must not be removed until such permanent sidewalk is open to traffic. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-18: PROTECTING SIDEWALKS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Whenever any walk shall be removed for the purpose of excavating any premises or in the course of erection of any building, no building material shall be
placed on any portion of any sidewalk, or any sidewalk shall become obstructed on the account of the erection of any building or the placing of any
material thereon, the contractor doing such excavating or erecting such sidewalk which is to remain in such condition for a period of more than twenty four
(24) hours, immediately protect such sidewalk by good and substantial fence at each end thereof and must place and maintain red lights thereon between
sunset and sunrise and the engineer shall have control over the same and may at any time require additional fences to be erected or fences to be more
substantial or additional red lights to be placed thereon, and such contractor shall also construct and maintain a temporary sidewalk in the street, which
temporary sidewalk shall be of plank not less than two inches (2") thick and such sidewalk to be not less than three feet (3') in width, and must extend from
sidewalk to sidewalk around such removed or obstructed sidewalk and shall not be removed until such permanent sidewalk is open for traffic. (Ord. 97, 8-
5-1910)
9-1-19: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
Whenever any walk which has been constructed or repaired shall be open to traffic, the contractor constructing or repairing the same shall immediately
remove all enclosures and temporary walks around the same and shall clean up and remove all material, tools, apparatus and appliances and all waste
and debris caused by the construction or repairing of such walk and shall leave the street adjoining such sidewalk in as good order and condition as the
same was before such construction or repairing was begun. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-20: SUPERVISION:
The engineer, or such other person as the council may direct, shall at all times have direct supervision over the construction or repairing of all sidewalks
and curbs and may, at any time when sidewalks and curbs are not being constructed or repaired in accordance with the specifications covering the same,
have authority to order the contractor constructing or repairing such sidewalk or curb to suspend work thereon until such construction or repairing shall be
made to conform in all respects to the plans and specifications therefor. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-21: CERTIFICATE OF CONTRACTOR:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 74/135
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of building, constructing or repairing sidewalks or curbs within the city unless such firm shall
be the holder of a valid unsuspended certificate as a bonded sidewalk and curb contractor.
Upon the filing with the clerk of a bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with the approval of the mayor and city attorney endorsed thereon,
and upon the payment to the treasurer of a fee of five dollars ($5.00), the clerk shall issue to the person filing such bond and paying such fee, a certificate
as a bonded sidewalk and curb contractor which certificate shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the same is issued.
The bond provided for in this section shall run to the city or shall be signed by at least two (2) resident freeholders within the city or by some bonding
company authorized to transact business in this state, and such bond shall be conditioned so as to save harmless the city, and all persons for whom
sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed or repaired by such contractor while said while said certificate shall remain valid and outstanding from any or all
loss or damage by reason or on account of any such sidewalk or curb becoming defective or unsafe within two (2) years from the date of the construction
thereof on account of materials used therein or workmanship thereon.
Action may be maintained upon said bond by either the city or by any person whomsoever, who shall suffer any loss or damage by reason of or on
account of any sidewalk or curb constructed by such bonded sidewalk and curb contractor becoming unsafe or defective within two (2) years from the date
of the construction of such sidewalk or curb on account of materials used therein or workmanship thereon2. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-22: SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE:
The engineer may suspend the certificate of any contractor who shall construct any sidewalk or curb upon or along any grade or line other than those
established by the engineer or who shall deviate from the plans and specifications hereinbefore mentioned, or who shall build or construct any sidewalk or
curb without first obtaining from the engineer the proper grade therefor and location thereof, or who shall fail, neglect and refuse to comply with any of the
other provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful for any such contractor to engage in the business of building, constructing or repairing sidewalks or
curbs while such certificate shall remain suspended. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-23: REPORT OF SUSPENSION TO COUNCIL:
Upon the certificate of any bonded sidewalk and curb contractor being suspended by the engineer, such engineer must report the same in writing to the
council at its next regular meeting together with his reasons for such suspension, and the council may either revoke such certificate or withdraw such
suspension and if such certificate shall be revoked by the council, it shall thereafter be unlawful for such person to engage in the business of building,
constructing or repairing sidewalks or curbs under such revoked certificate. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-24: REPORT OF CONTRACTOR:
Every bonded sidewalk and curb contractor must, before the tenth day of each month, file with the engineer a report, on blanks to be furnished by him for
that purpose, showing all sidewalks and curbs constructed by him during the preceding month, giving a description of the lot or lots, block and addition in
front of or along which each piece of sidewalk or curb was constructed, the name of the street along which the same was constructed, the length and width
thereof, the name of the person for whom the same was constructed and the date when the walk or curb was completed. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-25: DUTY OF OWNER:
It shall be the duty of the owner or tenants of any premises within the limits of the city to keep the sidewalk in front of and adjoining their premises in good,
safe and substantial condition and repair and the owner or tenants shall see that all breaks or unsoundness of any character resulting from natural
deterioration or from any cause whatsoever are repaired with all possible dispatch. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-26: REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the limits of the city to keep the sidewalk in front of or adjoining his premises clean and safe for
pedestrians and with all possible dispatch to remove snow, ice and slush and other impediments to safe and convenient foot travel and to prevent the
continuance or accumulation of the same upon such sidewalk, and in no case in the business district of the city shall the snow, ice and slush or other such
material removed from such sidewalk be dumped, placed or deposited in the adjoining streets or avenues within two feet (2') of the curb line. Sidewalks, in
all cases, must be freed of the night's accumulation of snow, ice, slush, mud or other like impediments within twenty four (24) hours of such accumulation.
(Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-27: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and members of the police force to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and police officers shall immediately
report any broken, defective or unsafe sidewalk to the owner or tenant of the premises in front of or adjoining which such defect exists and notify him to
repair the same forthwith.
Police officers shall also report all such defects or unsafe sidewalks or crossings as well as the particulars of any accident that may occur by reason of any
defective or unsafe sidewalk or crossing and the names of witnesses and persons injured thereby, to the chief of police specifying the hour at which the
owner or tenant, as aforesaid, was notified to repair his walk, and the chief of police shall in turn notify the engineer thereof. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-28: FAILURE TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS, MAKE REPAIRS:
Upon the refusal or neglect of the owner or tenant of any premises to remove obstructions from or to make necessary repairs to the sidewalks in front of or
adjoining the same and when, in the opinion of the engineer, immediate repairs or the removal of obstructions is necessary to prevent accidents, said
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 75/135
engineer may immediately proceed with the same and the full cost of such repairs or removal of such obstruction shall be assessed against said premises
as hereinbefore provided.
Absence of notice to owners or tenants to repair dangerous or unsafe sidewalks or to remove obstructions therefrom shall not constitute a valid excuse
against the payment of any fines or damages or assessments by such owners or tenants and nothing contained in the preceding sections shall be
construed as to release the owners or tenants of real estate from the duty of keeping the sidewalk in front of or adjoining their respective premises in a
good and thorough state of repair, but such duty is hereby expressly enjoined and imposed upon all such owners or tenants. (Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-29: INJURING SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon, go over or across any sidewalk or curb or to ride or drive or cause to be driven any horse, cow or other
animal upon, over or across any sidewalk or curb in such a manner as to mark, deface or destroy any sidewalk or curb, or cause the same to be done.
(Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-30: CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
The designation "sidewalk and curb contractor", whenever used in this chapter, shall be deemed to mean the person having a contract with the city for the
construction of all sidewalks and curbs ordered by the council and which the owners of the premises in front of or along which same are ordered
constructed; while the designations "bonded sidewalk and curb contractor" and "contractor", wherever used in this chapter, shall be deemed to mean any
person who, having filed the proper bond and paid the necessary fee, has obtained from the clerk a certificate as a bonded sidewalk and curb contractor.
(Ord. 97, 8-5-1910)
9-1-31: ITEMS DISPLAYED ON SIDEWALKS; PERMIT, FEE:
(A) Goods, merchandise, and other inanimate items may be placed for sale or display on a sidewalk, by the owner or person in control of the premises
immediately adjacent to said sidewalk, in areas zoned commercial intermediate, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through six o'clock
(6:00) P.M., under a permit issued by the office of the director of public works.
(B) Such permit shall be for a period of no longer than three (3) months and shall be issued upon payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Successive
permits shall be allowed.
(C) Permits shall be issued upon an application therefor which states:
1. Applicant's name, and business name, if any.
2. Applicant's address.
3. Location of sidewalk used for display.
4. Description of goods, merchandise or items to be displayed.
(D) All goods, merchandise or other items must be placed and maintained adjacent to and within four feet (4') from the structure or inside edge of the
sidewalk. A walkway of at least five and one-half feet (51/2') must at all times be maintained next to the street. No item or display shall be closer than
four feet (4') to any corner or intersection of sidewalks, nor be more than five feet (5') above the level of the sidewalk. Nothing shall be placed on the
sidewalk which is, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, dangerous, offensive or does not qualify under this section.
(E) Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall also be grounds to revoke any permit issued hereunder and not to issue a further permit
for up to one year from the date of such violation.
(F) Unless a permit is issued under this section, or special permission of the Council is granted, any obstruction of sidewalks is prohibited as otherwise
provided for in this Code. (Ord. 726, 5-20-1985)
9-1-32: SIDEWALK SEATING PERMIT:
The Director of Public Works may establish a permitting process, assess a permit fee and issue permits to a restaurant or bar seeking to establish
sidewalk seating immediately adjacent to their building. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be at the discretion of the Director. (Ord. 904, 4-16-
2018)
Chapter 2
DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS
9-2-1: SUPERVISION:
The construction of concrete driveways and concrete crosswalks, used for private purposes, within street lines of the city shall be under the supervision
and direction of the engineer, his authorized assistant or duly appointed inspector. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 76/135
9-2-2: PERMITS; FEE:
(A) Before commencing the construction, modification or repair of any concrete driveway or concrete crosswalk, the contractor shall first obtain a written
permit from the office of the engineer.
(B) All applications for driveway and curb cut permits shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a detailed plan showing all the proposed construction
affecting traffic movements, including such information as the exact location of the property, the dimensions and property lines, the width of proposed
and existing driveways, and the radii involved.
(C) The application shall be filed with the engineer who shall examine such application and examine the site to determine compliance with this chapter and
all traffic flow and safety standards before granting such permit. Any and all exceptions and unusual applications shall be referred to the council, which
may authorize exceptions when they are deemed desirable and are not incompatible with public safety and welfare, and who may authorize that such
permit be issued.
(D) All applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by a permit fee computed at a rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per foot of
driveway applied for, payable to the city to help defray costs of inspection of site and engineering overhead. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-3: MATERIALS:
All driveways between the curb line and property line shall be constructed of a minimum of six inches (6") of two thousand four hundred (2,400) pound
Portland cement concrete at twenty eight (28) day test with six by six (6 x 6) no. 10 welded wire mesh and a minimum of four inches (4") approved gravel,
subbase, and constructed to the standards and specifications on file in the office of the engineer. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-4: RADIUS OF DRIVEWAYS:
All commercial driveways and all residential driveways, where the distance from the curb to the sidewalk is three feet (3') or more, shall have a radius of
four feet (4').
In residential areas where the sidewalk is placed adjacent to the curb, the driveway shall have a radius of two feet (2'). (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-5: MAXIMUM LENGTH:
The maximum length measured along the curb for residential driveways shall be ten feet (10') plus the radii for single driveways and twenty feet (20') plus
the radii for double driveways. Double driveways being designed to serve two (2) adjacent residential properties.
The total maximum length, measured along the curb, of commercial driveways shall be governed as follows:
(A) When only one driveway serves a given frontage of property abutting a street or an avenue, the maximum length of the driveway shall be thirty five feet
(35').
(B) When only one driveway serves a given property frontage, the total length of driveways shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the frontage, where
such frontage is one hundred feet (100') or less. Where the frontage is greater than one hundred feet (100'), the length of driveways shall not exceed
sixty percent (60%) of said frontage.
(C) A safety island of not less than twenty feet (20') shall, in all cases, be provided between driveways serving any one property. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-6: DRIVEWAY NOT TO EXCEED FRONTAGE:
In no case shall the driveway, including the radii, exceed the property frontage.
Frontage referred to includes areas directly in front of the property owned or under the control of the applicant, and suchareas in front of adjoining property
which is used for approach purposes. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-7: MERGING OF DRIVEWAY APPROACHES AND ALLEY INTERSECTIONS:
Driveway approaches located within five feet (5') of existing curb returns at an alley intersection may be merged with the alley intersection. The total
distance of the driveway length plus the alley width measured along the bottom of the driveway to the opposite alley line shall not exceed forty feet (40').
(Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
9-2-8: LOCATION OF DRIVEWAY:
Driveways shall be located far enough from the intersection so that the cars using them can cross the intersection in a normal traffic pattern. (Ord. 483, 3-
21-1960)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 77/135
9-2-9: INTERIOR ANGLE:
The interior angle between the axis of the driveway and center of the street shall fall between forty five degrees (45) and ninety degrees (90). (Ord. 483,
3-21-1960)
9-2-10: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or to fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its mandatory provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 483, 3-21-1960)
Chapter 3
OBSTRUCTING STREETS
9-3-1: OBSTRUCTIONS:
Whenever any street or alley or any portion thereof in the city shall be obstructed by any fence, building or structure of any kind and the council shall pass
a resolution that the said street or alley or any portion thereof shall be opened and the obstruction removed, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to
serve a true copy of the resolution upon the person, or his agent, who shall have placed or maintained such obstruction.
Any person so notified who shall fail or neglect to remove such obstruction from such street or alley for a period of more than three (3) days after such
notice, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk within the limits of the city by placing thereon or therein any buildings, sheds, tents or
building materials without first having obtained permission from the mayor or council, and any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4, 10-20-1904)
Chapter 4
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
9-4-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
All houses and places of business having an entrance from any street, avenue, alley or public highway within the city shall be numbered by the owner or
agent of said property within ten (10) days after notice so to do by the engineer or other officer authorized by the council, and all numbering shall be in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-2: BASE LINE ESTABLISHED:
Main Street is designated as the base line for numbering houses fronting on avenues and Montana Avenue is designated as the base line for numbering
houses fronting on streets; numbering on the avenues increases from north to south beginning with Main Street; numbering on streets increases from west
to east and from east to west from Montana Avenue. Streets extended westward from Montana Avenue shall have the prefix "west", and avenues
extended north from Main Street shall have the prefix "north". (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-3: DESIGNATION OF EVEN AND ODD NUMBERS:
Even numbers shall be on the west side of avenues and on the south sides of streets. Odd numbers shall be on the east side of avenues and on the north
side of streets. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-4: NUMBERS ASSIGNED:
To each space of fifteen (15) linear feet on any avenue, street, alley or public highway shall be assigned one full number, each entrance used as a dwelling
or place of business shall have a separate number, and each stairway from a street shall have a number, and where necessary one-half (1/2) or one-fourth
(1/4)numbers, as 3061/2 or 3061/4, may be used. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-5: PREFIXING NUMBERS:
To each numeral shall be prefixed the hundred assigned to the block wherein said number occurs, the hundreds being designated by the number of the
street or avenue. Each block increases one hundred (100) numbers from the base lines referred to in section 9-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-6: NAMING OF ALLEYS:
Every alley running east and west shall take the name of the street north of it, and every alley running north and south shall take the name of the avenue
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 78/135
west of it, and all alleys shall take the same numbers as the streets from which they are named. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-7: SIZE; MATERIAL:
All numbers shall not be less than three inches (3") long and shall be placed in a conspicuous place where same can be easily seen from the center of the
street or avenue upon which they are designated to serve. The numbers shall be of metal or some substance equally durable, or they may be worked into
stained glass or otherwise placed upon buildings in a workmanlike manner so as to be neat, durable and conspicuous. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-8: ENGINEER TO DESIGNATE; NOTICE:
The engineer shall designate the numbers of all buildings in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and any owner or agent of any building who is
ordered in writing by the engineer or officer authorized by the council to place a number on his building or change any number which said building may
have, shall do so within ten (10) days after receipt of said notice. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
9-4-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In case any owner or agent, after having been notified as aforesaid so to do, shall refuse or neglect for ten (10) days to number a building as required by
the foregoing provisions of this chapter, or so number or attempt to number such building otherwise than in conformity with this chapter and the
requirements of the engineer or officer authorized to perform such duty, such person shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 29,
8-10-1904)
9-4-10: DESTROYING HOUSE NUMBERS:
Any person destroying or defacing any house number shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 29, 8-10-1904)
Chapter 5
AIRCRAFT
9-5-1: AIRCRAFT REGULATED:
The public safety requiring and the advantages of uniform regulation making it desirable in the interest of aeronautical progress that aircraft operating
within the airport of the city should conform with respect to air worthiness to the standards and requirements of the civil air regulations now or hereafter
described by the civil aeronautics authority of the United States regarding certifications of aircraft, and it shall be unlawful for any person to navigate an
aircraft within the airport of the city, to take off therefrom, or land thereon, with such aircraft, unless it is licensed and registered by the said civil aeronautics
authority of the United States. (Ord. 360, 1-15-1940)
Chapter 6
NUISANCE WEEDS
9-6-1: NUISANCE WEEDS DEFINED:
The term "nuisance weeds" shall mean all weeds, grass, wild vegetation and other uncared for vegetation growing to a height in excess of eight inches
(8") on property located within the boundaries of the city, and any other untended vegetation creating a potential fire hazard, visual or physical obstruction
for pedestrians or vehicles, potential for the spread of said vegetation or unsightly conditions. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
9-6-2: NUISANCE WEEDS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity (herein "owner") shall be guilty of the offense of maintaining a public nuisance if such person or entity causes,
permits or otherwise allows nuisance weeds to exist in or on any property within the boundaries of the city owned by such owner, or on the boulevards or
the one-half (1/2) of any public roads, streets and alleys immediately adjacent to such owner's property. Any such offense shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, punishable under the general penalty provisions of title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
9-6-3: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The director of public works (herein "director"), or the director's authorized representative, shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. On determination that a violation of this chapter exists, the director shall determine the description of the property on which nuisance weeds exist,
and the name and last known mailing address of the owner. In determining the name and mailing address of such owner, the director may rely on
information obtained from the current assessment list maintained by the office of the assessor of Hill County, Montana, or any other records available to
the city. The director shall then serve written notice of violation on such owner, as provided in section 9-6-4 of this chapter, directing the owner to cut and
remove the nuisance weeds from the subject property within ten (10) days of such notice. If such owner fails or refuses to cut and remove the nuisance
weeds to the satisfaction of the director, then the director shall cause the nuisance weeds to be removed from the subject property with the cost of such
removal to be charged to such owner as provided in section 9-6-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 79/135
9-6-4: NOTICE PROCEDURE:
(A) Written notice of violation shall provide at a minimum:
1. Name and address of the owner in violation of section 9-6-2 of this chapter;
2. All owners of real property are responsible for destroying all nuisance weeds in prohibited areas by extermination, removal, or cutting not later than
April 30 of each year and to keep the areas free of weeds through September 30 of that year;
3. Failure to remove the nuisance weeds within ten (10) days will result in the city removing the weeds and charging the owner costs of removal;
4. Owner will receive only one violation notice per year, and the city will remove or cut the weeds again as needed without any additional notice to the
owner; and
5. Owner bears the cost of all nuisance weed removal performed by the city.
(B) Written notice of violation shall be served in the following manner:
1. If the subject property is occupied by the owner, notice shall be either personally served on such owner or mailed to such owner at the owner's last
known address, by first class United States mail;
2. If the subject property is not occupied by the owner, notice shall be mailed to the owner at the owner's last known address, by first class United
States mail;
3. Such notice shall be deemed complete on the day of personal service or on the day such notice is deposited in any United States post office. (Ord.
888, 7-7-2014)
9-6-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
(A) In the event the owner fails to remove nuisance weeds within ten (10) days of receiving the violation notice as provided in this chapter, the director
shall cause such nuisance weeds to be cut and removed.
(B) If the owner of any parcel continues to allow nuisance weeds to grow in violation of this chapter after the city has already exterminated, removed, or cut
nuisance weeds at that same parcel during the preceding twelve (12) months, the city may at its sole discretion exterminate, remove or cut the weeds
again as needed without any additional notice to the owner. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
9-6-6: APPEAL:
In the event an owner disagrees with a notice of violation, the owner may appeal a violation notice to the public works director within ten (10) days of
receiving the violation notice. Such appeal must be in writing and must set forth the specific reasons why the violation notice is not well taken, or why the
owner is unable to comply with the provisions of this chapter. For good cause shown, or in cases of extreme hardship, the public works director may make
a determination that the provisions of this chapter are inapplicable to a certain parcel. Decisions of the public works director are final, and subject only to
judicial review. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
9-6-7: COSTS OF REMOVAL; ASSESSMENT OF SPECIAL TAX:
The costs of such removal may be based on going rates for labor and equipment used for similar purposes, together with a reasonable charge for
administration and supervision, all of which will be charged to the owner of the subject property by mailing a bill or statement to the owner at the owner's
last known address. The minimum charge to be assessed by the director for removal of nuisance weeds shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). If the
owner refuses or fails to pay such charges on receipt of the bill or statement, the director shall certify such unpaid charges to the city council who shall, by
resolution, assess and levy such unpaid charges as a special tax against the subject property. Such resolution shall be adopted by the city council on or
before the second Monday of August of each year and may be included in one or more similar resolutions adopted by the city council for other special tax
assessments. The city clerk must at once certify a copy of such resolution to the Hill County clerk for collection of such special tax in the same manner as
other city taxes and assessments are collected. (Ord. 888, 7-7-2014)
Chapter 7
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms and their derivatives shall have the meanings herein given (and
when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in
the singular number include the plural):
BASIC CATV SERVICE: The distribution of broadcast television signals by the grantee.
CATV: A cable television system.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: A system composed of, without limitation, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or any other conductors,
converters, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 80/135
radio, television or other electronic or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers and locations in the franchise area.
CITY: The local government of the city of Havre, state of Montana.
COUNCIL: The governing body of the city.
FRANCHISE AREA: That area within the geographic limits of the city.
GRANTEE: A cable company that has been granted the right to provide services to the city.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES: Include total revenues from basic CATV services, and total revenues from HBO and/or any other pay TV
programming, but shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed on any subscriber or user by any government, governmental
unit, political subdivision, agency or instrumentality, and collected by the grantee.
PERSON: Any natural person, company or entity of any kind.
PROPERTY OF GRANTEE: All property owned, installed or used by the grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city.
STREET: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, way, place, right of way, road, highway, freeway, bridge, tunnel, lane, path, bike
path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, communications or utility easement, by whatever name called, now or hereafter existing as such within the
franchise area.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person or entity receiving and paying for basic CATV service. (Ord. 825, 3-16-1998; amd. Ord. 883, 8-5-2013)
9-7-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
There is hereby granted by the city to the grantee the right and privilege to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system within the
city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street
or streets laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the franchise area, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit,
vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in
addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, including, but not limited to, any public utility or
other grantee franchised or permitted to do business within the city. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-3: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
The right to use and occupy said streets for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive in the grantee. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-4: FAVORED NATIONS:
In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity
other than the grantee for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the franchise area which
contains terms more favorable to such person or entity in any regard than similar provisions of this chapter, then this chapter shall be deemed amended as
of the effective date of the other franchise, permit, license authorization or other agreement, so as to give the grantee the benefit of any such more
favorable terms. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-5: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The franchise and rights herein granted shall commence thirty (30) days after the final passage hereof and shall continue in full force and effect for twenty
(20) years after said effective date. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-6: CONDITION OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
(A) All transmission and distribution structures, poles, lines, and equipment installed or erected by the grantee within the franchise areas shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
any of the said streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with applicable governmental construction and electrical
codes.
(B) In case of disturbance of any street or paved area, the grantee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such
street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore.
(C) The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street
or other public place any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacating, freeway
and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or any other type of structures or
improvements by the city; but the grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property subject to city ordinances, and, if public funds
are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the
grantee.
(D) The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings, provided:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 81/135
1. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in
advance; and
2. The grantee is given not less than three (3) business days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(E) The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging any streets in the franchise area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with
the grantee's wires and cables, except that, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the
grantee's expense.
(F) Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the city shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles
or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any street, provided:
1. Such use by the city does not interfere with the use by the grantee; and
2. The city holds the grantee harmless against and from all claims, demands, causes of actions, suits, actions, proceedings, damages, costs or
liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-7: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
(A) The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failure
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.
(B) All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained in a safe
and suitable condition and in good order and repair. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-8: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSION:
(A) The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the system within the franchise area to the extent that such extension is or may become technically and
economically feasible.
(B) Whenever the grantee shall have received written requests for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers within four hundred (400) cable meters
(1,300 cable feet) of its aerial trunk cable, or from at least twenty five (25) subscribers within four hundred (400) cable meters (1,300 cable feet) of its
underground trunk cable, it shall extend its system to such subscribers solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that
such extension is technically and economically feasible. The four hundred meters (400 m) shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable
required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of grantee's cable required for service located within the
public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary drop to the subscriber's home or premises.
(C) No person in the grantee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual circumstances,
including, without limitation, instances when the distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than forty five meters
(45 m) (150 cable feet) or when a subscriber density exists less than the density specified hereinabove, services may be made available on the basis
of costs of materials, labor and easements, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on cable subscribers in more densely populated areas.
(D) For all residential structures hereinafter erected which are to be served by underground utilities, the developer of the subdivision or development may
acquire CATV service for this development under the following conditions (but otherwise the grantee shall not be obligated to construct CATV system in
such new development): developer shall perform all trenching and backfilling necessary for the provision of cable television service, in compliance with
the provisions of subsection 4-2-4(A) of this code, including the furnishing of any imported backfill material required, and will furnish and install for the
grantee any necessary distribution conduit and substructures, including pedestals, required in accordance with the grantee's plans and specifications.
Developer may enter into a written agreement with the grantee whereby such costs may be reimbursed to the developer by grantee at the rate of fifty
percent (50%) of the basic subscriber revenues generated from CATV service supplied within the development over a period not to exceed three (3)
years.
In addition to providing plans and specifications to the developer, the grantee shall inspect the facilities required hereunder, and certify to the city, prior
to final approval of the subdivision or development, that the facilities required herein are properly installed. The city shall have the right to review and
require its approval of the maps and specifications provided by the grantee. The cost of that portion of an extension to a subdivision or development
from the grantee's existing facilities in excess of sixty meters (60 m) (200 feet) outside the boundaries of the subdivision or development shall be borne
by the developer.
Facilities installed hereunder shall be owned, operated, and maintained by grantee. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-9: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS; FORCE MAJEURE:
(A) The grantee shall operate and maintain its cable television system in full compliance with the standards set forth by the federal communications
commission.
(B) The grantee shall have no obligation to construct or extend the system, nor to provide, repair, replace, maintain or operate CATV service, for any cause
beyond grantee's control, including, without limitation, acts of God, fire, flood, earthquakes, hurricane, unavoidable casualty, extraordinary delays in
transportation, strikes, lockouts, picketing, boycotts, embargos, government orders or other requirements, acts of civil commotion, energy shortages,
acts or omissions of carriers, or activities or other emergency conditions including weather conditions incompatible with good quality workmanship.
(Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 82/135
9-7-10: LOCAL OFFICE, COMPLAINTS:
The grantee shall maintain a local business office or agent which subscribers may telephone during regular business hours without incurring added
message or toll charges, so that complaints regarding cable television operations may be promptly reported to the grantee. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-11: RATES:
The grantee shall maintain, on file with the city clerk, a schedule setting forth all rates and charges to be made to subscribers for basic CATV service, HBO
(Home Box Office) and/or any other pay TV programming, including connection and service charges. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-12: FRANCHISE PAYMENTS:
The grantee shall pay the city, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, a franchise fee of four and one-half percent (4.5%) of gross subscriber
revenues received for cable television operations within the city during the preceding calendar month, and no other fee, charge or consideration. The
grantee shall provide an annual summary report showing gross subscriber revenues received, by month, during the preceding year. (Ord. 825, 3-16-1998)
9-7-13: INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY:
(A) The grantee shall at all times protect and hold the city harmless from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damages of every kind and
description, including investigation costs, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person or
persons arising out of negligence of the grantee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of said cable television
system and by reason of any license, copyright, property right or patent of any article or system used in the construction or use of said system,
provided the city gives the grantee prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitation, in writing. The grantee shall maintain in full
force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability and property damage insurance for an amount of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) single limit liability from the time of commencement of construction of the CATV system.
All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any type of coverage. The city
may require that any and all investigation of claims made by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuse of privileges granted to the
grantee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of, the grantee or its insurer. The grantee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance
required hereby within the coverage of any so called blanket policy or policies of insurance on or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment,
endorsement or otherwise, provided, however, the interests of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the grantee had obtained individual
policies of insurance. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-14: PROCEDURES:
(A) Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation, or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the city in regard to the operations of the grantee's cable
television system, shall be taken only after thirty (30) days' written notice to the grantee of such action or proposed action, and the grantee has been
given an opportunity to respond in writing and at any hearing which may be specified by the city.
(B) The notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or
persons in authority to whom such responses should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the city. If a hearing is to be
held, the notice shall give the date and the time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such
participation may be obtained. The grantee shall be a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-15: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's
franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of section 626 of the cable act (as such existed as of the effective date of the cable act),
unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any
subsequent provision of federal or state law.
In addition to the procedures set forth in said section 626(a), the franchising authority agrees to notify grantee of its preliminary assessments regarding the
identity of future cable related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of grantee under the then current franchise term. The
franchising authority further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period
referred to in section 626(c) is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this paragraph, the grantee and franchising
authority and grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the franchising authority may
grant a renewal thereof. The grantee and the franchising authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions
of section 626 of the cable act. A reproduction of section 626 of the cable act as such existed as of the effective date of the cable act is attached to the
ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof by reference. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-16: CONDITIONS OF SALE:
If a renewal of grantee's franchise is denied and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully
effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the
basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.
If grantee's franchise is lawfully revoked for cause and the franchising authority acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions effects a transfer
of ownership of the cable system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at any equitable price. Grantee and franchising authority
agree that in the case of a revocation, at grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 83/135
effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as an ongoing
concern. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the
terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of
such revocation. If, at the end of that time, grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system, which is reasonably
acceptable to the franchising authority, grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state
law; it being further agreed that grantee's continued operation of its cable system during the six (6) month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor
an extinguishment of any rights of either the franchising authority or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this paragraph,
neither the franchising authority nor the grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-17: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee's right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without the prior
consent of the franchising authority, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by
mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure
indebtedness. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-18: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
(A) When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk.
(B) In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during
the emergency or disaster period. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-19: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
The grantee shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city. The city reserves the right to
adopt from time to time in addition to the provisions herein contained such ordinances as may be necessary to the exercise of police power. Such
regulation shall be reasonable and not in derogation of the rights herein granted, nor in conflict with the laws of the state or other local or federal laws or
regulations. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-20: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
(A) From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street within the
city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is
designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city any equipment or facilities for distributing
any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been
obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any
part of the franchised CATV system within the city for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, sound, or
other transmission without payment to grantee.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, wilfully to tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for
distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, sound or other transmission.
(D) Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and for each day of violation or
failure to comply may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or
both. Jurisdiction for such violation shall be in the city court of Havre. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
9-7-21: LINE SEVERING:
If at any time the grantee's cable and/or other equipment is disturbed, damaged, or severed, the cost of repair shall be paid by the party responsible for
said damage. The grantee may charge the responsible party for the time and materials expended for repair of said damage. The city will cooperate with
the grantee to assist in enforcing any charge or penalty arising from cable severing or other damage to grantee's property. (Ord. 759, 10-3-1988)
Chapter 8
TREES
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of both the public citizenry and the trees within the city of Havre. This chapter
establishes policies necessary to ensure the city will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. This chapter is intended to establish just
and fair standards and regulations to control planting, planning, maintenance, removal, and protection of trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody
vegetation, within the public right of way and public place. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 84/135
(A) Eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using public areas within the city;
(B) Prevent damage to public water and sewer lines, streets, sidewalks or other public properties;
(C) Maintain city trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through approved and recognized arboricultural practices and standards;
(D) Promote and enhance the natural beauty of the city;
(E) Make clear the parties responsible for tree issues in the community;
(F) Guard all trees in the city against the spread of disease or pests;
(G) Establish and maintain the maximum sustainable amount of tree cover on public and private lands within the city; and
(H) Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-2: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
This chapter applies to all park and street trees and any private property trees that encroach on public right of way, or create conditions that are hazardous
to public safety, health, property, or other trees within the city. The provisions of this chapter and specification manual pertaining to planting or species of
trees shall not apply to any tree existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing trees and to
all trees planted or growing after adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in their present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" means mandatory and not merely discretionary.
CITY: The city of Havre, Montana.
DEPARTMENT: The department of parks and recreation.
MAINTENANCE: Preserving from decline. Including, but not limited to, pruning, removal, fertilizing, insect and disease control, guying, cabling, bracing
and repair.
NOTICE: A written announcement of maintenance work or remedial actions that are to be carried out.
PARK TREES: All trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation on city owned, leased, managed, or occupied land other than street trees.
PERSON: Any individual, contractor, partnership, joint venture, association, other entity, or organization of any kind. Does not include the city or any of its
departments.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TREES: All trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation on privately owned land.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person or persons owning such property as is shown by the records of the clerk and recorder's office of Hill County, Montana.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The entire width between the dedicated boundaries of all public streets, roads, boulevards, and alleys, including all sidewalks
and public parking strips located within any such boundaries.
REMEDIAL ACTION: To remedy a hazard, potential hazard or problematic condition existing in a tree by performing maintenance.
STREET TREES: All trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation on land located on either side of all dedicated public streets, avenues or rights of
way within the city.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal tree canopy and disfigure the tree. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
The city tree commission shall develop and maintain a specifications manual to accompany this chapter. The specifications manual shall address issues
pertaining to safety, planting, removal, spacing, protection, and clearance of all street trees and private property trees encroaching into the public right of
way. The specifications manual shall also include a list of desirable trees suitable for planting along streets and a list of those species which shall be
prohibited in these locations. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PROPERTY OWNER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 85/135
A property owner is responsible for the watering, care, and maintenance of any street trees adjacent to that property owner's property. A property owner is
responsible and remains liable for damages or injury to persons or property caused by dangerous conditions existing on that property owner's property
and public properties under his/her control. Further and more specific responsibilities of the property owner may be found in the specifications manual.
(Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-6: INSPECTION AND OTHER DUTIES:
With permission, city employees or other agents may enter upon private premises at a reasonable time for the purposes of carrying out the duties
assigned to them under this chapter. The employee or agent shall advise the occupants, if any, of the premises of the purpose of his or her visit before
making the inspection. Upon finding violation of this chapter, the employee or agent may issue a notice or citation for the violation found. (Ord. 873, 11-1-
2010)
9-8-7: HAZARDS AND NUISANCES:
The department shall have the right to treat or remove any street tree or private property tree constituting a hazard to health, property, safety to the general
public, or any public street, public utility line, sidewalk, or other public area. Hazards and nuisances may be defined but not limited to: trees or tree
vegetation that is dead, dying, broken, split, or obstructs the sight of traffic or traffic signs, roots that damage sidewalks, curbs or public streets by causing
them to buckle or break or roots entering into public sewers or water mains. If the department determines any private property tree is creating a hazard or
nuisance, the department shall issue a notice in writing to the responsible property owner of such tree, and the remedial action to be taken by the owner, at
the owner's expense. The responsible property owner must complete the required work within thirty (30) days after the date of service of notice. Seasonal
weather conditions shall be taken into consideration when putting forth a time frame for required work to be completed. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-8: DISEASED AND INFESTED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The department shall have the right to treat or remove any street tree or private property tree within the city that is infected with disease or infested by
insects and constitutes a hazard to health, property, safety to the general public. This includes trees that harbor insects or disease constituting a potential
threat to other trees within the city. If the department determines any private property tree is diseased or infested, the department shall issue a notice in
writing to the responsible property owner of such trees, and the remedial action to be taken by the owner, at the owner's expense. The responsible
property owner must complete the required work within thirty (30) days after the date of service of notice. Seasonal weather conditions shall be taken into
consideration when putting forth a time frame for required work to be completed. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-9: TOPPING TREES:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any park tree or street tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at the determination of the tree commission. (Ord. 873,
11-1-2010)
9-8-10: PRUNING STANDARDS:
All persons and city departments shall prune park trees and street trees in accordance with accepted industry standards. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-11: VANDALISM OR DAMAGE TO TREES:
It is unlawful for any person to abuse, injure, mutilate, destroy, or kill any park tree or street tree, or to permit any animal under his or her control to do so.
Unlawful conduct shall include, but not be limited to: permitting any fire to injure any portion of any park tree or street tree; permitting any toxic chemical to
seep, drain, or to be emptied on or around any park tree or street tree; impeding the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any park tree or
street tree; or any general destruction or mutilation by whatever means. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-12: PERMITS TO PRUNE, PLANT, OR REMOVE STREET TREES:
Permits shall be required for persons seeking to engage in any of the following activities:
(A) Planting or removing any street trees;
(B) Pruning live branches over three inches (3") in diameter on any street tree;
(C) Spraying, injecting, guying, cabling, or bracing of any street tree; or
(D) Excavating, trenching, placing fill or disrupting soil within the critical root zone of any street tree.
Permits for the purpose of pruning and general tree maintenance may be issued by the department. Permits for the purpose of removing street trees shall
be issued by the city tree commission. All permits shall be obtained free of charge and have a window of thirty (30) calendar days until expiration. (Ord.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 86/135
873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-13: REPLACING REMOVED PARK AND STREET TREES:
Street trees that are removed through the permit process at the property owner's discretion that are not dead, dying, chronically infected with disease,
infested with insects, or deemed hazardous, shall be replaced on a one for one basis, within one year. In the event the site cannot accommodate a
replacement tree or the site is deemed no longer suitable for planting, the replacement tree may either be installed in public or park land, another
boulevard area, or the cost of replacement contributed to the city at the sole discretion of the department of parks and recreation. The party responsible for
any such removal shall bear the cost of replacing the tree pursuant to the determination of the department. Replacement trees shall be at minimum two
inches (2") in diameter and five feet (5') in height. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-14: STOP WORK ORDER:
The department may order the cessation of work being conducted on street trees when such work constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
Other official representatives of the city may order the cessation of any work to any tree, shrub or other vegetation when such work is being performed in
an unsafe manner that is deemed threatening to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, or threatening to other properties. The city may further
direct whatever action is reasonably necessary to resume work in a safe manner and in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-15: TREE SERVICE CONTRACTING:
All contractors and any person being paid a fee for work being performed in the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, and
otherwise treating or performing maintenance work on park trees or street trees in the city shall register annually with the city tree commission and be
required to do the following:
(A) Maintain minimum commercial liability insurance in the amount as set forth by the city tree commission;
(B) Sign a waiver indemnifying the city or any persons injured or damages resulting from the pursuit of endeavors, as herein described; and
(C) Sign an affidavit stating that he or she has received and read the city of Havre tree ordinance and specifications manual, and agrees to perform
according to industry standards, as described by the following publications:
1. American National Standards Institute ANSI A300 trees, shrubs, and other woody plant management, standard practices;
2. American National Standards Institute ANSI Z-133.1 safety requirements for arboricultural operations; and
3. International Society Of Arboriculture "ISA Tree Pruning Guidelines". (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-16: APPEAL FROM ORDER OF DEPARTMENT:
Any disagreement with a decision of the department concerning a violation or the implementation of the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the
city tree commission for further review. Appeals must be filed in writing to the department within ten (10) calendar days after the date of service of notice.
Persons or their representatives must present their disputes either in person or in writing at the next meeting of the city tree commission, where the
commission will then make a ruling. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-17: REVIEW BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
Any disagreement with a decision, order, or fine of the city tree commission may be yet further appealed to the city council for review. Appeals must be
filed in writing to the department within ten (10) calendar days after ruling is made. The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decision of the city tree commission. Decisions or rulings of the city council concerning disputes as herein described shall be final. (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
9-8-18: PENALTIES:
In the event a person abuses a park or street tree in violation of this chapter, the violator shall be responsible to undertake maintenance and/or other
remedial action the city determines is reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety and property, and to help the tree survive and recover from the
damage incurred. Remedial action and replacement required under this section for a first violation shall be completed within thirty (30) days of notice from
the city that such actions are required. If the natural habit of growth of the tree is destroyed, the violator may be issued a notice to remove the abused tree
and install a replacement tree or pay for the cost of replacement.
The city may require the violator to immediately undertake remedial action in the event the abused tree is an immediate threat to the public or property. If
the city, in its best judgment and sole discretion, deems the violator is not competent to, or cannot safely carry out the required remedial work, the city may
perform the necessary work with costs being subject to the violator. If a person refuses or neglects an issued notice, after the notice has expired, the city
may carry out the work required therein, with costs being subject to that person.
Any subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any such violation such person
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 873, 11-1-2010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 87/135
Title 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of the
municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police.
CONGESTED DISTRICTS: All streets or parts of streets within the following boundaries:
First Street on the north to Third Street on the south.
Second Avenue on the west and Fifth Avenue on the east.
In all cases, the entire width of the street or avenue mentioned shall be included within the congested districts.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections, or any other portion of a
roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more streets
or highways which join one another at an angle whether or not such street or highway crosses the other.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every "vehicle", as herein defined, which is self-propelled.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS: All signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for
the purpose of directing, warning or regulated traffic.
OPERATOR: Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and whileactually engaged in
loading or unloading, or in obedience of traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use, of the street or highway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb lines or that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Every way set apart for public travel, except footpaths.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using streets for purposes of
travel.
TRAILER: Every "vehicle", as defined herein, including without limitation, vehicles commonly known as camper trailers, travel trailers, boat trailers, utility
trailers, horse trailers, flatbed trailers, car haulers, and all other types and kinds of trailers. For purposes of sections 10-6-13 and 10-6-14 of this title, the
term "trailer" shall specifically include those recreational motorized vehicles commonly known as motor homes, bumper towed campers and fifth wheel
trailers.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 355, 3-1-1943; amd. Ord. 848, 9-20-2004)
Chapter 2
AUTHORITY OF POLICE
10-2-1: POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
It shall be the duty of the police department of this city to enforce the provisions of this title. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this title; provided, that in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire departments may direct traffic, as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of this title. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 88/135
10-2-2: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS:
The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this title and to make and enforce
temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-2-4: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the U.S. government, this state, county or city, and it
shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-2-5: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in
chapter 1 of this title, while the driverof such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption
shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety to others. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-2-6: PUSHCARTS, BICYCLES OR ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions of this title with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except
those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
10-3-1: TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
(A) The council shall by resolution determine and designate the character or type of all traffic signs and signals.
Subject to this selection, the chief of police is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his duty, to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs and signals. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city.
(B) No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator, if, at the time and place of the alleged violation the
sign herein required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does
not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any operator to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this title,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-3-2: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view any official
traffic sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered
to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-3-3: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully deface, injure,move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign, signal or to deface parking marks or lines
on any street. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-3-4: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish and to designate and shall thereafter maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices,
marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 89/135
10-3-5: DESIGNATION OF SAFETY ZONES AND LANES FOR TRAFFIC:
(A) The chief of police is hereby empowered to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(B) The chief of police is hereby empowered to determine those intersections at which operators of vehicles shall not make a left turn or U-turn and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 4
PEDESTRIANS
10-4-1: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY:
(A) The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk, or within any unmarked
crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control signals, or at
any point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing has been provided.
(B) Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(C) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk shall yield the right of way to vehicles upon the
roadway; provided, that this provision shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of pedestrians. (Ord. 385,
3-1-1943)
10-4-2: RIGHTS AND DUTIES AT CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS:
At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by police officers, operators of vehicles shall yield the right of way to pedestrians
crossing or those who have started to cross the roadway on a green or "go" signal, and in all other cases pedestrians shall yield the right of way to
vehicles lawfully proceeding directly ahead of a "go" signal. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-4-3: PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT ONE-HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right one-half (1/2) of crosswalks. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-4-4: PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any privatevehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 5
RAILROAD TRAINS
10-5-1: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any train or vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the
vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-5-2: BLOCKING STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any steam or street railway train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in
such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes, except that this provision shall
not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 6
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10-6-1: STOPPING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 90/135
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal:
(A) Within an intersection.
(B) On a crosswalk.
(C) Within twenty five feet (25') from the intersection of curb lines, or, if none, then within fifteen feet (15') of the intersection of property lines at an
intersection except at alleys.
(D) Within fifteen feet (15') of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
(E) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
(F) In front of a private driveway.
(G) On a sidewalk.
(H) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-2: STANDING FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING IN CERTAIN PLACES:
(A) The chief of police and police committee shall have authority to determine the location of passenger zones and loading zones and shall erect and
maintain or cause to be maintained signs indicating the same.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park a vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case
shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable between
the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-3: DESIGNATION OF BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS:
The chief of police and police committee are authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets in such places and
in such manner as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop and taxicab stand shall be
designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-4: WHEN PARKING IN BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, or for any vehicle other than a
taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop
or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-5: BUSES AND TAXICABS TO PARK IN DESIGNATED STANDS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any street in any business district, at any place other than at a bus stop or
taxicab stand respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with the
other parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-6: PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
(A) (Rep. by Ord. 519, 8-1-1966)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an alley except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any vehicle from
temporarily stopping in an alley for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or property, provided, that there is left
available and sufficient space to permit the free movement of traffic past the stopped vehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
(C) (Rep. by Ord. 892, 8-17-2015)
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any operator shall not park a vehicle with the left hand wheels adjacent to the left hand side of the street.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 91/135
(E) Upon those streets designated as one-way streets, an operator may park a vehicle with the left hand wheels adjacent to the left hand side of the street.
(Ord. 841, 3-18-2002)
10-6-7: STANDING OR PARKING TOO CLOSE TO CURB:
(A) Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the operator of a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the
edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within six inches (6") of the edge of the roadway,
except as provided in the following subsections:
1. Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks
or signs.
2. In places where, and at hours when, stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the
transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit
granting him such special privilege, and provided further, that such permit shall be either in the possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the
time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permits.
(B) The chief of police and police committee shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or
cause the same to be marked or signed.
(C) The chief of police and police committee are hereby authorized to issue, to any owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials, a
special permit, renewable annually, and to state therein the terms and conditions thereof, allowing the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading
and unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if in the opinion of the chief of police such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct
of the owner's business and will not seriously interfere with traffic. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-8: PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle displayed for sale. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-6-9: USING VEHICLE FOR DISPLAYING ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 851, 12-19-2005)
10-6-10: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
(A) When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on a street between the hours specified
in the following subsections on any day except Saturday and Sunday and public holidays within the parking meter zone of the city of Havre.
(B) In accordance with subsection (A) of this section, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours
specified herein on any day except Saturday and Sunday and public holidays during the period commencing on March 1 of each year and ending on
December 1 of each year of any portion of said period when said signs are in place giving notice thereof:
1. Between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any Monday, Wednesday or Friday upon the north side of streets
(roadway running in an easterly and westerly direction) and on the west side of avenues (roadway running in a northerly and southerly direction)
within the parking meter zone as limited and defined herein.
2. Between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any Tuesday or Thursday upon the south side of streets (roadway
running in an easterly and westerly direction) and on the east side of avenues (roadway running in a northerly and southerly direction) within the
parking meter zone as limited and defined herein. (Ord. 629, 6-7-1976)
10-6-11: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The parking of any semitruck or large commercial vehicle having a gross weight in excess of five (5) tons shall not be permitted on any residential street,
avenue or lot except while such vehicle is actually loading or unloading persons or cargo. A "residential" street, avenue or lot shall be such streets,
avenues and lots within any area zoned "residential" under the existing zoning ordinances of the city. (Ord. 659, 3-6-1978)
10-6-12: PARKING LIMITS:
The following provisions concerning parking limits are hereby adopted. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-1: PARKING ZONE:
(A) Markings: The chief of police is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones which shall be fixed and
designated from time to time by the direction of the mayor and city council; said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 92/135
the curbing or surface of the street. In each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that such a vehicle shall not be
entirely within the limits of the space so designated. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
(B) Parking Time Limits: The chief of police is hereby directed and authorized to designate said parking spaces as two (2) hour parking limit and fifteen
(15) minute parking limit. Said parking spaces shall be designated within the area bounded by First Street on the north and Third Street on the south
and the center of Second Avenue on the west and the center of Fourth Avenue on the east, with boundary area streets and avenues to be within the
controlled area on both sides of such streets and avenues, all located within the downtown area of Havre, Montana. (Ord. 891, 8-17-2015)
10-6-12-2: HOURS OF ENFORCEMENT:
The time limits established in subsection 10-6-12-1(B) of this chapter shall be enforced each and every day between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., except on holidays and Sundays. (Ord. 891, 8-17-2015)
10-6-12-3: IMPLEMENTATION:
The city council is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations or to adopt a resolution for such procedures as they consider to be reasonable
and necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes and intents of this section 10-6-12. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-4: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this section 10-6-12, acting in accordance with instructions of the chief of police,
such officer shall:
(A) Report the location of the overparking violation.
(B) Report the state license number of such vehicle.
(C) Report the time during which such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of this section 10-6-12.
(D) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to thoroughly understand the circumstances attending such violation.
(E) Attach such written report to the vehicle, addressed to the owner or operator thereof, that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of
this section 10-6-12, and instructing the owner or operator to report to the city court of the city, in regard to such violation. Such report may further
advise the owner or operator of the penalty provisions of this section 10-6-12 as set forth herein.
(F) Cars may be removed, at owner's expense, after six (6) hours, pursuant to section 6-7-1 of this code. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-5: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
This entire section 10-6-12 shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the city in the state for the preservation and protection
of the public safety, and all of its provisions shall be liberally construed with a view to effectuation of such purpose which is designed to assist in the
regulation of overtime parking within certain areas of said city. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-6: RESERVATION OF POWERS:
Nothing in this section 10-6-12 shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, for taxi stands or other matters of a similar nature,
including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans or other commercial vehicles and the issuance of courtesy tickets or permits. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-7: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful an a violation of the provisions of this section 10-6-12 for any person:
(A) To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person, to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal
parking time established for any parking space as herein described.
(B) To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any such parking space beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. Any vehicle continuing to
occupy such space after issuance of an initial notice of violation shall be in continuing violation and such person shall be subject to a separate charge
for each two (2) hour period his vehicle remains so parked. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
10-6-12-8: PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 93/135
Any person whose vehicle or motor vehicle shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this section 10-6-12 shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). It is intended that this is the
absolute liability of the person whose vehicle or motor vehicle is found to have violated this section 10-6-12, unless that person can conclusively prove that
the vehicle was at the time of the violation stolen or similarly beyond the registered owner's custody or control. (Ord. 721, 4-16-1984)
10-6-13: TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED:
(A) No Trailer Parking: No person shall park a trailer on any public street, avenue, boulevard, alley or other public right of way within the city, except
temporarily for a period of time not to exceed forty eight (48) hours. Any trailer parked in violation of this section may be removed, at the owner's
expense, pursuant to sections 6-7-1 through 6-7-6 of this code.
(B) Penalty: A violation of this section shall be assessed the following fine(s):
1. First offense: No less than a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine.
2. Second offense: No less than a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine.
3. Third offense: A three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine and the trailer may be subject to removal and impoundment. (Ord. 898, 2-21-2017)
Chapter 7
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
10-7-1: RESTRICTIONS AS TO SPEED:
(Rep. by Ord. 680, 3-16-1981)
10-7-2: STATE CODE SECTIONS ADOPTED:
State Code Section Title
61-1-101 Definition of words and phrases
61-1-102 Motor vehicle
61-1-103 Vehicle
61-1-104 Special mobile equipment
61-1-105 Motorcycle
61-1-106 Motor driven cycle
61-1-107 Truck
61-1-108 Truck tractor
61-1-109 Farm tractor
61-1-110 Road tractor
61-1-111 Trailer
61-1-112 Semitrailer
61-1-114 Pole trailer
61-1-115 Bus
61-1-116 School bus
61-1-119 Authorized emergency vehicles
61-1-122 Trackless trolley coach
61-1-123 Bicycle
61-1-124 Railroad train
61-1-125 Pneumatic tire
61-1-126 Solid tire
61-1-127 Metal tire
61-1-130 Motor home
61-1-131 Travel trailer
61-1-201 Highway
61-1-203 Street
61-1-204 Arterial street
61-1-205 Private road or driveway
61-1-206 Roadway
61-1-207 Laned roadway
61-1-208 Sidewalk
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 94/135
61-1-209 Crosswalk
61-1-211 Controlled access highway
61-1-212 Intersection
61-1-302 Chief
61-1-304 Police officer
61-1-305 Highway patrolman
61-1-306 Local authorities
61-1-307 Person
61-1-308 Pedestrian
61-1-309 Driver
61-1-310 Owner
61-1-311 Operator
61-1-312 Chauffeur
61-1-313 Nonresident
61-1-317 Railroad
61-1-401 Traffic
61-1-405 Safety zone
61-1-406 Right of way
61-1-407 Stop, stopping, standing and parking
61-1-502 Gross weight
61-1-503 Suspension
61-1-504 Revocation
61-1-505 Cancellation
61-1-506 Explosives
61-1-507 Flammable liquid
61-5-102 Operators and chauffeurs to be licensed
61-5-104 Exemptions
61-5-116 License to be carried and exhibited on demand
61-5-210 No operation under foreign license during suspension or revocation in this state
61-5-212 Driving while license suspended or revoked penalty
61-5-302 Unlawful use of license
61-5-304 Permitting unauthorized minor to drive
61-5-305 Employing unlicensed chauffeur
61-5-306 Renting motor vehicle to another
61-7-104 Accident involving damage to vehicle
61-7-105 Duty to give information and render aid
61-7-106 Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
61-7-107 Duty upon striking fixture or other property upon a highway
61-7-108 Immediate notice of accidents
61-7-109 Written reports of accidents - additional information - form of report
61-7-110 When driver unable to report
61-7-113 Garages to report
61-7-114 Accident reports confidential
61-8-101 Application - exceptions
61-8-104 Required obedience to traffic laws
61-8-105 Obedience to police officers and highway patrolmen
61-8-106 Responsibility of public officers and employees
61-8-107 Police vehicles and authorized emergency vehicles
61-8-108 Traffic laws applicable to persons driving animal drawn vehicles
61-8-201 Obedience to traffic control devices
61-8-207 Traffic control signal legend
61-8-208 Pedestrian control signals
61-8-209 Flashing signals
61-8-210 Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings
61-8-301 Reckless driving
61-8-302 Careless driving
61-8-303 Speed restrictions - basic rule
61-8-308 Permission of authorities to hold speed contest
61-8-311 Minimum speed regulations
61-8-321 Drive on right side of roadway - exceptions
61-8-322 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 95/135
61-8-323 Overtaking, a vehicle on the left
61-8-324 When overtaking on right is permitted
61-8-325 Limitations on overtaking on the left
61-8-328 Driving on roadways laned for traffic
61-8-329 Following too closely
61-8-330 Driving on divided highways
61-8-331 Restricted and controlled access
61-8-333 Required position and method of turning at intersections - signs
61-8-334 Turning on curve or crest of grade prohibited
61-8-335 Starting parked vehicle
61-8-336 Turning movements and required signals
61-8-337 Signals by hand and arm or signal device
61-8-338 Method of giving hand and arm signals
61-8-339 Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
61-8-340 Vehicle turning left at intersection
61-8-341 Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersection
61-8-342 Vehicles approaching "yield" sign
61-8-343 Vehicle entering highway from private road, driveway or public approach ramp
61-8-344 Vehicles to stop at stop signs
61-8-345 Stop before emerging from alley, driveway or building
61-8-346 Operation of vehicles on approach of police vehicles or authorized emergency vehicles
61-8-347 Obedience to signals indicating approach of train
61-8-348 All vehicles to stop at certain railroad grade crossings
61-8-349 Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade
61-8-350 Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings
61-8-351 Meeting or passing school bus
61-8-352 Prohibited operation of special lighting equipment on school buses
61-8-354 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
61-8-359 Riding on motorcycles
61-8-360 Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism
61-8-362 Coasting prohibited
61-8-363 Following fire apparatus prohibited
61-8-364 Crossing fire hose
61-8-365 Putting refuse on highway prohibited
61-8-366 Riding on fenders or running boards prohibited
61-8-367 Riding in house trailers
61-8-368 Opening and closing vehicle doors
61-8-501 Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations
61-8-502 Pedestrians' right of way in crosswalk
61-8-503 Crossing at other than crosswalk
61-8-504 Drivers to exercise due care
61-8-505 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
61-8-507 Pedestrian soliciting rides or business
61-8-508 Intoxicated pedestrian
61-8-401 Persons under the influence of alcohol or drugs
61-8-402 Chemical blood, breath or urine tests
61-8-403 Right of appeal to court
61-8-405 Administration of tests
61-8-702 Use of radar - evidence admissible
61-8-703 Arrest without a warrant in radar cases
61-8-704 Erection of signs
61-8-713 Injury to or removal of sign or marker a misdemeanor - penalty
61-9-109 Driving vehicle in unsafe condition prohibited- applicability of chapter
61-9-201 When lighted lamps are required
61-9-202 Visibility distance and mounted height of lamps
61-9-203 Headlamps on motor vehicles
61-9-204 Taillamps
61-9-205 New motor vehicles to be equipped with reflectors
61-9-206 Stop lamps - when required
61-9-207 Application of succeeding sections
61-9-208 Additional equipment required on certain vehicles
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 96/135
61-9-209 Color of clearance lamps, side marker lamps, reflectors and backup lamps
61-9-210 Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps and side marker lamps
61-9-211 Visibility of reflectors, clearance lamps and marker lamps
61-9-212 Obstructed lights not required
61-9-213 Lamp or flag on projecting load
61-9-214 Lamps on parked vehicles
61-9-215 Lamps on farm tractors, farm equipment and implements on husbandry
61-9-216 Lamps on other vehicles and equipment
61-9-217 Spot lamps and auxiliary lamps
61-9-218 Signal lamps and signal devices
61-9-219 Additional lighting equipment
61-9-220 Multiple beam road lighting equipment
61-9-221 Use of multiple beam road lighting equipment
61-9-222 Single beam road lighting equipment
61-9-223 Lighting equipment on motor driven cycles
61-9-224 Alternate road lighting equipment
61-9-225 Number of driving lamps required or permitted
61-9-226 Special restrictions on lamps
61-9-227 Blinker type red light on firefighter's private vehicle - use - identification card
61-9-228 Standards for lights on snow removal equipment
61-9-301 Brake equipment required
61-9-312 Performance ability of brakes
61-9-313 Maintenance
61-9-314 Hydraulic brake fluid
61-9-315 Brakes on motor driven cycles
61-9-401 Horns and warning devices
61-9-402 Audible and visual signals on vehicles
61-9-403 Mufflers - prevention of noise
61-9-404 Mirrors
61-9-405 Windshields to be unobstructed and equipped with wipers
61-9-406 Restrictions as to tire equipment
61-9-407 Fenders, splash aprons or flaps required on certain vehicles - dimension and location - violation a misdemeanor - penalty
61-9-413 Vehicles transporting explosives
61-9-415 Slow moving vehicles
61-9-417 Headgear required for minor motorcycle riders
61-9-418 Motorcycle noise suppression devices
61-9-514 Unauthorized use of firefighter's private vehicle
61-10-101 Standards of maximum dimensions, weights, etc.
61-10-141 Officers authorized to weight vehicles and require removal of excessive load
61-10-147 Penalties for using highway when use is restricted
61-11-101 Report of convictions and suspension or revocation of driver's licenses - surrender of licenses
61-12-204 Identification badge and uniform
61-12-601 Unlawful operation by minor - jurisdiction of courts - penalties
61-12-602 Summons - issuing to minor
49-4-213 Use of white or metallic colored canes restricted to the blind
49-4-216 Duty and civil liability of pedestrian or driver approaching blind person
49-4-217 Penalty for violation of duty or unauthorized use of cane
49-4-401 Definition of blind person
(Ord. 679, 3-16-1981)
Chapter 8
ACCIDENTS
10-8-1: DUTY TO STOP IN EVENT OF ACCIDENT:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property, shall immediately stop such vehicle at the
scene of such accident and shall give his name and address and registration number of his vehicle to the person struck or to the driver or occupants of any
vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or
surgeon for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 97/135
Every person convicted under this section upon a charge of failure to stop after an accident resulting in injury or death of any person or damage to
property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-8-2: DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENTS:
(A) The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more, shall within one hour make a report of such accident to the police headquarters in this city.
(B) Unless the police department forwards such reports to the state department of motor vehicles for compilation and analysis, the police department shall
tabulate and analyze such reports and publish annually or at more frequent intervals statistical information based thereon as to the number, cause and
location of street traffic accidents. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-8-3: GARAGES TO REPORT DAMAGED VEHICLES:
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious
accident or struck by any bullet, shall report to the police department of the city, within twenty four (24) hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving
the engine number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 9
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
10-9-1: FLAG OR LIGHT AT END OF LOAD:
Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet (4') beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of
such load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag not less than twelve inches (12") both in length and
width, except that between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed at the end of such load a yellow
or red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred feet (200') from the rear of such vehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-9-2: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
(A) Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order, capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of two hundred feet (200') or more, and it shall be unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this section, for any
vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon a vehicle any siren, or any compression or spark plug whistle or any exhaust horn or whistle
which does not produce a harmonious sound, or for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning, or to make any
unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device.
(B) Every authorized emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a bell, siren or exhaust whistle of a type approved by the police committee. (Ord. 385, 3-1-
1943)
10-9-3: MUFFLERS; PREVENTION OF NOISE:
(A) No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
(B) It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle on a highway.
(C) No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unlesssuch vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-9-4: RED OR GREEN LIGHTS IN FRONT OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle upon a highway with any red or green light thereon visible from directly in front thereof. This
section shall not apply to police or fire department or fire patrol vehicles nor to any vehicle required or permitted by state law or regulation to display red or
green clearance lamps on the front. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
10-10-1: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 98/135
and stopping the motor of said vehicle, and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or the side of
the street or highway. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-2: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, to go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-3: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his
vehicle to any other moving vehicle or streetcar upon any roadway. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-4: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or streetcar to drive between the vehicle comprising a funeral or other authorized processions while they
are in motion; provided, that said vehicles are conspicuously so designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic control signals or police officers. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-5: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING:
The operator of a vehicle shall not back the same unless suchmovement can be made in safety. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-6: OBSTRUCTING DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle
such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such position as to interfere with the operator's view ahead, or to the sides, or to interfere
with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-7: RIDING ON HANDLE BARS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when upon the street, to carry any other person upon the handle bar, frame or tank of any
vehicle, or for any person to so ride upon such vehicle. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-8: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or streetcar track to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire marshal or fire department official in command. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
10-10-9: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
No vehicle shall be driven on the streets of the city unless the same is equipped with lights, warning devices, brakes, license plates, rear view mirror and
any and all accessories or equipment which may be required by the laws of the state. It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motor vehicle upon any
street in the city unless such person is the holder of and has in his possession a driver's license issued to him by the state of Montana and currently valid;
provided, that this requirement shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle licensed in another state or country if the operator thereof possesses a driver's
license currently valid in said state or country. (Ord. 385, 3-1-1943)
Chapter 11
ONE-WAY STREETS
10-11-1: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
One-way streets in the city shall be designated as follows: (Ord. 456, 11-21-1955)
(A) Sixteenth Street in the city, from Sixth Avenue to Ninth Avenue, shall henceforth be a one-way street within said boundaries, with traffic on said
Sixteenth Street from Sixth Avenue to Ninth Avenue going in an easterly direction only. Said one-way street shall be a through street. (Ord. 699, 12-7-
1981)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 99/135
(B) Repealed.
(C) The alleyway between First Street and Second Street and Third Avenue and Fourth Avenue shall hereafter be a one-way street with traffic moving in
an easterly direction only.
(D) The alleyway between Second Avenue and Third Avenue and between First Street and Second Street shall be a one-way street with traffic moving in
an easterly direction only.
(E) The alleyway between Second Street and Third Street and between Third Avenue and Fourth Avenue shall hereafter be a one-way street with traffic
moving in an easterly direction only. (Ord. 456, 11-21-1955)
(F) First Avenue in the city, from Third Street to Tenth Street shall henceforth be a one-way avenue within said boundaries and that traffic on said First
Avenue from Third Street to Tenth Street shall move south only. (Ord. 604, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-5-1974)
(G) Second Street in the city, from Eighth Avenue to Fourteenth Avenue, shall henceforth be a one-way street within said boundaries with traffic on said
Second Street from Eighth Avenue to Fourteenth Avenue moving in a westerly direction only. Said one-way street shall not be a through street. (Ord.
690, 7-6-1981)
(H) Third Street in the city, from Seventh Avenue to Fourteenth Avenue, shall henceforth be a one-way street within said boundaries with traffic moving on
said Third Street from Seventh Avenue to Fourteenth Avenue in an easterly direction only. Said one-way street shall not be a through street. (Ord. 558,
10-4-1971, eff. 11-3-1971)
(I) (Rep. by Ord. 699, 12-7-1981)
(J) (Rep. by Ord. 619, 5-19-1975, eff. 6-18-1975)
(K) The alleyway between Second Avenue and Third Avenue and between Third Street and Fourth Street shall be a one-way street with traffic moving in a
westerly direction only. (Ord. 628, 4-5-1976)
(L) The alley between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue and between Third Street and Fourth Street shall be a one-way street with traffic moving in a
westerly direction only. (Ord. 693, 8-17-1981)
(M) The alley between Sixth Avenue and Fifth Avenue and between Eleventh Street and Twelfth Street shall be a one-way alley with traffic moving in a
westerly direction only.
(N) The alley between Third Avenue and Fourth Avenue and between Third Street and Fourth Street shall be a one-way alley with traffic moving in a
westerly direction only. (Ord. 698, 11-2-1981)
(O) First Street, from its intersection with U.S. Highway 2 and Fourteenth Avenue to its intersection with Fifteenth Avenue, is a one-way street within such
boundaries, with traffic on First Street between Fourteenth Avenue and Fifteenth Avenue being allowed to move in an easterly direction only. Such oneway
street is not a through street. (Ord. 847, 2-17-2004)
Chapter 12
VEHICLE WEIGHTS
10-12-1: STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND DIMENSIONS:
The standards established by the state governing the maximum dimensions and weights of motor vehicles, and other characteristics and factors thereof,
operating over the highways of and in the state, shall be and are hereby made applicable to and shall govern the maximum dimensions and weights of
motor vehicles, and other characteristics and factors thereof, operating over any paved streets of and in the city, to the exclusion of any other standards or
any other requirements respecting the subject matter. (Ord. 455, 11-21-1955)
10-12-2: SPECIAL PERMITS:
The engineer may, at his discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing, authorizing the
applicant to operate or move a vehicle of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this chapter upon any paved road within the city. No permit
shall designate the routes to be traversed and may contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by said engineer, and may be cancelled
at any time by the said engineer. Every such permit or a true copy thereof shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any peace officer of the city. (Ord. 455, 11-21-1955)
10-12-3: POWER OF PEACE OFFICERS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 100/135
Any peace officer of the city having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle load is unlawful is hereby authorized and empowered to weigh the same,
either by means of portable or stationary scales, and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest scales in the event such scales are within two
(2) miles. The said peace officer may then require the driver to unload immediately such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the weight of
such vehicle to conform to the maximum allowable weights specified by this chapter. (Ord. 455, 11-21-1955)
Chapter 13
ABANDONED VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 636, 12-20-1976)
Chapter 14
PARKING METER REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 691, 7-20-1981)
Chapter 15
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR AND/OR DRUGS
10-15-1: PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
(A) It is unlawful and punishable as provided in subsection (C) of this section for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor to drive or be
in actual physical control of any vehicle within this municipality.
(B) It is unlawful and punishable as provided in subsection (C) of this section for any person who is an habitual user of or under the influence of any
narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle to drive a motor
vehicle within this municipality. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this subsection is or has been entitled to use such drug under the
laws of this state shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this subsection.
(C) Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section will be punished by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. On a second or subsequent conviction, he
shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one year, or in the discretion of the court, a fine of not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 486, 10-3-1960)
10-15-2: RECKLESS DRIVING:
(A) Any person who drives any vehicle in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
(B) Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or
by fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment, and on a
second or subsequent conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months, or by afine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 486, 10-3-1960)
10-15-3: CARELESS DRIVING:
(A) Any person who drives any vehicle in this municipality in a careless manner in disregard of the safety of persons or property is guilty of careless
driving.
(B) Every person convicted of careless driving shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 486, 10-3-1960)
Chapter 16
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
10-16-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter.
These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 101/135
10-16-2: TRAFFIC LAWS TO APPLY:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic laws of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of the laws which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
(A) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(B) Wherever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of
any sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulationsapplicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-5: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-6: SPEED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (Ord. 522, 2-
6-1967)
10-16-7: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-8: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, toboggan, skis, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-9: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support
the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-10: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the central business district within the city.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-11: EQUIPMENT:
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp or reflector on the front which shall emit or reflect a white light visible from a distance
of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to
three hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
10-16-12: PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 102/135
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by impounding of such person's bicycle for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days, or guilty of misdemeanor. (Ord. 522, 2-6-1967)
Title 11
ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
ZONING
11-1-1: DISTRICTS:
For the purpose of regulating, classifying and restricting the location of trades, industries and enterprises, and the location of buildings, designed, erected
or altered for specified uses, and limiting the height and size of such buildings, and the use of lot areas, and regulating and determining the area of the
yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings hereafter erected, and preventing additions to, and alterations to or remodeling of, existing buildings or
structure in such a manner as to avoid the restrictions and limitations in this section contained, the city is hereby divided into nine (9) districts termed
respectively as follows:
District Short Title
Residential-one family (class A) Class A
Residential-one family (class A-1) Class A-1
Residential-one family (class A-2) Class A-2
Residential-general Class B
Commercial-local Class C
Commercial-office restricted Class D
Commercial-intermediate Class E
Commercial-general Class F
Industrial-intermediate Class G
The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part of this title,
being designated as the "zoning map A" and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of
this title as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all fully described herein. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-2: RESIDENTIAL-ONE FAMILY (CLASS A) DISTRICT:
The following regulations shall apply in the residential-one family (class A) district: (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
(A) Use: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following uses:
One-family dwellings.
Any use other than residential one-family shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of adjustment pursuant to
section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: No building or structure or the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected with any exposed side greater than thirty feet
(30') in height.
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than forty feet (40') in depth from any street or avenue.
2. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than sixty feet (60').
4. Lot Area: Every dwelling unit erected hereafter within the district shall have a minimum lot area of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
5. Floor Area: Each dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet exclusive of garage.
6. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 103/135
7. Detached Garages Or Accessory Buildings: Detached garages or accessory buildings shall meet the same side yard requirements as main
buildings. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-3: RESIDENTIAL-ONE FAMILY (CLASS A-1) DISTRICT:
Residential-one family (class A-1) being those lots without an alley or secondary means of access. The following regulations shall apply in the residentialone
family (class A-1) district: (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
(A) Use: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following uses:
One-family dwellings.
Permitted conditional uses, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Any use other than residential one-family and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board
of adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected with any exposed side greater than thirty
feet (30') in height.
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement: (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') in depth from any street or avenue, except that the front yard on the longer
side of corner lots shall be not less than twenty feet (20'). In no event may the entry side of a garage be less than thirty feet (30') from the street or
avenue. (Ord. 650, 7-5-1977)
2. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard on one side of a dwelling of not less than eight feet (8'), there shall be a minimum side yard on the other side
of the dwelling of not less than twenty four feet (24'); except that when, at the time of construction, a garage is attached neither side yard need
exceed eight feet (8').
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
4. Lot Area: Every dwelling unit erected hereafter within this district shall have a minimum lot area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
5. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter.
6. Detached Garages Or Accessory Buildings: Detached garages or accessory buildings shall maintain a minimum side yard from any property line of
six feet (6') and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the main building. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-4: RESIDENTIAL-ONE FAMILY (CLASS A-2) DISTRICT:
Residential-one family (class A-2) being those lots with an alley or secondary means of access. The following regulations shall apply in the residential-one
family (class A-2) district: (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
(A) Use: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following uses:
One-family dwellings.
Permitted conditional uses, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Any use other than residential one-family or permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected with any exposed side greater than thirty
feet (30') in height.
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') in depth from any street or avenue.
2. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard on one side of a dwelling of not less than eight feet (8'), there shall be a minimum side yard on the other side
of a dwelling of not less than twelve feet (12'); except that when, at the time of construction, a garage is attached neither side yard need exceed eight
feet (8').
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty feet (40').
4. Lot Area: Every dwelling unit erected hereafter within this district shall have a minimum lot area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
5. Detached Garages Or Accessory Buildings: Detached garages or accessory buildings shall maintain a minimum side yard of not less (material
missing).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 104/135
6. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff.
9-4-1974)
11-1-5: RESIDENTIAL-GENERAL DISTRICT:
The following regulations shall apply in the residential-general district: (Ord. 641, 2-7-1977)
(A) Use: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following uses:
Any use permitted in residential one-family districts.
Apartments.
Beauty parlors and professional offices in a dwelling where the residential appearance of the building is not changed and no advertising signs are
displayed larger than twelve (12) square feet in area and attached directly to the structure.
Condominiums.
Multiple dwellings.
Permitted conditional uses, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Rest homes or nurseries, schools, nursing homes and dormitories.
Townhouses.
Any use other than the foregoing uses and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, with any exposed side greater than fifty feet
(50') in height.
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure and/or enlargement.
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') in depth from any street or avenue.
2. Corner Lots: On any corner lot there shall be no structure or sight obstruction within a forty foot (40') radius from the intersection of the property lines
of any street or avenue.
3. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than eight feet (8') from any structure not over two and one-half
(21/2) stories in height and for each additional story an additional four feet (4'). When used as single-family dwelling and there is no secondary
means of access there shall be one side not less than ten feet (10') from a main building.
4. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10'). When used as a single-family dwelling there shall be a rear yard of not less than
forty feet (40').
5. Lot Area: Every lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet plus a minimum lot area per each additional living unit of six
hundred forty (640) square feet.
6. Lot Coverage: No more than forty percent (40%) of the lot shall be occupied by main and accessory buildings.
7. Automobile Parking Spaces: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for off street parking in section 11-1-10 of this
chapter except that for the purpose of this section, the off street parking space shall be a rectangle measuring not less than ten feet by twenty feet
(10' x 20') and that any two (2) only, of the required yard areas may be occupied by parking. Access to and from any parking area must be
maintained orderly and safe.
8. Curb Cuts: There shall be a maximum of one curb cut which shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length, or two (2) curb cuts which shall not exceed
twelve feet (12') in length per side for a corner lot sixty feet (60') in width and one curb cut which shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in length for each
additional thirty feet (30') in width. One curb cut which shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length or two (2) curb cuts which shall not exceed twelve
feet (12') in length for each sixty feet (60') in width.
9. Detached Garages Or Accessory Buildings: Detached garages or accessory buildings shall maintain a maximum side yard and rear yard of not less
than six feet (6') and a minimum of not less than ten feet (10') from the main building.
10. Planting: Planting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for planting in section 11-1-13 of this chapter, except that all yard areas
not occupied by off street parking shall be planted and permanently maintained and landscaped, and that such planted and landscaped area shall be
a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the lot area. (Ord. 641, 2-7-1977)
11-1-6: COMMERCIAL-LOCAL DISTRICT:
The following regulations shall apply in the commercial local district:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 105/135
(A) Uses: No building, structure or land shall be hereafter used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the residential-general district.
Automobile service station; provided, that any tube or tire repairing, battery charging and storage of merchandise of supplies are conducted wholly
within a building.
Bank.
Barbershop, drugstore or beauty parlor.
Book, stationery, florist, gift or jewelry store.
Clothing or wearing apparel shop.
Food markets.
Hardware store.
Laundromat.
Medical and dental clinics.
Offices, business or professional.
Permitted conditional uses, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Photographer.
Public parking area.
Restaurant.
Any use other than the foregoing uses and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974; amd. Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected, with any exposed side greater than thirty
five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 621, 8-4-1975, eff. 9-3-1975)
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structures or enlargement:
1. Front Yard Commercial Uses: There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') in depth from any street or avenue.
2. Side Yards Commercial Uses: No side yards shall be required except as specified by the uniform building code as revised from time to time.
3. Rear Yard Commercial Uses: There shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
4. Residential Uses: When used as residential or multiple dwellings all yard requirements and lot areas shall be the same as in residential-general.
5. Detached Garages And Accessory Buildings: Same as residential-one family (class A-1 and class A-2).
6. Planting: See section 11-1-13, "Planting", of this chapter.
7. Curb Cuts: There shall be a maximum of two (2) curb cuts which shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length, or one curb cut which shall not exceed
forty feet (40') in length.
8. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter.
(D) Nuisances: No noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare or heat shall be emitted so that it exceeds the general level of noise, odor, vibration dust, glare or heat
emitted by uses outside the boundaries of the commercial-local district. Such comparison shall be made at the boundary of the commercial-local
district. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-7: COMMERCIAL-OFFICE RESTRICTED DISTRICT:
The C-O commercial office restricted district is a district limited to offices and customer service uses designed to be compatible with each other and nearby
residential district. The following regulations shall apply in the commercial-office restricted district:
(A) Uses: No building, structure or land shall be hereafter used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following uses:
Branch offices for the following: banks, building and loan associations, brokerage houses, savings and loan associations, title insurance companies,
and trust companies.
No accessory uses shall be permitted in this district except surface parking. Parking structures may be permitted subject to site plan approval if
required by the city council.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 106/135
Offices wherein administrative, clerical or sales services only are rendered; provided, that other than regular office books, records and papers used in
connection with rendering said office service, no commodity or tangible personal property, either by way of inventory or sample, shall be stored, kept or
exhibited in any said office or on the premises wherein the said office is located.
Permitted conditional uses, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
When the professional use is a medical center then a pharmacy and/or snack bar may be permitted in conjunction therewith; provided, that the center
consists of offices occupied by at least ten (10) doctors. Such snack bar may have accommodations for the concurrent service of ten (10) patrons for
the first ten (10) doctors and may accommodate one additional patron for each four (4) doctors over ten (10). In no event shall there be
accommodations for the concurrent service of over thirty (30) patrons. Also provided, that the entrance to said pharmacy or snack bar shall be from
within the exterior walls of the building only, and that no sign or display be located so as to be visible from a public thoroughfare or adjacent property.
The dispensing of ophthalmic materials is permitted; provided, that the entrance shall be from within the exterior walls of the building only, and that no
sign or display be located so as to be visible from a public thoroughfare or adjacent property.
Any use other than the foregoing uses and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974; amd. Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
(B) Height: Same as residential one-family districts.
(C) Area: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Lot Area: No lot shall hereinafter be subdivided to provide less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area nor to have width of less than sixty
feet (60') nor a depth of less than one hundred feet (100').
2. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') in depth from any street or avenue.
3. Side Yards: There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than eight feet (8') per story.
4. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30') plus ten feet (10') per story over one story which may be measured from the
centerline of any existing twenty foot (20') or wider alley.
5. Lot Coverage: The building on a lot shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
6. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter for type of occupancy.
(Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-8: COMMERCIAL INTERMEDIATE DISTRICT:
The C-1 commercial intermediate district, is a district of commercial uses of medium intensity designed to be compatible with each other and to provide for
a wide range of types of commercial activity within the district.
(A) District Restrictions:
1. Except as otherwise provided, all permitted uses and storing of materials or supplies shall be conducted entirely within a closed building.
2. The board of adjustment may issue a use permit for the outdoor display of new merchandise in connection with the following permitted uses as set
forth in subsection (B) of this section.
3. Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjacent property. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
(B) Uses: All uses permitted in commercial-local district and, in addition, the following:
Ambulance service office.
Antiques, wholesale.
Architects, supplies.
Artificial limbs, braces, sales.
Artists' materials and supplies, wholesale.
Assayers (see Laboratories).
Assembly halls and auditorium.
Auto seat covers and trim shops.
Automobile laundries, enclosed.
Automobile parts and supplies, new retail and wholesale.
Awnings, custom fabrication and sales.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 107/135
Bakers and baked goods, manufacturing, wholesale and storage.
Balls and bearings, retail shops.
Barbers' supplies, retail and wholesale.
Bars, cocktail lounges, and casinos, and private clubs and lodges qualifying by law as nonprofit entities, with or without dancing, subject to the following
conditions or limitations: all music and dancing shall be contained within a closed building and such music shall not be audible beyond the property line;
provided, that all live music and entertainment is performed on a stage, platform or other exclusive area for such purposes and that no entertainer or
performer is permitted to leave the stage, platform or exclusive area while entertaining or performing; and provided further, that no entertainer,
performer or any other person shall be permitted to appear in or on the premises in a state of nudity or to have his or her genitalia, anal cleft or
cleavage of the buttocks exposed or so thinly covered as to appear uncovered, or in the case of a female entertainer, performer or person, to have her
breasts uncovered or so thinly covered so as to expose or appear to expose any portion of the nipple or areola.
Bathroom accessories, display and retail sales only.
Beauty shop equipment, retail sales.
Beer, ale and wine distributor, wholesale and storage (no bottling).
Beverages, wholesale and storage (no bottling).
Bicycles, retail sales and repair.
Blood banks.
Blueprinting.
Boats, retail sales.
Bookbinding, commercial.
Bowling alleys.
Brushes, retail sales.
Building materials, retail sales only.
Burglar alarm equipment, sales and service.
Burglar alarm watching service.
Bus line depots.
Business machines:
Distribution and sales,
Repair and service,
Storage and wholesale.
Butchers' supplies, retail and wholesale.
Candy, wholesale distribution.
Car wash, hand.
Carpet, rug and furniture cleaning.
1. All activity except loading and unloading restricted to a closed building;
2. All solvents, shampoos, detergents and other agents shall be noncombustible and nonexplosive and shall require approval of the fire marshal; and
the same shall not emit odors beyond the zoned lot boundaries;
3. Only hand portable machines.
Cat and dog hospital. Enclosed and limited to five (5) cages of one animal capacity each - outdoor runs.
Chemicals and drugs, storage and distribution.
Cigarette service.
Cigars, manufacturing custom hand rolled.
Cigars, wholesale and distribution.
Cleaning and dyeing plants.
Clothing, wholesale and distribution.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 108/135
Coffee, wholesale and storage, no roasting.
Coin machines, rental service.
Confectioners, wholesale.
Contractors' office with inside storage of materials only.
Curios, wholesale.
Dental laboratories.
Dental supplies, retail and wholesale.
Diaper supply service.
Dolls, repairing.
Draperies, manufacturing.
Drawing materials, retail sales and wholesale.
Drive-in restaurants.
Drugs, wholesale storage.
Dry goods, wholesale and storage.
Eggs, storage and processing.
Electric equipment, retail sales and repair.
Engravers.
Exhibition hall.
Family game center.
Fire protection equipment and supplies, retail sales and service.
Floor coverings, retail and wholesale.
Florist, wholesale.
Frozen foods, wholesale storage and distribution.
Furniture, repairing and refinishing.
Furniture, used, no outdoor display.
Furs, custom cleaning, storage.
Garage, equipment, retail sales.
Garage, repair, not body and fender shops.
Garages, public.
Gas regulating equipment, sales and service.
Glass shops, custom.
Guns, retail sales and/or repairs.
Gymnasiums, private or commercial.
Hospital.
Hotel equipment, supplies and retail sales.
Hotels and motels.
Janitors' supplies, storage and wholesale.
Jewelers, manufacturing.
Jewelers, wholesale.
Kiddieland.
Laboratories, clinical and dental.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 109/135
Laboratories, testing and research.
Laundries.
Laundry equipment and supplies.
Lawn furniture, new sales.
Lawn mower repair shops.
Leather goods, repairing, sales custom or handicraft manufacturing.
Linen supply laundry service.
Liquor, storage and wholesale.
Lithographers.
Lockers, food storage.
Locksmiths' repair shops.
Massage establishment.
Medical supplies, retail sales and rentals.
Milliners, wholesale and manufacturing.
Millinery and artificial flower making.
Mimeographing and multigraphing commercial.
Mineral water distillation and bottling.
Miniature golf.
Mirrors, resilvering, custom work.
Monuments, retail sales and display.
Mortuary.
Motion picture equipment, retail sales and display.
Motion picture theaters.
Music studios.
Musical instruments, repairing and retail sales.
News dealers.
News service.
Newspaper printing.
Novelties, wholesale.
Office service:
Stenographic service, letter preparation, addressing and mailing, duplicating, multigraphing, machine tabulation research and statistical.
Oil burners, retail sales and repairs.
Optical goods, manufacturing and sales.
Orthopedic appliances, manufacturing and sales.
Painters' equipment and supplies, shops, wholesale and storage.
Parking lots, commercial.
Pawnbroker or pawnshop.
Photoengraving.
Photographic developing and printing.
Physical therapy equipment, retail and wholesale.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 110/135
Plastic and plastic products, retail and wholesale.
Playground equipment, sales.
Plumbing fixtures and supplies, display and retail sales.
Pool and billiard halls.
Poster illustration, studio.
Pottery and ceramics, wholesale.
Precision instruments, custom repair.
Printers.
Private clubs and lodges qualifying by law as a nonprofit entity.
Public storage garages.
Pumps, retail sales and display.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Radio and television studios.
Radio repair shop.
Reducing salons.
Refrigeration equipment, repairs and sales.
Restaurant equipment, supplies and retail sales.
Riding equipment sales.
Rug cleaning.
Saddlery shops, custom, handmade.
Safes, repairing and sales.
Salvation army welfare activities.
Saw sharpening shop.
School equipment and supplies, wholesale.
Schools:
Beauty,
Business and commercial, private,
Correspondence and stenographic,
Dancing,
Health, gymnastic.
Service station equipment, wholesale.
Sewing machines, commercial and industrial type, retail sales and repairing.
Shoe repairing equipment and supplies, wholesale.
Sightseeing tours, garages and depots.
Sign painters, shops, not neon signs - fabrication.
Slipcovers, custom manufacturing.
Soaps, wholesale and storage.
Soda fountain supplies, retail and wholesale.
Sound system and equipment sales rental and repairs.
Taxicab garages.
Taxidermists.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 111/135
Telegraph companies, facilities and offices.
Telephone companies, facilities and offices.
Theaters.
Tire repairing equipment and supplies.
Tobacco, wholesale and storage.
Tombstones, sales and display.
Tools, wholesale and distribution.
Towels, supply service.
Upholsterers, custom, retail sales and supplies.
Venetian blinds, custom manufacturing and cleaning.
Veterinarians' supplies, retail and wholesale.
Washing machine, retail sales and display.
Water or mineral, drinking or curative bottling and distribution.
Water softening equipment, service and repair.
Window cleaners' service.
Window display installations, studio and shops.
Window glass installation shops.
Wines, storage and wholesale.
In addition to the foregoing uses, permitted conditional uses may be allowed, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Any use other than the foregoing uses and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 839, 8-7-2000; amd. Ord. 874, 12-6-2010)
(C) Height: None.
(D) Area: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected nor shall any building or structure be altered, repaired or added to within any twelve (12)
month period in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the existing building or structure unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained
in connection with such building, structure or enlargement.
"Core area" for this purpose is defined as that area within the centerline of Main Street to Third Street and First Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
1. Lot Area: No building site shall contain less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet nor have a width of less than sixty feet (60').
2. Front Yard: There shall be a minimum setback from any street or avenue to the closest part of any building including marquees of ten feet (10').
Except that when twenty feet (20') above the elevation of the sidewalk, building may extend to the property line; provided, that no bearing columns
may occupy required yard area. Except that in the "core area" no setback shall be required.
3. Side Yards: No side yard shall be required on interior lots. Front yard requirements shall be maintained on corner lots, except in the core area.
4. Rear Yards: There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10') in depth.
5. Residential Uses: When used as residential, all yard requirements and lot areas shall be the same as in residential-general.
6. Curb Cuts: There shall be a maximum of two (2) curb cuts which shall not exceed forty feet (40') in length.
7. Planting: See section 11-1-13, "Planting", of this chapter.
8. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter for type of occupancy.
(E) Nameplates And Signs: See section 11-1-12, "Nameplates And Signs", of this chapter.
(F) Nuisances: No noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare or heat shall be emitted so that it exceeds the general level of noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare or heat
emitted by uses outside the boundaries of the commercial intermediate district. Such comparison shall be made at the boundary of the commercialintermediate
district. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-9: COMMERCIAL-GENERAL DISTRICT:
The C-G commercial-general district is a district designed to provide for the intensive commercial uses necessary to the proper development of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 112/135
community.
(A) Uses: All uses permitted in the commercial-intermediate district and, in addition, the following including the storing of all raw materials and finished
products in connection herewith:
Acoustical material, storage and wholesale.
Agricultural implements, distributions and display, retail sales.
Amusement park, outdoor exhibition or production or other outdoor recreation facilities.
Artificial limbs, manufacturing.
Asbestos products, wholesale and storage.
Auctioneers' auditorium, other than livestock.
Automobile, body and fender shops.
Automobile, radiator shops.
Automobile rental and leasing.
Automobile sales, new and used.
Battery repair.
Belting, repairing.
Beverages, bottling.
Blacksmiths.
Bleach blending.
Boats, custom fabrication.
Boilers, retail sales.
Bottled gas, storage and distribution, no bulk storage.
Bottles, wholesale.
Butter and cheese, manufacturing.
Cabinet makers.
Camper sales.
Candy manufacturing.
Canvas goods, fabrication.
Car wash, mechanical, exterior.
Carbide, sales and distribution.
Carbonic gas, sales and storage.
Carbonic ice, bulk sales and distribution.
Carpenters' shops.
Carpets and rugs, wholesale, warehouse and manufacturing.
Cigars, manufacturing machine rolled.
Cleaning compounds storage.
Clothing manufacturing.
Cold storage, no slaughtering.
Commercial radio or television tower or transmitting station.
Contractors' equipment and supplies, retail sales.
Conveyors, retail sales.
Corsets and brassieres, manufacturing.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 113/135
Dairy products, manufacturing.
Department stores warehouse.
Desks, manufacturing.
Disinfectants, storage and wholesale.
Drive-in theater.
Electrical appliance, wholesale.
Electrical contractors' shop.
Equipment, rentals.
Excelsior, storage and distribution, bulk.
Express companies, warehouse and garage.
Farm implement and machinery, retail sales.
Feed, retail and sales office.
Firewood, storage.
Fish, wholesale.
Floor finishing, contractors' shop.
Food processing, wholesale.
Food products, warehouse.
Freight depot.
Freight forwarders' warehouse.
Frozen foods, processing.
Fruit and vegetable market, wholesale.
Furnaces, cleaning and repairing shop.
Furniture, wholesale and storage.
Golf or baseball driving range.
Grocers, wholesale and warehouse.
Hardware, wholesale.
Horseshoeing.
Ice cream manufacturing.
Imported goods, warehouse.
Ink, compounding, packaging, storage insecticides, storage and distribution.
Linoleum storage.
Lubricating compounds, storage.
Lumber.
Lumber, cabinet shop.
Lumber, used and wholesale.
Machine shops.
Machine tools, storage.
Machinery dealers, retail sales and showrooms.
Machinery rental.
Machinery rentals, other than industrial.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 114/135
Matches, wholesale and storage.
Mattresses, manufacturing.
Meat and fish wholesale market.
Meat, storage and wholesale.
Mexican food preparation, wholesale.
Microwave relay tower.
Milk bottling plant.
Milling equipment, showrooms, retail sales.
Mining machinery supplies, display and retail sales.
Missions, religious.
Mobile home sales.
Monument works, no outdoor sandblasting.
Motor freight company garages.
Movers, warehouses.
Office furniture, storage and warehouse.
Oil burners, service and repair.
Paper products, wholesale and storage.
Pattern shop.
Perfumes, compounding, packaging storage.
Pharmaceutical products, compounding packaging, storage.
Plant, nursery.
Planting works, precious metals.
Plumbers' shops.
Plumbing fixtures and supplies, wholesale and storage.
Pony rides.
Potato chip manufacturing.
Printers' equipment and supplies, wholesale.
Produce (garden), wholesale.
Produce, warehouse.
Quick freeze plant.
Radio equipment, assembling.
Refrigerators, wholesale, storage.
Rehabilitation centers.
Restaurant equipment service repair shops.
Road building equipment, retail sales.
Roofing material, storage and sales.
School, trade.
Secondhand goods.
Sheet metal work, custom fabrication.
Sheltered workshops.
Shirt factory.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 115/135
Shooting gallery.
Sign shops, any type.
Skating rinks.
Soaps, compounding, packaging and storage.
Soda water manufacturing.
Stoves and ranges, wholesale storage.
Termite control contractor shops.
Terrazzo contractor shops.
Tire repairing and recapping.
Toiletries, compounding, packaging storage.
Toys, fabrication.
Tractors, retail sales display.
Trailer rental.
Trailer sales.
Transfer business.
Travel trailer sales.
Truck freight movers.
Used car sales.
Vegetable market, wholesale.
Wallboard, wholesale and storage.
Wholesale produce storage or market commercial.
Wine bottling.
Woodworking, equipment, wholesale.
In addition to the foregoing uses, permitted conditional uses may be allowed, subject to the provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
Any use other than the foregoing uses and permitted conditional uses shall be deemed a variance requiring authorization of the city's zoning board of
adjustment pursuant to section 11-1-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974; amd. Ord. 783, 6-7-1993; Ord. 837, 7-3-2000; Ord. 839, 8-7-
2000)
(B) Height: None.
(C) Area: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected nor shall any building or structure be altered, repaired, or added to within any twelve (12)
month period in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the existing building or structure unless the following yard and lot areas are provided and maintained in
connection with such building, structure, or enlargement:
1. Lot Area: No building site shall contain less than sixteen thousand eight hundred (16,800) square feet nor have a width of less than one hundred
twenty feet (120').
2. Front Yard: There shall be a minimum setback from any street or avenue to the closest part of any building including marquees of ten feet (10').
Except that when twenty feet (20') above the elevation of the sidewalk, buildings may extend to the property line without column.
3. Side Yards: No side yard shall be required on interior lots.
4. Rear Yards: There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10') in depth.
5. Residential Uses: When used as residential, all yard requirements and lot areas shall be the same as in residential general districts.
6. Curb Cuts: There shall be a maximum of two (2) curb cuts which shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length, or one curb cut which shall not exceed
forty feet (40') in length.
7. Planting: See section 11-1-13, "Planting", of this chapter.
8. Automobile Parking Space: See section 11-1-10, "Automobile Parking And Loading Space Requirements", of this chapter for type of occupancy.
9. Nameplates And Signs: See section 11-1-12, "Nameplates And Signs", of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 116/135
10. Nuisances: No noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare or heat shall be emitted so that it exceeds the general level of noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare or
heat emitted by uses outside the boundaries of the commercial-general district. Such comparison shall be made at the boundary of the commercialgeneral
district. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-10: AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Off Street Parking: No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented satisfactory evidence to the building inspector that he owns or
has otherwise available for his use sufficient property to provide the parking required in subsection (C) of this section.
(B) General Requirements:
1. For the purpose of this section, an "off street parking space" shall mean an area located entirely on private property consisting of a rectangle
measuring no less than ten feet by twenty four feet (10' x 24'). In addition, adequate drives or aisles providing access, turning and maneuvering
space shall be provided on private property and each off street parking space shall be accessible from streets or alleys or private driveways or alleys
leading to streets or alleys. No parking space shall occupy the required front yard. In any residential or commercial-office zoning district, motor
vehicles classed by manufacturer's rating as exceeding three-quarters (3/4) of a ton shall not be parked in any required front yard. In any residential
or commercial-office district, no mobile home, travel trailer, tent trailer, trailer, camper, boat or boat trailer shall be parked in any front yard, nor shall
such vehicle or equipment which exceeds eight feet (8') in height above the ground be parked in any required side yard, nor shall any vehicle or
equipment be parked in any side yard adjacent to a street.
2. Vacant lots or open land areas in any residential district may be used as an area for the parking of customer and employee passenger vehicles only,
if said property is zoned as a parking P-1 district, and provided further, that the provisions of this section, when applicable, shall be complied with
and, provided further, that the city council may impose conditions, other than those set forth in this section for the protection of adjacent property or in
the interest of the public welfare.
3. The parking of more than one commercial vehicle of not more than five (5) ton capacity, or the parking of any commercial vehicle of more than five
(5) ton capacity, on any lot in any residential district shall be considered a commercial use and is prohibited.
4. "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area and/or the open land area needed for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients,
including area occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not mean floors or parts of floors used principally
for nonpublic purposes such as storage, automobile parking, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, show windows or for offices
incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings, or to restrooms or powder rooms.
5. Wherever such space is required or permitted, uses other than single-family residential uses shall maintain the area of such space "dust free" as
defined herein. Uses other than single-family dwellings and multiple dwellings in a residential district shall enclose such required or permitted off
street parking area with a solid wall except for necessary points of ingress or egress. Along that portion of the perimeter of the parking area bounding
or within the side and rear yards, the wall shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height. Along that portion of the lot which
bounds the front yard, the wall shall be three feet (3') in height. All required walls shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition.
6. In any case where a lot is located in a district other than a residential zoning district and:
(a) Is used for other than a single-family dwelling, or multiple dwellings, and
(b) Is used for motor vehicle parking or interior vehicle circulation as a primary or accessory use.
(c) Such lot adjoins a residential zoning district or is separated therefrom by a local or collector street or an alley, a wall shall be required along such
portions of said lot which adjoin or are across the said street or alley from the residential zoning district. Along that portion of the lot which bounds
the side or rear yards, the wall shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height. Along that portion of the lot which bounds
the front yard, the wall shall be three feet (3') in height. All required walls shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition.
7. Any lights used to illuminate said parking space shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining lots.
8. A minimum of six inch (6") wide and six inch (6") high curb or bumper guard shall be installed along all lines bordering the parking and maneuvering
area excluding necessary driveway openings and shall be so located that no part of a vehicle shall extend over or beyond said lines.
9. For the purpose of converting a parking area into the required or permitted parking spaces, plans must be submitted to show how the required or
permitted parking spaces shall be arranged in the area on private property supplied for that purpose and to indicate in the parking area sufficient
space for turning maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the parking area before a permit is granted.
(a) All such parking plans shall be submitted to the building inspector.
(b) Before issuance of a building permit, the building inspector may obtain the approval of the city engineer or his duly authorized representative for
all such plans requiring or providing for three (3) or more off street parking space.
10. Whenever a building permit has been granted and the plans so approved for off street parking, the subsequent use of such property shall be
deemed to be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the parking provisions contained in such plans. Any use of such
property in violation hereof shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
Should the owner or occupant of any building to whom a building permit has been granted containing off street parking requirements so change the
use to which such building is put as to increase off street parking as required under this chapter, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to
begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the increased off street parking provisions of this section are complied with.
11. No addition or enlargement of an existing building or use shall be permitted unless the parking requirements of this chapter are met for the entire
building or use.
12. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off street parking space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately as specified in this section, and the off street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off street
parking for any other use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 117/135
13. Any lot used for the parking of three (3) or more motor vehicles, prior to being subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall, within three (3) months
from the effective date of original city zoning ordinance, be paved for dust control, and a six inch (6") wide by six inch (6") high curb or bumper guard
shall be installed along all property lines bordering the parking and maneuvering area, excluding necessary points of ingress and egress, and shall
be so located so that no part of a vehicle shall extend over or beyond any property line. The area of such parking lot shall be maintained "dust free"
as defined herein. This provision shall also apply to lots within newly annexed areas and to include area for storage pneumatically tired vehicles and
used car lots.
(C) Parking Requirements:
1. Off street automobile parking space or area shall be provided according to the following schedule and subject to the following conditions in any
district in which any of the following uses shall be established.
2. All dwelling units, motels, tourist courts, tourist homes and trailer parks shall have the required parking spaces provided on the lot on which such
above dwelling type unit is located.
3. In the event the following listed uses, excepting preceding dwelling type uses, are located on property within a residential zone, the required parking
area shall be located on the same or contiguous lots or an adjacent lot separated from the property by no more than twenty feet (20').
4. Wherever the below listed uses, excepting above dwelling type uses, are located on property with a commercial or less restrictive zone, such
required parking space shall be provided so that at least one point of the parking area shall be no farther than four hundred feet (400') distant in a
direct line from the building or, if no building is present, from the property line. A letter waiving protest of a parking SID may waive the parking
requirements in the core area.
5. In the event that all or any part of the parking area not on the same lot with the primary use is located in a residential zone, parking zoning must be
secured for the area or that part thereof within a residential zone.
Churches At least 1 parking space for each 5 seats or 1 parking
space for each 90 linear inches of pew space
Doctors' offices, dentists' offices, medical clinics, medical centers 1 parking space for each 200 square feet or gross floor
area between exterior walls
Libraries At least 1 parking space for each 190 square feet of
gross floor area and 1 parking space for each 3
employees
Medical service facilities:
(a) Hospitals Parking space for 1 vehicle for each 3 patient beds,
plus at least 1 parking space for each resident doctor,
plus at least 1 additional parking space for each 3
employees, including nurses not domiciled on the
property
(b) Nursing homes and sheltered care homes Parking space for 1 vehicle for each 5 patient beds,
plus at least 1 parking space for each 3 employees
Motels, hotels, tourist courts, tourist homes, mobile home parks and travel trailer parks
1 parking space for each dwelling unit, rooming unit or
guestroom, and 1 parking space for each mobile home
space or travel trailer space in a mobile home park or a
travel trailer park
Multi-family residences At least 1.3 parking space for each 1 bedroom dwelling
unit or efficiency apartment; at least 1.5 parking space
for each 2 bedroom dwelling unit; and at least 2 parking
spaces for each dwelling unit containing more than 2
bedrooms
Office buildings, retail establishments, commercial buildings and any commercial
building and any commercial establishment not specified herein
1 parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area
Places of public assembly, including, but not limited to, private clubs, lodges and
fraternal buildings, not providing overnight accommodations, assembly hall, exhibition
halls, convention halls, auditoriums, skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, theaters,
sports arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, racetracks, fairgrounds,
funeral homes, community centers
At least 1 parking space for each 4 seats provided for
patron use and at least 1 parking space for each 60
square feet of floor area used for public assembly but
not containing seats
Restaurants, bars, taverns, nightclubs and all other similar dining and/or drinking
establishments
Parking area of at least 1 space for each 50 square feet
of floor area (exclusive of kitchen, rest rooms, and
storage, etc.)
Schools, including academies, colleges, universities, elementary schools, junior high
schools, high schools, prep schools, and all other similar institutions of learning
At least 1 parking space for each 3 employees
including administrators, teachers, and building
maintenance personnel, and at least 1 parking space
for each 5 high school, college or university students,
predicated upon the designed capacity of the physical
plant
Service stations Parking space for 2 vehicles for each service bay in the
station. Pump islands shall not be considered as
service bays. Standing areas at pump islands and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 118/135
interior circulation areas shall not be counted as
parking space
Single-family dwellings, boarding houses, dormitories, and fraternity and sorority
houses
At least 1 parking space for each dwelling unit or
rooming unit and at least 1 parking space for each 2
guestrooms, except residential one-family (class A)
must provide 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants, and all other structures devoted to
similar mercantile or industrial pursuits including, but not limited to, warehouses and
storage buildings and yards, public utility buildings, contractor equipment and lumber
yards, business service establishments, such as blueprinting, printing and engraving,
soft drink bottling establishments and fabricating plants
At least 1 parking space for each 3 employees
(Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-11: OFF STREET LOADING SPACE:
(A) General Provisions:
1. Whenever the expression "off street loading space" is used, it shall mean an on the property space for the standing, loading, and unloading of
vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets, alleys and sidewalks. Such space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width and
thirty feet (30') in length, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
(B) Off Street Loading Required: In the use of land for residential, commercial, industrial, or any other purpose, no residential, commercial, industrial or any
other building or structure shall be erected unless provision is made for the location on the lot of off street loading space on the basis of the following
minimum requirements:
1. Every hotel, office building, restaurant, department store, freight, terminal or railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing
establishment, retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale establishments, and all other structures devoted to similar mercantile or
industrial pursuits, which has an aggregate gross floor area of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide off street truck loading
or unloading berths in accordance with the following table:
Square Feet Of Aggregate Gross
Floor Area Devoted To Such Use
Required
Number Of Berths
25,000 - 40,000 1
40,001 - 100,000 2
100,001 - 160,000 3
160,001 - 240,000 4
240,001 - 320,000 5
320,001 - 400,000 6
400,001 - 490,000 7
For each additional 90,000 1 additional
(C) The off street loading facilities required shall in all cases be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no cases
shall the required off street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off street parking requirements of this chapter.
(D) The provisions of this section shall apply to the entire City of Havre including the central business district. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-12: NAME PLATES AND SIGNS1:
11-1-13: PLANTING:
(A) Multiple Dwellings: For multiple dwellings, any required front or side yard shall be planted and permanently maintained with grass.
(B) Commercial Uses: For commercial uses, any required front yard shall be landscaped, and planted as recommended by the planting ordinance, and
permanently maintained and treed as recommended.
(C) General: If parking is provided between the main building and the street or avenue, a screen shall be planted and permanently maintained inside and
along the property line, such screen shall be of plants approved by the City of Havre, and shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. Trees shall be
planted according to type and spacing as approved by the City of Havre. All trees when planted shall be a minimum of one inch (1") in diameter. All
required planting shall be completed within one year from the date of occupance. Other decorative walls may be approved upon submittal of plans to
the Zoning Board. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 119/135
11-1-14: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Uses:
1. Conformance And Permits Required: No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved, nor
shall any building, structure or land be hereafter used, designed, or intended to be used for any use other than is permitted in the district in which
such building, structure or land is located and then only after applying for and securing a permit.
2. Public Utilities And Railways: For the purpose of this chapter, nothing herein shall be so interpreted as to interfere with the construction, maintenance
and operation of the facilities of any public utility or public service including railway tracks and rights-of-way, on any property where such use lawfully
existed at the time this chapter became effective.
3. Permitted Under Law: No use of land shall be permitted or conditionally permitted within the City of Havre that is in violation of Federal, State or local
law. (Ord. 903, 12-18-2017)
(B) Area:
1. Area Requirements: Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, located or maintained on a lot unless such building, structure or enlargement conforms with the area regulations of the district in which it is
located.
(C) Exceptions:
1. Exceptions To Height Regulations: This chapter shall not be deemed to limit or restrict the height of belfries, chimneys, clock towers, cooling or
catalytic cracking towers, elevators, bulkheads, grain elevators, penthouses, stacks, water towers, ornamental towers, wireless or television towers
or any similar appurtenances to buildings, imposed by other ordinances. Churches, public or semipublic buildings, hospitals, schools, colleges and
private clubs may exceed the height restrictions of the district as approved by the Board of Adjustments.
(D) Exceptions To Area Requirements:
1. Where churches, schools, hospitals or colleges are located in any residential district and have no portion used as a place of habitation, the depth of
the rear yard may be reduced as approved by the Board of Adjustments.
2. The front side and rear yards may be waived where dwellings are erected above stores, shops or other commercial uses that do not require such
yards, when approved by the Board of Adjustments.
3. No lot area shall at any time be so reduced or diminished that the front, rear or side yard shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter.
4. Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed.
5. On any corner lot in which a front yard is required by this chapter, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, tree or
other growth exceeding four feet (4') above the street grade shall be maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and
a straight line joining said street lines at points which are thirty feet (30') distant from the point of intersection measured along said street lines.
6. On lots of irregular shape where the yard regulations can be determined but cannot reasonably be complied with, or on lots so located that
appropriate improvement cannot be secured through strict adherence to the yard regulations, the yard regulations may be modified by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
7. On the flank lines on any interior lot, between the front lot line and a line parallel with the rear wall of the rear most adjacent dwelling regulations shall
apply:
(a) No fence hereafter erected shall exceed a horizontal height of four feet (4') above the main level of the ground and any such fence shall be of
open work construction and not solid.
(b) No hedge hereafter planted, located or maintained shall exceed a horizontal height of four feet (4') above the main level of the ground.
(c) On the flank lines on any interior lot between the rear lot line and a line parallel with the rear wall of the rear most adjacent dwelling no fence or
hedge hereafter erected or planted shall exceed a horizontal height of six feet (6') above the main level of the ground. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-
4-1974)
11-1-15: NONCONFORMING USES:
(A) The lawful use of land, existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be
continued, but, if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one year, future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this section.
(B) The lawful use of a building existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions
hereof, and such use may be extended throughout the building provided no alterations, except those required by ordinance, are made therein, and the
building has not been enlarged or added to.
(C) When a district shall hereafter be changed, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued, or changed to any use
permitted in the same district as that in which the existing use is permitted; provided, that all other regulations governing the new use are complied
with.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 120/135
(D) This chapter shall not apply to existing structures or the existing use of any buildings, but shall apply to any alteration of a building to provide for its use
for a purpose, or in any manner, different from the use to which it was put before alteration; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prevent
the restoration of a building damaged not more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing building or structure or prevent the continuance of the use of
such building, or part thereof, as such uses existed at the time of such damage; provided, that such restoration shall be begun, and diligently pursued,
within one year; nor, shall the same be construed to prevent a change of such existing use under higher classification as herein provided. No building
which has been damaged as above provided to the extent to more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing building or structure shall be rebuilt or
repaired, except in conformity with the regulations contained in this section.
(E) The zoning board of adjustment may authorize in a residence district, for a period of not more than two (2) years from the date of such permit, a
temporary building for commerce or industry incidental to the residential development; provided, however, that such permit shall be renewed.
(F) Any structure vacant at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be classified as to use, in accordance with its previous use, arrangement, design
or intended use, except that any structure vacant for a period of one year immediately prior to the adoption of this chapter shall not be considered a
nonconforming use as defined in this section and any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 8-
5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-16: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
singular number include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive; the word person includes
individuals, partnerships, corporations, clubs, or associations. The following words or terms, when applied in this chapter, shall carry full force when used
interchangeably; lot, plot, parcel, or premises, used, arranged, occupied or maintained; sold or dispensed, construct, reconstruct, erect, alter (structurally
or otherwise) but not the term maintenance. The term "city" and "county" shall mean the city of Havre and the county of Hill, respectively; board shall mean
board of adjustments; commission shall mean city-county planning board; council shall mean city council. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached subordinate building situated on the same lot with the main building used for an accessory use. If there is less than
ten feet (10') of separation from the main building, it will be considered as an attached building.
ACCESSORY USE: A subordinate use of a building, other structure, or use of land:
(A) Which is clearly incidental to the use of the main building, other structure or use of land, and
(B) Which is customary in connection with the main building, other structure, or use of land, and
(C) Which is located on the same zoned lot with the main building, other structure, or use of land.
ADJACENT: Nearby, but not necessarily touching.
ALLEY: A public passageway, eight feet (8') to twenty five feet (25') wide, affording a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ANTIQUE: A product that is sold or exchanged because of value derived due to oldness as respects the present age.
APARTMENT: A suite of rooms within a building arranged, designed or used for residential purposes for one family, and containing independent sanitary
and cooking facilities. The presence of cooking facilities conclusively establishes the intent to use for residential purposes. Each apartment shall be
considered a dwelling unit.
APARTMENT-HOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing both apartment and rooming units in some combination and containing those services
customary and appropriate to a hotel. Such services to be available for the convenience of the occupants thereof only.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building or that portion thereof containing more than four (4) dwelling units or efficiency apartments.
ARTIST: One who practices the fine arts which shall be limited to painting, drawing, sculpture, poetry, music, dancing and dramatic art. This is not deemed
to include the business of teaching one or more of the arts.
ATTACHED BUILDING: A building which has any part of its bearing wall in common with another building or which is connected to another building by a
roof. If there is less than ten feet (10') of separation from the main building, then an accessory building will be considered as an attached building.
AUTO COURT: See definition of Motel.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place of business having pumps and/or storage tanks from which liquid fuel and/or lubricants are dispensed at retail
directly into the motor vehicle. Sales and installation of auto accessories, washing, polishing, inspections and cleaning, but not steam cleaning, may be
carried on incidental to the sale of such fuel and lubricants.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: See definition of Junkyard.
AWNING: Roof like cover entirely supported by and extending from a building for the purpose of protecting openings therein from the elements.
BAR: An establishment the main use of which is to serve spirituous liquors to be consumed on the premises. Food may or may not be served. Usually a
counter and stools are present.
BLOCK: That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, or nearest intersecting street and railroad
right of way, unsubdivided acreage, waterways, but not an alley of such size as to interrupt the continuity of development of both sides thereof.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling in which there is no more than one dwelling unit and more than two (2) but not exceeding five (5) rooming units or
guestrooms. Meals may or may not be provided to the occupants thereof. A boarding house shall not include homes for persons not members of the family
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 121/135
requiring professional or semiprofessional care by reason of physical or mental infirmity or disease or by reason of age.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosures of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING AREA: The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the mean grade level of the principal buildings and all accessory buildings, exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces, steps and roof overhangs and balconies.
BUILDING, CLOSED: A structure completely enclosed by a roof and walls of approved construction.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest level of the roof surface of flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs or to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, gambrel or hip roofs. The building height limitations of this chapter shall not apply
to church spires, signs, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, vents, flagpoles, radio and television towers, fire lookout
towers or airway beacons nor to any bulkhead, elevator, water tank or similar structure extending above the roof and not occupying any aggregate area
greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the roof area.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building, or buildings, in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In residential district, any dwelling shall
be deemed to be the main building of the lot on which the same is situated.
CANOPY: See definition of Awning.
CARPORT: A building used solely for the storage of motor vehicles and containing no enclosing walls, screens, lattices or other materials other than the
wall or walls of the building to which it attaches. The area of supporting columns or wall sections of any one side other than the wall or walls of the building
to which it attaches or other than a storage room shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of that side. Screen, lattice, grill work or other material which has a
net of ten percent (10%) closed area may be permitted provided the maximum area of fifty percent (50%) is not exceeded.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE: An establishment the main use of which is to serve spirituous liquors to be consumed on the premises. Food may or may not be
served. A lounging area is provided and a counter is not necessarily present.
COMMERCIAL USE: A use operating for profit or compensation. Without limiting this definition, the allowable use shall include apartment houses, motels
and hotels.
CONDOMINIUM: An ownership in fee simple by an individual of a single unit in a multi-unit structure, coupled with ownership of an undivided interest in
the land and other elements of the structure held in common with other unit owners of the building. Commonly it refers to individual ownership of a unit in a
multi-unit structure such as an apartment building.
CONTIGUOUS: In contact with.
CORNER LOT: A lot abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135). A corner lot shall be considered to be in that block in which the lot fronts.
COURT: Any space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is unobstructed and open to the sky above the floor
level of any room having a window or door opening on such court. The width of a court shall be its least horizontal dimension.
CUSTOM: Work, service or assembly made to order for individual customers for their own use or convenience.
DAY NURSERY: See definition of Nursery School.
DORMITORY: A building or that portion thereof other than a hotel, motel, boarding house, fraternity house, or sorority house containing three (3) or more
rooming units or guestrooms or sleeping facilities for more than five (5) persons. Such rooming units or guestrooms shall be for residential purposes only.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment where food or beverages are dispensed and where such food or beverages are consumed on the premises
but not within a building.
DRIVE-IN THEATER: An open air theater designed for viewing by the audience from motor vehicles.
DUPLEX: A building designed and/or used exclusively for residential purposes and containing two (2) dwelling units separated by a common party wall or
otherwise structurally attached.
DUST FREE: Shall mean the property is maintained dust free by paving with one of the following methods: a) asphaltic concrete, b) cement concrete, c) a
penetration treatment of bituminous material and a seal coat of bituminous material binder and mineral aggregate, or d) the equivalent of the above as
approved by the division of building inspection.
DWELLING: A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING GROUP: A single-family dwelling and one or more single-family or duplex dwellings located on a lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building designed and/or used exclusively for family residential purposes containing more than one but not more than four (4)
dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed and/or used exclusively for residential purposes for one family only and containing not more than one
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, UNIT: One or more rooms within a building arranged, designed or used for residential purposes for one family and containing independent
sanitary and cooking facilities. The presence of cooking facilities conclusively establishes the intent to use for residential purposes.
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit of no more than one room in addition to kitchen and bath.
FAMILY: A family is:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 122/135
(A) An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption and usual servants, living together as a single housekeeping unit in
a dwelling unit, or
(B) A group of not more than five (5) persons, who need not be related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
FAMILY GAME CENTER: A supervised indoor amusement and recreation facility, the main use of which consists of mechanical, electronic, and electrical
devices for entertainment and amusement, and which may include, but not be limited to, such facilities as card games, ping pong tables, and billiard
tables.
FINE ARTS: Limited to painting, drawing, sculpturing, poetry, music, dancing and dramatic art.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area ratio of a building shall be the ratio of the gross floor area of the building, excluding those parts of the building
specifically excluded, to the gross land area of the site which gross land area may include one-half (1/2) of all abutting streets and alleys which are
dedicated to public use or as determined by the board of adjustment.
FOSTER HOME: A home maintained by any individual or individuals having the care of one or more but no more than five (5) minor children, other than
those related to each other by blood or marriage, or related to such individuals, or who are legal wards of such individuals.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE: A building containing no more than one dwelling unit and no more than two (2) rooming units or guestrooms. Such
rooming units or guestrooms shall be for residential purposes only.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building occupied by the passenger motor vehicles of the families residing on the same lot. This may include one
commercial vehicle under five (5) ton capacity. Noncommercial vehicles of persons nonresident on the lot may occupy up to one-half (1/2) the capacity of
such garage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building, other than that herein defined as a private garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles, or where any such
vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA: The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, upper floors and
storage area, and excluding areas devoted to housing of mechanical equipments, electrical substations and mail areas, and also excluding general office
floor area having no connection to any of the retail establishments in the planned shopping center, up to twenty percent (20%) of the gross leasable floor
area of the center.
GUESTROOM: A rooming unit of only one room. If a guestroom contains sleeping facilities for more than two (2) persons, each unit of sleeping facilities
for two (2) persons or any portion thereof shall be considered as a separate guestroom for density purposes only.
HISTORICAL SOCIETY: An organization of persons interested in the study, collection, interpretation and dissemination of information and material related
to the historical development of a given area, or combination thereof.
HOBBY SHOP: An accessory use which is not conducted for remuneration but solely as a hobby, pastime or means of education or entertainment. Such
activity shall be carried on entirely within a building. No noise, heat, light, odor or vibration shall be emitted beyond the property line.
HOME: A place of human habitation.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or a profession which:
(A) Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in an attached building; and
(B) Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and; further provided, that such use does not alter or
change the exterior character of the dwelling unit or exterior character of the attached building, and in connection with which there is kept no stock in
trade or commodity sold upon the premises, and in which no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing in the home;
and
(C) Which conforms to the following additional conditions:
1. The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within an attached building.
2. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the character of the principal building.
3. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced;
(D) No mechanical equipment shall be used except that normally used for domestic, hobby, or household purposes;
(E) A "home occupation" shall not include, but such exclusion shall not be limited to, the following:
Barbershops.
Commercial stables, veterinary office.
Hospitals and kennels.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 123/135
Real estate offices.
Restaurants.
HOSPITAL: An institution for the diagnosis, care or treatment of two (2) or more unrelated persons suffering from illness, injury or deformity, or for the
rendering of obstetrical or other professional medical care other than in an emergency. The term "hospital" shall not be construed to include the office of a
physician or practitioner. (For the purposes of this definition "nursing care" shall not be construed to be professional "medical care".)
HOTEL: A building or that portion thereof containing more than five (5) rooming units or sleeping facilities for more than twenty (20) persons. Such rooming
units or dwelling units being for residential purposes or transient purposes. A hotel shall provide customary hotel services such as bellboy service, room
service, maid service, telephone, secretarial or desk service.
HOUSEKEEPING RESIDENTIAL USE: All residential uses except those used for transient purposes.
INTERIOR LOT: A lot having but one side abutting on a street.
JUNKYARD: The use of a lot or portion thereof for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, dismantled automobiles, or other vehicles, or machinery,
or parts thereof, including scrap metals, rags, or other scrap materials.
KEY LOT: An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to the rear line of a corner lot.
KINDERGARTEN: See definition of Nursery School.
LAUNDRY, SELF-HELP: A building in which domestic type washing machines and/or driers are provided on a rental basis for use by individuals doing their
own laundry.
LIBRARY: A place in which books, manuscripts, musical scores or other library or literary and artistic materials are kept for use and only incidentally for
sale.
LIBRARY, RESEARCH: A place in which books, manuscripts, musical scores or other literary and artistic materials are kept for use, and only incidentally
for sale, as reference in the inquiry and investigation of facts aimed at interpretation and discovery.
LOT, COMMERCIAL: A parcel of land or two (2) or more contiguous parcels zoned commercial or industrial to be used as a unit under the provisions of
the commercial and industrial zoning districts of this chapter.
LOT LENGTH: The length (or depth) of a lot shall be:
(A) If the front and rear lines are parallel, the shortest distance between such lines.
(B) If the front and rear lines are not parallel, the shortest distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
(C) If the lot is triangular, the shortest distance between the front lot line and a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet (10') long lying
wholly within the lot.
LOT LINE: (A) Front: The front property line of a lot shall be determined as follows:
1. Corner Lot: The front property line of a corner lot shall be the shorter of the two (2) lines adjacent to the streets as platted, subdivided or laid out.
Where the lines are equal, the front line shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings in
the block. If such front is not evident then either may be considered the front of the lot but not both.
2. Interior Lot: The front property line of an interior lot shall be the line bounding the street frontage.
3. Through Lot: The front property line of a through lot shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other
buildings in the block. Where such front property line is not obviously evident, the board of adjustment shall determine the front property line. Such
a lot over two hundred feet (200') deep shall be considered, for the purpose of this definition, as two (2) lots each with its own frontage.
(B) Rear: The rear property line of a lot is that lot line opposite to the front property line. Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear
property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than ten feet (10') long, lying within the lot and parallel to the front property line. In the event that
the front property line is a curved line, then the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than ten feet (10') long, lying within the lot
and parallel to a line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.
(C) Side: The side property lines of a lot are those lot lines connecting the front and rear property lines of a lot.
LOT, RESIDENTIAL: A parcel of land or two (2) or more contiguous parcels to be used as a unit under the provisions of this chapter, as shown in the
records of the Hill County recorder's office, and having its principal frontage on a street, in any district where a half street not less than one-half (1/2) of that
width prescribed for that street by the minimum right of way standards map, and amendments thereto, has been dedicated, any lots facing or siding on
such half streets from which side the required width of dedication has been made shall be deemed to have frontage on a street. No permit shall be issued
for buildings on a lot fronting on a half street of less than thirty five feet (35') for a major arterial and thirty feet (30') for all other streets within the city of
Havre. An appeal from this requirement may be taken to the board of adjustment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 124/135
For the purpose of this section, a private way of passage meeting city right of way standards which is burdened with an easement of passage,
running with the land, to the benefit of all lots having frontage thereon, may be considered as a street subject to the following provisions:
(A) Such private way of passage must have been a part of a legally recorded subdivision in which substantial development of street or buildings
has commenced at the time of passage of this chapter, or
(B) A proposed private way of passage must be submitted to the commission for its recommendations and then be approved by the city council of
the city of Havre.
However, such private way of passage shall not be considered a street wherein it is contiguous with dedicated right of way except at an intersection
of the private way of passage and the dedicated right of way.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot shall be:
(A) If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines.
(B) If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot as a distance equal to
the front setback required for the district in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property
lines.
MAINTENANCE: The replacing of a part or parts of a building, which have been made unusable by ordinary wear or tear, or by the weather.
MALL: A pedestrian way of passage within or between closed buildings. Only areas at least fifty feet (50') within any open end mall shall be considered as
being within the mall.
MARQUEE: See definition of Awning.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot, tract or parcel of land licensed and used or offered for use in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of
occupied mobile homes and travel trailers subject to chapter 3 of this title and used solely for living and/or sleeping purposes. Travel trailers shall not
occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the spaces of the total mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision for residential use by mobile homes exclusively.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing apartments, and/or rooming units, and/or guestrooms each of which maintains a separate outside
entrance. Such building or group of buildings being designed, intended, or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers, and providing
automobile parking conveniently located on the premises.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building designed and/or used exclusively for residential purposes and containing more than one dwelling unit.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: A multiple dwelling is a "multi-family residence" as defined herein.
MUSEUM: An institution, including historical museums, devoted to the procurement, care and display of objects of lasting interest or value.
NONCONFORMING USES: See section 11-1-15 of this chapter.
NURSERIES: A building and premises where children are temporarily cared for in their parents' absence.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution for the care of children, of preschool age, the activity of which shall be conducted between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Even though some instruction may be offered in connection with such care, the institution shall not be
considered a "school" within the meaning of the ordinance.
NURSING HOME: A facility other than a hospital in which continuing nursing care on a twenty four (24) hour basis by a graduate nurse licensed in
Montana or other nursing personnel meeting standards adopted by the state board of health, is provided and in which medical services are prescribed or
performed under the direction of a physician or surgeon licensed to practice in Montana, for two (2) or more unrelated persons who are not acutely ill and
not in need of hospital care.
OPEN INNER COURT: A court bounded on all sides by building walls or other structures.
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL: A lot upon which cars are parked subject to remuneration.
PARKING LOT, PRIVATE: A lot upon which cars are parked without charge and in conformance with requirements of section 11-1-10 of this chapter.
PERMITTED USE: A use specifically permitted or analogous to those specifically permitted as set forth in sections 11-1-1 through 11-1-9 of this chapter.
PHARMACY: A place where medicines only are compounded or dispensed.
PLATE LINE: That part of a wall that supports the rafters.
PORCH, OPEN: A roof partially supported by columns or wall sections. Any portion of such open porch which extends into a front or side yard shall be so
constructed that the area of supporting columns or wall sections on any one side shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of that side; and further, that screen,
lattice, grill work or other material which has a net ten percent (10%) closed area may be permitted, provided the maximum area of fifty percent (50%) is
not exceeded. Such open porch shall be used solely for ingress and egress, and not for occupancy as a sleeping porch or washroom.
PRIVATE USE: One which is restricted to the occupants of a lot or building, together with their guests, where compensation for such use is not received
and where no business or commercial activity is associated with such use of building.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 125/135
PROFESSIONAL USE: The rendering of service of a professional nature by:
(A) Architects, engineers and surveyors.
(B) Doctors of medicine, osteopathy, dentistry and optometry.
(C) Lawyers.
(D) Accountants.
(E) Consultants and practitioners who are recognized by the appropriate above licensed professions.
(F) Chiropractors, chiropodists, and naturopaths.
PROHIBITED USE: A use which is not specifically permitted or analogous to those specifically permitted.
RESIDENTIAL PURPOSE: The intent to use and/or the use of a room or group of rooms for the living, sleeping and housekeeping activities of persons on
a permanent or semipermanent basis of an intended tenure of one month or more.
RESIDENTIAL USE: Shall be deemed to include single and multiple dwellings and mobile homes.
REST HOME: See definition of Hospital.
RESTAURANT: An establishment other than a boarding house where meals which are prepared therein may be secured by the public.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Boarding House.
ROOMING UNIT: A suite of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for residential or transient purposes but not including
cooking facilities of any kind. Wherein a rooming unit is designed to be divided into separate guestrooms, then each separate sleeping room shall be
counted as a guestroom for density purposes.
RUMPUS ROOM: A room in the main building or in an accessory building which is used as a playroom or study room by the occupants of the lot and their
guests for such purposes and is not used for sleeping, living, or as a business office.
SCHOOL: A place of general instruction including college, but not including business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies or
specialized trade or vocational schools.
SERVICE STATION: See definition of Automobile Service Station.
SHELTERED CARE HOME: A facility other than a hospital or nursing home for two (2) or more unrelated persons who are not acutely ill which renders
personal care and assistance with meals, dressing, medications prescribed by a physician or surgeon licensed in Montana, and other personal assistance
of a similar type and includes homes for the aged and infirm who do not need skilled nursing care.
SNACK BAR: A retail food service establishment serving such items as coffee, tea, milk, soft drinks, sandwiches and pastry. All customer service shall be
confined to the physical limits of the snack bar.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement, the ceiling of which is less than four feet six inches (4'6") above the grade level,
shall not be considered a story. A mezzanine floor shall be considered a story if it exceeds thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the area of the
floor next below it.
STREET: A dedicated public passageway which affords a principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner and attached to the ground.
SUBLOT: A subordinate and integral part of a lot which lot is identified on a subdivision recorded in the maps and plats records of the Hill County recorder.
THROUGH LOT: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
TOURIST COURT: See definition of Motel.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family residence located within a multi-family structure with land and appendages thereon held in fee simple and common walls
covered by party wall agreements and covenants running with the land. Commonly it refers to a single-family house of two (2) or sometimes three (3)
stories that is connected to a similar house or houses by a common sidewall or sidewalls.
TRANSIENT PURPOSES: The intent to use and/or the use of a room or a group of rooms for the living, sleeping and housekeeping activities of persons
on a temporary basis of an intended tenure of less than one month.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. Such home shall not exceed
eight feet (8') in width and thirty two feet (32') in length, and shall be classified as a travel trailer whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling
equipment have been removed, or whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any lot, tract or parcel of land licensed and used or offered for use in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of
occupied mobile homes, travel trailers, pickup campers, converted buses, tent trailers, tents or similar devices used for temporary portable housing and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 126/135
used solely for living and or sleeping purposes.
USE: The specific purpose for which a building or lot is arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
WHOLESALE: The business of selling goods or merchandise to retailers or jobbers for resale to the ultimate consumer.
YARD: A required space other than a court on any lot, unoccupied by a structure and unobstructed from the ground upward, and measured as the
minimum horizontal distance from the nearest wall or projection including carports, porches, eaves, bay windows, sills, or other projections, to the property
line opposite such building line; provided, however, that where a future width line is established by the provisions of this chapter for any street bounding
the lot, then such measurement shall be taken from the line of the building to such future width line.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of the yard being the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and
a line parallel thereto on the lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line; the depth of the required rear yard
shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the rear lot line toward the nearest part of a main building.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard, or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear
yard, the width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of a main building.
For the purposes of this chapter, all yards abutting streets or avenues shall be considered as front yards. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974; amd. Ord.
621, 8-4-1975, eff. 9-3-1975; Ord. 641, 2-7-1977)
11-1-17: ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of districts are shown for convenience upon the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and being part of this chapter, except that
all changes in zoning boundaries hereafter will be shown on a revised map on display in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-18: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall be enforced by the building inspector or his assistants, subject to such variations and interpretations which may be made by the board of
adjustment. Appeal of any decision of the enforcing officer, may be made to the board of adjustment as provided in the law of the state of Montana. (Ord.
599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
A building permit shall be issued by the enforcing officer before any building, or premises, or part thereof may hereafter be created, erected, changed or
converted, wholly, or in part, in its use or structure, to the effect that such building and use proposed therefor, conform to the provisions of this title. A
certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and issued before any building or premises, or part thereof, for which a building permit has been issued, is
allowed to be placed in use, certifying that such building and use proposed therefor conform to the provisions of the building permit and this title. (Ord. 621,
8-4-1975, eff. 9-3-1975)
Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion of any alterations, or during a partial
occupancy of such building. Such temporary certificates shall not be extended, nor shall they, in any way, affect the rights, duties and obligations of the
owner or the city relative to the use or occupancy of the premises converted, or any other matter covered by this title.
Each application for a building permit must be accompanied by a plat drawn to scale, and in such form, as may be prescribed by the building inspector,
showing the actual size and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary
to provide for the enforcement of the regulations in this title, and the issuing, as before required, of a certificate of occupancy. The building inspector shall
file a careful record of such application and plat. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-19: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; VARIANCES:
(A) Board Of Adjustment Established:
1. The board of adjustment is hereby established to act on variance and conditional use applications as herein detailed. Said board shall consist of five
(5) members appointed by the mayor for three (3) year terms, and subject to confirmation by the city council.
2. The board shall appoint one of its members as chairperson and will set its operating rules in accordance with section 76-2-321, Montana Code
Annotated.
3. The board's office shall be in the office of the city director of public works. All files of said board shall be held in said office.
4. The staff of the director of public works shall be at the disposal of the board to receive and process applications for variances and for conditional
uses and to give its advice to said board.
5. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson, or in the
absence of the chairperson, then the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board
shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
office of the board and shall be a public record.
(B) Powers Of Board:
1. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this title, the board of adjustment shall
have the power, after public notice and hearing, in a specific case, to vary or modify any of the regulations or provisions relating to the use,
construction, setback, yard, area and height requirements and parking and loading space requirements, as well as structural changes in, equipment
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 127/135
or alterations of buildings or structures in harmony with their fundamental purposes and intent, so that the public health, safety and general welfare
may be conserved and substantial justice done.
2. In every case, however, where a variance permit is either granted or revoked by the board of adjustment, it must be affirmatively shown that an
unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty would be created.
3. In addition to the foregoing powers, the board of adjustment shall have the power to permit conditional uses, subject to and in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 5 of this title.
4. Changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of districts may be made only by the city council, and in the manner designated by Montana
law.
(C) Variance, Procedure:
1. Written application for such variances or modifications shall be filed in the office of the director of public works and shall include a scale drawing of
the proposal showing the placement of structures on the lot and the approximate location of buildings around, and the written consent of the
adjoining landowners within a radius of one hundred fifty feet (150'), if possible. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a uniform fee,
established by the resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each application for a variance or modification for the
purpose of defraying expenses incidental to the proceedings.
2. The director of public works shall cause to be made such investigation of fact bearing on the application as will provide necessary information to
assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title. No application will be regarded as having been
filed until the fee stated above shall have been paid to the city.
(D) Variance, Notice Of Hearing:
1. Notice of said hearing shall be published once, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing date,
and notice shall also be posted on the bulletin board in the city hall.
2. Said hearing shall be held at the appointed time and place, in the city council chambers, and testimony may be taken by the board of adjustment
from persons interested in said variance or modification request, and from the staff of the office of the director of public works.
3. In approving such variance or modification, the board of adjustment shall designate such lawful conditions as will secure substantial protection for
the public health, safety and general welfare and shall find as follows:
(a) Such variance or modification will not be inconsistent with the intent and purpose of this title and/or any adopted general plan.
(b) That strict compliance with the provisions of this title would create unnecessary hardship or unreasonable situations on a particular property due
to unusual or extreme topography, unusual shape of the property or the prevalence of similar conditions in the immediate vicinity of the property.
(c) That such modifications will have minimal adverse effect on abutting properties or the permitted uses thereof.
(d) That the lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, which provisions
may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Bond to ensure removal of a structure within a specified period of time.
(2) A time period within which the proposed structure shall be erected.
(3) Regulations of point of vehicular ingress and egress.
(4) Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof.
(5) Requiring the surfacing and marking of off street parking and loading areas subject to specifications of the uniform building codes2 of the city
and of the board of adjustment.
(6) Any other such conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent
and purpose set forth in this section. Any approval under this section shall be subject to the terms of the conditions designated in connection
therewith.
(7) The board of adjustment may require that the applicant agree in writing to fulfill the required conditions as set forth herein, or post with the city a
faithful performance bond in the amount equal to the estimated costs of improvements plus fifteen percent (15%) to ensure the installation of
such improvements. This bond shall be furnished by a surety company authorized to write such bonds in the state, except in cases where a
cash deposit is accepted by the city. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
11-1-20: CHANGE IN DISTRICT:
(A) Changes in the boundaries of any district, or part thereof, may be made by the city council, but the following procedure shall be followed: a petition
requesting such change shall first be presented to the city council, duly signed by the owners of thirty five percent (35%) or more, either of the area of
the lots included within such change, or of the lots immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending one hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom, or, of the
lots directly opposite thereto, extending one hundred fifty feet (150') from the street frontage of such opposite lots. Such petition shall be referred to the
board of adjustment which shall make a careful investigation of such proposed change, and file the report thereon within thirty (30) days after the same
has been referred. The city council shall thereupon cause notice to be published twice in the official newspapers of the city of the time and place set for
the hearing upon such report. The first publication of such notice shall be made not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such hearing. At such
hearing, the city council shall hear all persons and all objections and recommendations relative to such proposed change, and thereupon action shall
be taken upon such ordinance by said city council, and such action shall be final and conclusive as to all matters and things involved in said petition;
provided, however, in case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom, or of those
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 128/135
directly opposite thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council.
(B) When such proposed amendment has been rejected by the city council, neither it, nor one involving only the same property, shall be offered for
adoption within one year after such rejection.
(C) Changes in the regulations and restrictions in any district may be made from time to time by the city council in the same manner as is prescribed in the
preceding paragraphs of this section for making changes in the boundaries, except that, such action may be initiated without the presentation of a
petition requesting it. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-21: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title.
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or
permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-22: PROCEDURE IN CASE OF NONCONFORMITY:
If on any inspection the condition of a building or premises, or its use or occupancy, is found not to conform to the requirements of this title, or the
conditions of an existing certificate therefor, the building inspector shall at once issue written notice to the owner, specifying the manner in which the
building or premises, or its use or occupancy, fails to so conform, and the owner shall at once take steps to make it so conform, as directed, by the building
inspector; and, if it is necessary for the proper protection of the occupants, he shall order the use or premises vacated until its condition is made
satisfactory and in conformity with the requirements of this title at which time a certificate will be issued as herein provided for new buildings, or for the use
of premises. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-23: INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE:
(A) In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
(B) It is not intended by this title to interfere with, or abrogate or annul rules or permits previously adopted or issued according to the law relating to the use
of buildings or premises, nor to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenants, or agreements between parties; provided, however, that
where this title imposes greater restrictions as to use, or requires larger open spaces or less height, than are required by such rules or permits or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974, eff. 9-4-1974)
11-1-24: VALIDITY OF REGULATIONS:
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this title shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect
the validity of this title as a whole, or any part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or held unconstitutional. (Ord. 599, 8-5-1974,
eff. 9-4-1974)
Chapter 2
CHANGES IN DISTRICTS
11-2-1: CHANGES IN DISTRICTS:
Changes in the boundaries of any district or part thereof, may be made by the council, but the following procedure shall be followed: A petition requesting
such change shall first be presented to the council, duly signed by the owners of thirty five percent (35%) or more, either of the area of the lots included
within such change or of the lots immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending one hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom, or, of the lots directly opposite
thereto, extending one hundred fifty feet (150') from the street frontage of such opposite lots. Such petition shall be referred to the board of adjustment
which shall make a careful investigation of such proposed change, and file the report thereon within thirty (30) days after the same has been referred. The
council shall thereupon cause notice to be published twice in the official newspapers of the city, of the time and place set for the hearing upon such report.
The first publication of such notice shall be made not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such hearing. At such hearing, the council shall hear all
persons and all objections and recommendations relative to such proposed change, and thereupon, action shall be taken upon such ordinance by said
council, and such action shall be final and conclusive as to all matters and things involved in said petition; provided, however, in case of a protest against
such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%), or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those
immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereof extending one hundred fifty
feet (150') from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
the members of the council.
When such proposed amendment has been rejected by the council, neither it, nor one involving only the same property, shall be offered for adoption within
one year after such rejection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 129/135
Changes in the regulations and restrictions in any district may be made from time to time by the council in the same manner as is prescribed in the
preceding paragraphs of this section for making changes in the boundaries, except that such action may be initiated without the presentation of a petition
requesting it. (Ord. 480, 8-3-1959)
11-2-2: MOBILE HOMES AS DWELLINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; DEFINITIONS:
Mobile homes or travel trailers may not be parked or located for use as a dwelling in the following districts:
Residential-one family R1
Residential-two family R2
A "mobile home" is defined for this purpose as a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used without a permanent foundation
as a dwelling when connected to utilities, and which is wider than eight feet (8') and longer than thirty two feet (32'). Any factory built building accepted
under the building code by reason of conforming to the construction provisions of the American national standard a 119.1-1969, standard for mobile
homes, shall be deemed a "mobile home" when used for sleeping or living purposes. A mobile home shall be considered to be a mobile home whether or
not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed and whether or not it has been placed on a permanent foundation or any
addition thereto has been built on the ground. A mobile home shall be a dwelling unit for density and parking requirement purposes but shall not be
considered a single or multiple dwelling, apartment, efficiency apartment, rooming unit or guestroom.
A "travel trailer" is defined for this purpose as a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed for use as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation uses, and would include any vehicular, portable structure which is not wider than eight feet (8') or longer than thirty two feet
(32'). (Ord. 585, 10-1-1973)
Chapter 3
MOBILE HOME COURTS
11-3-1: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Site: Area allotted per mobile home unit, including yard, driveway, etc., and the actual space on which the mobile home sets.
(B) Dead side: To have a minimum allowance of six feet (6').
(C) Entry side: To have a minimum of twenty feet (20').
(D) Rear (back):
1. Exterior lot line: To have a minimum of ten feet (10') from exterior perimeter on any side.
2. Interior lots: To have a minimum of six feet (6').
(E) Front: To have a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the edge of the property line.
(F) Storage sheds: To be required for each lot and to be built not less than forty eight (48) square feet, with a minimum height of six feet (6').
(G) Built on additions (entry): If built on to the trailer, shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') to the adjacent property line.
(H) The owner of the mobile home court shall provide a portable type of garbage cart with wheels, per mobile home; to be of a type which will hold at least
two (2) not more than thirty five (35) gallon containers, with two (2) handles and tight fitting lids.
(I) Each lot is to have a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area as grass, and there are to be two (2) trees per lot, which are to be at least one inch
(1") in diameter when planted.
(J) Each lot shall have a minimum of twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20') of off street parking area, to be constructed ofeither asphalt or concrete. (If
asphalt, to have a treated 2 foot by 10 foot plank for the perimeter.)
(K) If a fence is located on the perimeter of a lot, across the front and the two (2) sides, back twenty feet (20') shall not exceed four feet (4'), and the
remainder shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-2: STREETS WITHIN THE MOBILE HOME COURT:
(A) Undedicated Street: If not a dedicated street:
1. To be thirty one feet (31') back to back of the curb.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 130/135
2. To have a concrete curb and gutter design, at least twenty four inches (24") wide and of a type that can be driven over.
(B) Dedicated Street: If a dedicated street:
1. To be forty one feet (41') back to back of concrete curb.
2. To have a minimum of sixty feet (60') right of way.
3. To meet the present city standards for curbing; and if outside of Havre, to have similar curbing of a type to meet city standards.
(C) Paving: All mobile home courts, whether having private or dedicated streets, are required to have paved streets of the following specifications:
1. To be not less than two inches (2") of hot or cold asphalt mix, or, six inches (6") of reinforced concrete.
2. Base materials (minimums):
(a) To have at least six inches (6") of three inch (3") minus.
(b) To have at least two inches (2") of three-fourths inch (3/4") minus, or, can be of six inch (6") reinforced concrete. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-3: MOBILE HOME PARK:
(A) Minimum Lots Allowed: The minimum number of lots allowed within a mobile home park shall not be less than twenty five (25).
(B) Recreation Or Play Area Required: Each mobile home court is required to have a recreation or play area consisting of at least eight percent (8%) of the
total area of the mobile home park.
(C) Storage Areas: An area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home lot shall be allocated within themobile home park for storage,
and further, shall be enclosed with a six foot (6') chainlink fence or approved equal. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-4: UTILITIES:
(A) Water And Sewer Within The City System: Water and sewer within the city system must conform to city codes if connected to the city system, and, any
facility outside of the city, but connected to the city sewer or water system must also conform to city codes.
(B) Water And Sewer Outside The City:
1. Water:
(a) When available, public water supplies shall be used exclusively where there is satisfactory quantity and pressure.
(b) Community water supply:
(1) The following exhibits shall be furnished to the authority:
A. A topographic map of the land on which the distribution system is to be constructed showing size and location of all system components
including proposed future additions or extensions.
B. Complete construction details for developing source of supply both above and below ground or water surface.
C. Basic engineering data from which design of system was developed.
D. Details of all pumping and distribution systems.
(2) All systems shall comply with Montana state board of health and Montana plumbing code requirements for design and installation, and quantity
and quality of source. With the exception that all water mains shall have a minimum size of six inches (6"), and all service lines shall have a
minimum size of three-fourths inch (3/4").
(c) Operators of courts served by a private water supply shall be certified in compliance with sections 69-5701 through 69-5912, RCM, 1947.
2. Sewage Disposal:
(a) When available public sewage systems shall be used exclusively for all sewage disposal.
(b) Community sewage disposal system:
(1) The following exhibits shall be furnished for any proposed community sewage disposal system:
A. A topographic map of the land on which the system is to be constructed showing the size and location of proposed residences and water
supplies.
B. Plans, profiles and details of the collection system, pumping stations and any treatment facilities.
C. Basic engineering data from which the design of the system was developed, including results of all required soil tests.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 131/135
(2) All systems shall comply with Montana state board of health and Montana plumbing code requirements for design, construction and
maintenance.
(c) Operators of courts served by community sewage disposal systems shall be certified in compliance with sections 69-5901 through 69-5912,
RCM, 1947.
(B) Electrical: All hookups are required to be underground for electrical, telephone and cable television.
(C) Fire Hydrants:
1. Any mobile home court inside the city or any court connected to a public water supply system shall meet the city requirements for city hydrants, and
shall be installed every one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet.
2. Mobile home courts outside of the city, not connected to the city system, shall have one fire hydrant every one hundred twenty thousand (120,000)
square feet with a required six inch (6") main.
(D) Lighting: The private or dedicated streets within the mobile home court are to have streetlights with a minimum of four-tenths foot (0.4') candlepower.
(E) Antennas: Where antenna television is necessary, the antenna must be located on the lot. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-5: SERVICE BUILDINGS:
Service buildings must be located a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the side or rear lot line and have a minimum construction requirement of fire zone (3).
(Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-6: PROCEDURE FOR PRESENTATION OF PLATS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS:
(A) All proposals to the planning board must be submitted inrough platted form (preliminary drawing) showing the following:
1. Streets.
2. Water and sewer.
3. Mobile home lots with lot sizes and square footage shown.
4. The rough plat must be drawn on a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'); and further must be accompanied by a drawing of a typical proposed
mobile home lot with landscaping, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20').
5. The preliminary drawing must further show the relationship of the court to the area around it.
(B) All proposals submitted to the planning board as formal presentation for adoption by the planning board, must be submitted showing the following:
1. Streets.
2. All utilities.
3. Mobile home lots with lot sizes and square footage shown.
4. All related buildings within the court area.
5. Recreation or park area location and size.
6. The formal plat must be drawn on a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'); and further must be accompanied by a drawing of the typical
proposed mobile home lot with landscaping, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20').
7. The formal plat must further show the relationship of the court to the area around it.
8. The formal plat must further show the relationship of the court to the effect of the proposed court to the environment of the area (environmental
impact statement).
9. The formal drawing must be accompanied by a topographical map of the area.
10. The formal plat shall show the complete layout of the court area and be tied into its surrounding area by legal description. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-7: LICENSE AND PERMITS:
The city and county shall provide for the authority of delegated officials to enforce the requirements of this code. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
11-3-8: DEFINITIONS:
The FHA definitions under chapter 7 for mobile home court terms have been adopted and will apply as follows: (The following terms are defined because
they refer specifically to mobile home developments and may vary in many respects from their commonly accepted usage. These definitions apply only to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 132/135
mobile home properties.)
APPURTENANT STRUCTURES: Any structural addition.
COMMON AREA: Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying mobile home developments.
COMMUNITY SYSTEM (WATER OR SEWERAGE): A central system which serves all living units and is not publicly owned.
DENSITY: The number of mobile homes or mobile home stands per gross acre.
DRIVEWAY: A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home lot or for common access to a small group of lots or common
facilities.
EASEMENT: A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than the owner
who holds title to the land.
ELECTRIC BRANCH SERVICE: That part of the electric distribution system from the service equipment to the development receptacle.
ELECTRIC FEEDER: That part of the electric distribution system between the transformer and the service drop or drops (secondary voltage).
ELECTRIC PARK RECEPTACLE: The waterproof, attachment plug device located adjacent to the water and sewer outlets to receive the flexible cable
from the mobile home.
ELECTRIC SERVICE DROP: That part of the electric distribution system from a feeder to the service equipment serving one or more mobile home
spaces.
ENTRY SIDE: The side of the mobile home where the main entrance doorway is located.
LOT AREA: The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a mobile home.
LOT LINE: A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plat.
MASTER TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEM: A television antenna system designed to serve more than one living unit.
MOBILE HOME: A manufactured relocatable living unit.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land rented for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
NONENTRY SIDE: That side of the mobile home opposite the entry side.
PATIO: A surfaced outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile home living area.
PLAT: A map, plan or chart of a city, town, section or subdivision, indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PLOT: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
PRIVATE STREET: A private way which affords principal means of access to abutting individual mobile home lots and auxiliary buildings.
PROPERTY: A plot with any buildings or other improvements located thereon.
PROPERTY LINE: A recorded boundary of a plot.
PUBLIC STREET: A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties.
PUBLIC SYSTEM (WATER OR SEWERAGE): A system which is owned and operated by a local governmental authority or by an established public utility
company which is adequately controlled by a governmental authority. Such systems are usually existing systems serving a municipality, a township, an
urban county or a water or sewer district established and directly controlled under the laws of a state.
RIGHT OF WAY: The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists.
SHALL: Indicates that which is required.
SHOULD: Indicates that which is recommended but not required.
SITE: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
TENANT STORAGE: An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliarygeneral storage space for an individual mobile home. It may be provided in current
mobile home models.
YARDS: The area on the same lot with a mobile home between the lot line and the front, rear or side of the mobile home stand. This includes areas which
must remain clear of all structures such as enclosed patios, expandable rooms, garage or other additions. (Ord. 579, 2-5-1973)
Chapter 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 133/135
11-4-1: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The "subdivision regulations for Hill County and incorporated cities within Hill County, October 2006", be and they are hereby adopted as the official
subdivision regulations of the city. Such regulations, where applicable under the laws of Montana, shall control subdivisions with the said city. On and after
the effective date of this section, the city shall establish, by resolution from time to time adopted by the city council, any necessary subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 864, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 5
CONDITIONAL USES
11-5-1: INTENT:
Conditional use permits, for uses other than those permitted without review in a particular district, are intended to provide for individual or community
needs where they may be appropriate. Subject to provisions of this chapter, conditional uses shall, in a general sense, be considered permitted uses in
particular use districts and zones. Conditional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special forms that each such use shall be considered on an
individual case and, if permitted, shall be subjected to those conditions deemed necessary by the board of adjustment to prevent unduly negative impacts.
(Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
11-5-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
(A) No structure or land may be used for any purpose, or be constructed, designed or altered for such purpose, in a district where such use is not listed as
a permitted use, unless such use is provided for in this chapter and a conditional use permit is first obtained.
(B) No conditional use, conducted pursuant to any conditional use permit, may be expanded or enlarged, unless such expansion or enlargement is first
reviewed and approved pursuant to this chapter.
(C) A conditional use permit shall be granted by the board of adjustment only upon the basis of a statement of findings, warranted by the facts,
circumstances and evidence of record, that:
1. The proposed use conforms generally to the objectives of the comprehensive plan;
2. The proposed use will not adversely affect nearby properties or their occupants by:
(a) Measurably and substantially reducing the value or marketability of such properties;
(b) Substantially increasing traffic, noise, glare or odor onor adjacent to such properties;
(c) Substantially reducing or impairing the full enjoyment of such properties for the uses or purposes to which the same are presently put;
(d) Causing or increasing the likelihood of danger or peril from crime, fire or other hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or substantial
magnitude.
3. The proposed use meets the overall density, coverage, yard and/or other applicable regulations of the district in which it is to be located;
4. The provisions and requirements of subsection 11-5-3(B) of this chapter will be met; and
5. A public hearing has been held by the zoning board of adjustment, after the required legal notices have been given, and the public has been given
an opportunity to be heard upon the matter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
11-5-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURE:
(A) A person desiring a conditional use permit shall apply for the same at the office of the director of public works, on the appropriate forms, and shall pay
any required fee.
(B) All applications for conditional use permits shall indicate that:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures will be provided, assure automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, safe traffic flow
and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe;
2. Off street parking and loading areas will be provided as required by this title with particular attention to subsection (B)1 of this section and to any
noise, glare, odor or other adverse effects of the use on adjoining and other properties;
3. Solid waste deposit and collection areas will be provided with reference to subsections (B)1 and (B)2 of this section;
4. Utilities will be installed and located as required with attention given to their compatibility with nearby properties;
5. Landscaping, and screening and buffering of adjacent properties, will be provided as required by this chapter; and
6. Any signs and exterior lighting will be established with concern for glare, traffic safety, compatibility and harmonywith nearby properties, and the sign
codes1.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 134/135
(C) After an appropriate application has been filed and the required filing fee paid, the zoning board of adjustment shall make such an investigation of the
facts bearing on the application as will provide information necessary to assure that the action on the application is consistent with the intent and
purpose of this title and the provisions of the chapter. The zoning board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the application to gather facts and
information from all interested parties. At least seven (7) days' notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. In addition, the notice shall be posted on the bulletin board at city hall at least seven (7) days in advance of the hearing.
The zoning board of adjustment may continue the hearing, if necessary, to obtain additional information. If the hearing is continued, a second legal
notice is not required if the time, date and location of the continued hearing is announced at the hearing and placed in the official record of the zoning
board of adjustment.
(D) Following the public hearing, the zoning board of adjustment shall render its decision on the application, in writing, setting forth any and all pertinent
facts in regard to the application, including the statement of findings required by subsection 11-5-2(C) of this chapter. The applicant shall be given a
true and exact copy of the zoning board of adjustment's decision within thirty (30) days after the public hearing.
(E) The applicant for a conditional use permit, if the same is approved, may be required to assure the city of compliance with the requirements set forth in
said permit. This assurance may be, at the zoning board of adjustment's discretion, in the form of a cashier's check, a performance bond, acceptable
letter of credit, or cash placed in an escrow account in the amount of the estimated value of all required physical improvements, upon which the use is
conditional, plus fifteen percent (15%). The value shall be determined by agreement between the public works director and the applicant, or its
representative if it is an entity. Further, the public works director shall set forth the time or times by which the conditions are to be met. The applicant
shall forfeit the security in the event the conditions are not met by the deadlines. The applicant shall be advised, in writing, twenty (20) days before the
expiration of the time in which the conditions are to be met.
(F) A person possessing a conditional use permit issued by the city may apply to the city for an amendment to or extension of said conditional use permit.
The issuance of an extended or amended conditional use permit shall be subject to thefollowing terms and conditions:
1. Said application shall be received by the office of the director of public works prior to the expiration date noted on the original conditional use permit.
2. The applicant for an extended or amended conditional use permit shall follow the procedure set forth in and be subject to the terms and conditions of
the following sections of this code:
(a) Section 11-5-2 of this chapter;
(b) Subsections (A), (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section;
(c) Section 11-5-4 of this chapter.
3. The zoning board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on said application for extension or amendment, notice of which shall be given as
provided in subsection (C) of this section.
4. The zoning board of adjustment shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the extension or amendment of the conditional use permit. Any such
decision approving or conditionally approving said extension or amendment shall be in writing and shall contain a statement of findings required by
subsection 11-5-2(C) of this chapter.
(G) A fee for a conditional use application and for an amendment to or extension of a previously approved conditional use permit shall be set by a city
council resolution after a public hearing held for such purposes. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
11-5-4: CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL:
The zoning board of adjustment may make the granting of a conditional use permit subject to such additional, reasonable limitations or conditions as it
may impose upon structures, to reduce any adverse effects on nearby property or the occupants thereof, to preserve the character of the area, to protect
or enhance the view from this or other properties, or to make the proposed use more acceptable in other ways. The zoning board of adjustment may
further require as such a limitation or condition, that a building permit be obtained within a specific period of time. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)
11-5-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses, and no others are permitted subject to the other provisions of this chapter:
(A) In The Class A-1, A-2 Districts:
Churches, church residences and private schools.
Group daycare centers, daycare centers and group daycare homes.
Mobile homes, located outside mobile home parks, limited to mobile homes constructed after June 15, 1976, certified to meet the construction
standards of the U.S. department of housing and urban development, and which meet the following standards:
(a) Multisectional, twenty feet (20') wide at the narrowest point;
(b) Nonmetallic wood shake, fiberglass or asphalt shingle roof with minimum pitch of three to twelve (3:12);
(c) Eaves of six inches (6") minimum attached to perimeter of roof;
(d) Horizontal metal lap siding, simulated wood siding or wood siding;
(e) Complete perimeter enclosure similar in durability and appearance of masonry foundation;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=475 135/135
(f) Anchoring system totally concealed under the structure; and
(g) Towing hitch, wheels and axles removed.
Nonboarding elementary, middle and high schools, including playgrounds and play fields incidental thereto.
Public and private parks not originally considered as part of a residential subdivision proposal.
Recreational facilities.
Residences previously constructed and moved to a site, which meet all applicable provisions of title 4 of this code.
(B) In The Residential General District:
Churches, church residences and private schools.
Clinics.
Drugstores and grocery stores, any of which do not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in gross floor area, and excluding accessory
sales of gasoline and alcoholic beverages.
Group daycare homes, group daycare centers and daycarecenters.
Hospitals
Nonboarding elementary, middle and high schools, including playgrounds and play fields incidental thereto.
Nursing homes.
Parking lots, if landscaped and screened and adjacent to a business district.
Professional and business offices.
Public and private parks.
Public libraries.
Recreational facilities.
Residences previously constructed and moved to a site, which meet all applicable provisions of title 4 of this code.
Residential condominiums.
Retirement homes.
Retirement homes, tourist homes, and rooming and boarding houses, any of which are located in structures constructed during or previous to 1935,
and which contain at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area.
Rooming and boarding houses.
Self-service or coin operated laundry.
Telephone building or local exchange; provided, that the design conforms to the residential character of the area.
Tourist homes.
Townhouses which meet the requirements of chapter 1 of this title.
Utility structures; provided, that they are landscaped and screened.
(C) In The Commercial-Local, Commercial Office Restricted, Commercial Intermediate And Commercial General Districts:
Conditional uses permitted in the class A-1, class A-2 and residential general districts, as set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
Other uses, subject to the terms and conditions of the following sections of this code:
(a) Section 11-5-2 of this chapter;
(b) Subsections 11-5-3(A), (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this chapter;
(c) Section 11-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-7-1993)