7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 1/242
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 835
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 1, VOLUNTEER FIRE
DEPARTMENT, OF THE SHELBY MUNICIPAL CODE
BE OT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELBY, MONTANA:
THAT only the following sections below in Title 8, Chapter 1, as found in the Shelby Municipal Code, are amended to read as follows:
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
8-1-2: COMPOSITION; OFFICERS:
B. Elections:
3. Qualifications of Additional Officers: The assistant chief, fire captain and lieutenants shall be
technically qualified by training and a minimum of 5 years’ experience; shall have the ability
to command firefighters; and be able bodied citizens residing within the city, preferable
property owners whose business activities are normally within the city of Shelby.
4. Time Of Election: The annual election of the chief and other officers shall be held on the first
regular meeting in the month of December.
8-1-3: CHIEF
B. Qualifications: The chief shall be technically qualified by training and a minimum of 10
years’ experience and shall have the ability to command firefighters and hold their respect
and confidence.
8-1-4: MEMBERSHIP:
5. All members must make fifty percent of all meetings and forty percent of all fires annually or
said member will be brought before the officers for department status.
6. New applicants will have a background check; any applicant found to have a felony charge or
conviction will not be considered for appointment.
7. Newly appointed members to the department must serve a probationary period of twelve
months, complete a 30 hour basic firefighting course, carry a current first aid/CPR card, and
pass a six month test on all apparatus before being fully approved as a regular firefighter in
good standing.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 2/242
READ AND PROVISIONALLY ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELBY, SHELBY, MONTANA ON THE FIRST READING ON
THE 17TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2018 AND FINALLY READ AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELBY, MONTANA ON THE 9TH
DAY OF JANUARY, 2019.
__________________________________________
GARY MCDERMOTT, MAYOR
ATTEST:
__________________________________
JADE GOROSKI, FINANCE OFFICER
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 836
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1-ADMINISTRATION, CHAPTER 12-SCHEDULE OF FEES, PART 3 GARBAGE / LANDFILL COLLECTION
RATES
WHEREAS, the City of Shelby has acquired 20 yard size solid waste or garbage container; and,
WHEREAS, the City of Shelby Garbage / Landfill Collection Rates as set forth in 1-12-3, S.M.C. does not include a rate for 20 yard solid waste containers; and,
WHEREAS, the City of Shelby Council wishes to amend the rates to include 20 yard solid waste containers; and,
WHEREAS, the City of Shelby Council has determined to set the rate for 20 yard solid waste containers at five times (5x) the rate for 4 yard solid waste
containers.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SHELBY, MONTANA that the following sections of the Shelby Municipal Code shall be amended as follows and in full force and effect in the City of Shelby, Montana.
1-12-3(A)(4) GARBAGE COLLECTION RATE
Size Service
1 time
per
week
pickup
Monthly
Total
2
times
per
week
pickup
Monthly
Total
20 Yard
Container
Garbage $380
$840
$760
$1,680
Landfill $460 $920
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the rates for Minimum Charge, 1 ½ Yard Container, 2 Yard Container, 3 Yard Container, and 4 Yard Container remain as
specified in the Ordinance.
FIRST, passed and approved by the Council of the City of Shelby, Montana this
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 3/242
9th day of January, 2019.
_________________________________
Gary W. McDermott, Mayor
Attest:
______________________________________
Jade Goroski, Finance Officer
FINALLY, passed and approved by the Council of the City of Shelby, Montana this 22nd day of January, 2019.
_________________________________
Gary W. McDermott, Mayor
Attest:
______________________________________
Jade Goroski, Finance Officer
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 837
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1-ADMINISTRATION, CHAPTER 12-SCHEDULE OF FEES, PART 3 GARBAGE / LANDFILL EXEMPTION
FROM FEES
WHEREAS, the City of Shelby’s City Council intends that the rates as established in 1-12-3 S.M.C. are for customers who dump typical waste in the Municipal
landfill; and
WHEREAS, the City Council does not intend that these rates are applicable to any customer who dumps large amounts of waste such as debris from building
demolition or waste that requires special handling; and
WHEREAS, 1-12-3(A)(3) S.M.C. conflicts with the City Council’s intentions by exempting all commercial and residential customers receiving City of Shelby
garbage service “from paying any further fees when utilizing the landfill” as established by 1-12-3 S.M.C.; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined to remove or delete 1-12-3(A)(3) S.M.C. from the Shelby Municipal Code in order to resolve this conflict.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SHELBY, MONTANA that 1-12-3(A) of the Shelby Municipal Code shall be amended by deleting the following section of that ordinance and is no longer in effect in the
City of Shelby, Montana:
1-12-3(A)(3) USERS USING GARBAGE SERVICE: All commercial and residential customers receiving Municipal garbage service are exempt from
paying any further fees when utilizing the City of Shelby’s Municipal landfill
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the remaining sections of 1-12-3(A) S.M.C. remain as specified in the Ordinance.
FIRST, passed and approved by the Council of the City of Shelby, Montana this
22nd day of January, 2019.
_________________________________
Gary W. McDermott, Mayor
Attest:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 4/242
______________________________________
Jade Goroski, Finance Officer
FINALLY, passed and approved by the Council of the City of Shelby, Montana this 4th day of February, 2019.
_________________________________
Gary W. McDermott, Mayor
Attest:
______________________________________
Jade Goroski, Finance Officer
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Shelby, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 834, passed May 7, 2018. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 793
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE SHELBY, MONTANA CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Shelby, Montana, as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code of the city of Shelby, Montana prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing
the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the
city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. The above, referred to as the "Shelby City Code of 2008", will be on file at the office of the Shelby city hall.
READ AND PROVISIONALLY ADOPTED by the city council of the city of Shelby, Montana on the first reading on the 15th day of December, 2008.
LARRY J. BONDERUD, MAYOR
ATTEST:
TAMMY PEDERSON, DEPUTY CITY CLERK
FINALLY adopted by the city council of the city of Shelby, Montana on second reading and approved by the mayor, on the 5th day of January, 2009.
LARRY J. BONDERUD, MAYOR
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 5/242
ATTEST:
TERI RUFF, CITY FINANCE OFFICER
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
SHELBY CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Shelby. This code of ordinances
shall be known and cited as the SHELBY CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the
most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (1975 Code § 1.00.020; amd. 2008 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2008 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance or any section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance sets forth the revised ordinance or amended section in full. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to
the codifiers, and such ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city code. (1975 Code § 1.00.010; amd. 2008 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages shall be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the council. The city finance officer shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
finance officer. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances
passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such person through
the office of the city finance officer. Such code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property
of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city finance officer when directed so to do by order of the council. (2008 Code)
1-1-5: PROVISIONS CODIFIED:
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of Shelby, Montana. (1975 Code § 1.01.030)
1-1-6: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Shelby city code", or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Shelby, Montana, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (1975 Code § 1.01.050)
1-1-7: REFERENCES TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included in the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (1975 Code § 1.01.070)
1-1-8: CONSTRUCTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 6/242
The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.
(1975 Code § 1.04.040)
1-1-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the "Shelby city code" becomes effective. (1975 Code § 1.01.090)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all
special ordinances. (2008 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such matters, in
which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2008 Code)
1-2-3: PROCEEDINGS:
A. Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations: Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of
any ordinance of the code of the city of Shelby shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed
prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the
penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or
deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (1975 Code
§ 1.01.080)
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued
or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2008 Code)
1-2-4: REPEAL NOT TO REVIVE ANY ORDINANCE:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has not been repealed thereby. (1975
Code § 1.04.050)
1-2-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or
unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect. (1975 Code § 1.01.100)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 7/242
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city:
A. Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine gender and neuter gender.
B. Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
C. Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
D. Use Of Words And Phrases: Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the
language. (1975 Code § 1.04.020)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Shelby, Montana, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless
from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words
or phrases:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
CITY/TOWN: The city of Shelby, Montana, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Shelby, Montana, and such territory outside of the city over
which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
CODE: The city code of the city of Shelby.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the
last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Shelby, Montana. "All its members" or "all councilmen" mean the total number of councilmen provided by the
general laws of the state of Montana.
COUNTY: The county of Toole, state of Montana.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Shelby".
LAW: Denotes the applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of Montana, the ordinances of the city of Shelby, and when appropriate,
any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MCA: Abbreviation for Montana Code Annotated.
MAY: Permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUST/SHALL: Mandatory.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons
within the community.
OATH: Construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
word "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Shelby".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
ORDINANCE: A law of the city of Shelby; provided, that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may be in the form of a
resolution.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, or lessee of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, fraternal organization, company,
corporation, business, trust, or their manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee or any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 8/242
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Includes streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Montana.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other ways in this city which have been or may hereafter
be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
TENANT/OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TITLE OF OFFICE: Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the
city of Shelby.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when
the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case
such person is unable to write, by such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1975 Code § 1.04.010; amd. 2008 Code)
1-3-3: CONSTRUCTION:
A. Words And Phrases: All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
B. Required Acts: When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by the authorized agent. (1975 Code § 1.04.010)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1975 Code § 1.01.060; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. Violation: Whenever in any provision of this code or other ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, a
misdemeanor, an infraction, or an offense, or whenever in any such provision or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided therefor, any person, upon conviction for the violation of any such provision of
this code or ordinances, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment for each such misdemeanor offense; or by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) when the offense is
designated as an infraction by state law or by any section or provision of this code, or if the infraction is a repeat offense, a penalty not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each repeat violation. Each day any violation of any provision of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Construction; Interpretation: In the construction and interpretation of this section, the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered as a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 9/242
C. Violation Of Federal Water Pollution Control Act: Any person violating any city ordinance relating to local or federal wastewater pretreatment standards
implementing the federal water pollution control act, 33 UCC 1251 through 1387, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day for each violation or six (6) months' imprisonment, or both. (2008 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2008 Code)
1-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, PERMITTING:
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (1975 Code § 1.04.030)
1-4-4: ARRESTS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates:
ARREST: Taking, under real or assumed authority, custody of another for the purpose of holding or detaining him to answer a criminal charge.
CRIME: An act committed or omitted in violation of a law forbidding or commanding it; a term of broad and general import, including both felonies and
misdemeanors, and hence covering all infractions of the criminal law. (1975 Code § 1.24.010)
B. Authority To Arrest: It is the intention of the city council to grant authority to the city law enforcement agency to make arrests within five (5) miles of the
city limits, and along the line of water supply of the city, if the person or persons to be arrested has/have committed a crime within the hereinabove
described area. (1975 Code § 1.24.020)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2008 Code)
Chapter 5
GENERAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: WARDS1:
A. Boundaries: The boundaries of the wards of the city of Shelby, Montana, shall be changed, and the city be divided into three (3) wards, which shall be
numbered as ward 1, ward 2 and ward 3, respectively.
1. Dividing line between ward 1 and ward 3:
Beginning at a point where the centerline of Fifth Avenue North intersects the centerline of Main Street; thence south along the centerline of Fifth
Avenue South to the centerline intersection of Fifth Avenue South and Third Street South; thence west along the centerline of Third Street South to
the centerline intersection of the Third Street South and Sixth Avenue South; thence south along the centerline of Sixth Avenue South to the
centerline intersection of Sixth Avenue South and Fifth Street South; thence west along the centerline of Fifth Street South to the centerline
intersection of Fifth Street South and Cedar Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Cedar Avenue to the centerline intersection of Cedar
Avenue and Eighth Street South; thence west along the centerline of Eighth Street South to the intersection of the centerline of Eighth Street South
and Ninth Avenue South; thence south along the centerline of Ninth Avenue South to the intersection of Ninth Avenue South and Tenth Street South;
thence in a southwesterly direction following the current city limits (see exhibit A attached to ordinance 764) until it intersects with Thirteenth Street
South; thence in a westerly direction along the current city limits to the intersection of Thirteenth Street South and Marias Valley Road.
2. Dividing line between ward 1 and ward 2:
Beginning at a point where the centerline of Fifth Avenue North intersects the centerline of Main Street; thence in a southeasterly direction along
the centerline of Main Street to the centerline intersection of Main Street and Coyote Pass (viaduct); thence northeasterly along the centerline of
Coyote Pass to the centerline intersection of Coyote Pass and Marias Avenue; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Marias Avenue to the
centerline intersection of Marias Valley and Division Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Division Street to the centerline intersection
of Oilfield Avenue; thence in the same northeasterly direction to the intersection of Hill Street and Blaine Avenue; thence east along the centerline of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 10/242
Blaine Avenue to the centerline intersection of Glacier Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of City Shop Road to the centerline
intersection of City Shop Road and Benjamin Road.
3. Dividing line between ward 2 and ward 3:
Beginning at point where the centerline of Fifth Avenue North intersects with the centerline of Main Street; thence west along the centerline of
Main Street to the centerline intersection of Main Street and Seventh Avenue North; thence north along the centerline of Seventh Avenue North to
the centerline intersection of Seventh Avenue North and First Street North; thence west along the centerline of First Street North to the centerline
intersection of First Street North and Ninth Avenue North; thence north along the centerline of Ninth Avenue North to the centerline intersection of
Ninth Avenue North and Second Street North; thence west along the centerline of Second Street North to the centerline intersection of Second Street
North and Tenth Avenue North; thence north along the centerline of Tenth Avenue North to the centerline intersection of Tenth Avenue North and
Third Street North; thence west along the centerline of Third Street North to the centerline intersection of Third Street North and Eleventh Avenue
North; thence north along the centerline of Eleventh Avenue North to the south side of the Burlington Northern-Santa Fe Railway right of way line,
which is one hundred feet (100') from and parallel to the centerline of the main track of the Burlington Northern-Santa Fe Railway, then northwesterly
along this right of way line to the current city limits at the northwest corner of Valley View Cemetery.
B. Wards Designated:
1. Ward 1: All of that part of the city lying south and east of the above described boundary line between wards 1 and 2 and south and east of the above
described boundary line between wards 1 and 3 shall constitute and be designated as ward 1 of the city.
2. Ward 2: All of that part of the city lying north of the above described boundary line between wards 1 and 2 and north of the above described
boundary line between wards 2 and 3 shall constitute and be designated as ward 2 of the city.
3. Ward 3: All of that part of the city lying south and west of the above described boundary line between wards 2 and 3 and west and north of the above
described boundary line between wards 1 and 3 shall constitute and be designated as ward 3 of the city. (Ord. 764, 3-3-2003)
1-5-2: ORDINANCES, POSTING OF2:
All ordinances of the city, from and after the passage and adoption hereof, shall be posted on the public bulletin board located at the Shelby city hall, the
Toole County courthouse and the Toole County public safety building for a period of not less than fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 742, 7-19-1999, eff. 8-18-1999)
1-5-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an
ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon
presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him
by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained,
he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty four (24) hours' written notice of the authorized official's
intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the
event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate or judge. In the event the
owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent
jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (1975 Code § 1.16.010)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: RULES OF PROCEDURES:
A. General Provisions:
1. These rules are supplementary to the provisions of title 7, chapter 1, part 41; title 7, chapter 5, parts 41 and 42; and title 2, chapters 2 and 3,
Montana Code Annotated, as they relate to procedures for conducting meetings and public hearings before the City Council of the City of Shelby.
2. To assure effective participation by all members of the Council and to protect the right of participation by all individuals appearing before the Council,
all Council meetings and hearings shall be conducted in general conformance with "Robert's Rules of Order Revised", except as otherwise provided
by law.
3. Any member of the City Council who has an interest in a matter before the Council shall not vote thereon nor seek to influence the vote of other
Council members. (See also subsection F5 of this section.)
4. The Council shall choose a Finance Officer and such other officers and employees of its own body as are necessary. The Finance Officer shall keep
records and perform such other duties as may be required by the Council or by law.
B. Duties Of Officers:
1. The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor who shall arrange the meeting agenda, coordinate the affairs of the Council and preside at all
meetings of the Council.
2. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Chairman of the Council shall serve as its presiding officer and may vote as other members of the
Council. In the absence of the Mayor and of the Chairman of the Council, the Council shall select one of its number to serve as its temporary
presiding officer.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 11/242
3. The Finance Officer shall record and maintain the minutes of the Council's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if
failing to vote, indicating that fact; shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions; shall summarize briefly and accurately the
substance of all matters proposed, discussed or decided; shall record the names and addresses of all persons appearing before the Council; shall,
subject to the direction of the Council and presiding officer, conduct the correspondence of the Council; shall file said minutes and records in the
Office of the Council, which minutes and records shall be a public record; and shall be the custodian of the files and records of the Council. (Ord.
806, 11-21-2011)
C. Meetings:
1. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. in the Council Chambers
of City Hall, or at such other time and place as designated by the Council.
Should the regular meeting day be a recognized holiday the Council shall, with proper notice, set an alternate day for the meeting, typically the day
after the holiday. (Ord. 833, 3-5-2018)
2. Special meetings of the Council may be called in accordance with sections 7-5-4102(1)(c) and 7-5-4122, Montana Code Annotated.
3. To ensure public participation all meetings of the Council shall be open to the public except as provided in section 2-3-203, Montana Code
Annotated.
4. A quorum of the Council shall consist of four (4) Council members. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at a lawful meeting of
the Council shall be necessary to adopt or reject any motion, resolution, or ordinance or pass any measure unless a greater number is required by
law.
D. Agenda:
1. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council, shall be submitted by
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the Thursday immediately preceding the next regularly scheduled council meeting with the exception that the mayor
may approve late submission when deemed to be in the city's best interest by delivering the same to the finance officer, whereupon the mayor shall
immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business specified herein, and provide each member of the council with a copy of
the same not later than one working day immediately preceding the council meeting. Copies of the agenda shall be available to the public from the
finance officer and one copy shall be posted at the designated posting board in the city hall for public viewing. Pursuant to 7-1-4135, Montana Code
Annotated, the city council has designated by resolution its official posting place to be the posting board in the lobby of city hall located at 112 1st St.
S.
E. Order Of Business:
1. The finance officer shall prepare the council agenda which shall be in substantially the following form:
a. Roll call of members.
b. Open public hearings.
c. Appearance requests.
d. Approval of minutes.
e. Claims report.
f. Committee reports.
g. Community development director.
h. Close public hearings.
i. City attorney.
j. City superintendent.
k. City finance officer.
l. Other matters.
m. Adjourn.
2. The order of business may be adjusted by consent of the council.
F. Rules Of Council Debate: Council debate shall proceed in accordance with the following rules:
1. Every member desiring to speak shall address the presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine himself/herself to the question under debate,
avoiding abusive and indecorous language.
2. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member,
while speaking is called to order, he/she shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order, he/she shall be permitted to
proceed.
3. Order of rotation in matters of debate or discussion shall be at the discretion of the presiding officer.
4. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council, may be made only on the day such action was taken or at the next meeting of the council.
Such a motion shall be made by a member of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member; it shall be debatable and requires a simple
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 12/242
majority for adoption.
5. Any member of the council who has an interest as defined by the laws of the state of Montana1 or as advised by the city attorney shall not participate
in the debate nor vote in the matter nor seek to influence the vote of members of the council. Any council member attempting to so participate may
be censored by a majority vote of the remaining members of the city council. ("Censored" is defined as a formal resolution of the legislative body
reprimanding a member for specified conduct. It is an official reprimand or condemnation.)
6. If the presiding officer of the council has an interest in a matter pending before the council, as defined by the laws of the state of Montana or as
advised by the city attorney, he/she shall yield the chair to a member of the council during the course of debate and decision concerning the matter in
which he/she has an interest.
7. After a motion is duly made and seconded by the council, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the presiding
officer.
G. Presentation To The Council (Other Than A Public Hearing): The general manner in which items other than public hearings are handled by the council
shall be as follows:
1. The presiding officer or staff member presents the item to the council along with a brief summary of the matter for discussion, with or without
recommendation.
2. For purpose of clarification, council members, after recognition by the presiding officer, may direct questions to the presiding officer or staff member.
3. Upon recognition by the presiding officer, comments from the applicant will be heard by the council.
4. After recognition by the presiding officer, council members may direct questions to the applicant.
5. Members of the audience will be invited to present testimony beginning with those in favor of the measure, followed by those who oppose the
measure and, finally, those who wish to speak but who neither favor nor oppose the measure.
6. All testimony shall be directed to the presiding officer.
7. The council may, upon a proper motion and second, vote on the matter at hand or table the matter until a date certain.
H. Public Hearings:
1. The council may conduct public hearings or may appoint a committee or hearing officer for that purpose as provided in section 7-1-4131, Montana
Code Annotated.
When heard by the council the items will be presented to the council in the same format as described in subsection G of this section.
In addition, when public hearings and public interest matters are being heard and it is anticipated that a large number of citizens may wish to present
testimony, the presiding officer, with the consent of the council, may, prior to opening the hearing, establish reasonable guidelines for the conduct of
the hearing. The presiding officer shall explain these guidelines to the audience prior to taking testimony.
2. Witnesses may be required to testify under oath and all testimony shall be directed to the presiding officer.
3. The council shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, but may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, or unduly repetitious testimony or
evidence.
The presiding officer shall, with advice from the city attorney, rule on all questions relating to the admissibility of testimony or evidence. The ruling of
the presiding officer may be overruled by a majority vote of the council.
4. The proponents or opponents, their agent or attorney, may submit petitions and letters during or prior to the closing of the hearing and the same shall
be entered by reference into the minutes and considered as other testimony received at the hearing.
5. Following the presentation of all comments, testimony and evidence, the council may:
a. Continue the hearing to a date certain to allow additional information to be submitted to the council as a body on any unresolved issues;
b. Close the public hearing and proceed to council debate of the matter; or
c. Close the hearing and continue the council debate and vote to a date certain.
A public hearing which has been formally closed may not be reopened. If additional information is required before a decision can be made, the
council, upon motion duly made, seconded and passed, may call for an additional public hearing which hearing shall be duly noticed, specifying
date, time, place and subject matter of the hearing.
I. Addressing The Council:
1. The public is invited to speak on any item under discussion by the council after recognition by the presiding officer.
The speaker should step to the lectern or front of the room and, for the record, give his/her name and address and, if applicable, the person, firm, or
organization he/she represents.
Prepared statements are welcomed and should be given to the finance officer. Prepared statements that are also read, however, shall be deemed
unduly repetitious. All prepared statements shall become a part of the hearing record.
2. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum. A member shall not delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace
of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer.
Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous or disruptive during the council meeting shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 13/242
forthwith barred from further presentation to the council by the presiding officer, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the
council.
J. Ordinances And Resolutions:
1. All ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared or reviewed by the city attorney. No ordinance or resolution shall be prepared for presentation to the
council unless so ordered by a majority vote of the council or requested by the mayor.
2. The ordinances and resolutions shall, before presentation to the council, be approved as to form and legal sufficiency by the city attorney and shall
have been examined by the mayor (city manager) who may refer it for comment to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the subject
matter of the ordinance or resolution is to be administered.
3. Ordinances and resolutions must be introduced by a member of the council or the mayor. A draft of the proposed ordinance or resolution shall be
presented to the council for review and comment prior to a motion to approve the proposed resolution or ordinance.
If the draft ordinance is approved by the council, it shall then be placed on the agenda for first reading and provisional adoption, with second reading
and final adoption occurring at least twelve (12) days after the first reading and provisional adoption. After being adopted provisionally, the ordinance
shall be posted on the city's posting board and copies thereof shall be made available to the public by the finance officer. The reading of the
ordinance's title and number shall be sufficient to constitute a reading and an actual oral pronouncement of each word contained therein of the
proposed ordinance is not required and shall be waived unless required by a majority vote of the council.
4. All ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall become effective thirty (30) days after the second reading and final adoption. All resolutions and
emergency ordinances shall become effective at the time indicated therein. (Ord. 806, 11-21-2011)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: TERMS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS1:
On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every odd numbered year, a municipal election must be held at which the qualified electors of
the city must elect the officers of the city as defined in Montana Code Annotated section 7-4-4102, whose terms of office will expire, with aldermen to be
voted for by the wards they respectively represent; the mayor to hold office for a term of four (4) years, and until the qualification of his successor; and
each alderman so elected to hold office for a term of four (4) years, and until the qualification of his successor; and also a city judge who shall hold office
for a term of four (4) years, and until the qualification of his successor. (1975 Code § 2.08.010; amd. 2008 Code)
1-7-2: OATH; BONDS2:
A. Oaths And Bond Required: Each officer of the city must take the oath of office. Any officer that is required to give bond shall file the same, duly
approved, within ten (10) days after receiving notice of his election or appointment; or, if no notice be received, then on or before the date fixed for the
assumption by him of the duties of the office to which he may have been elected or appointed. (1975 Code § 2.24.010)
B. Requirements Established By Council: The city council shall designate the officers and employees required to be bonded. (1975 Code § 2.24.020)
C. Determination Of Amounts: Those officers and employees designated by the city council to be bonded shall be bonded in accordance with the amount
of money or property handled and the opportunity for defalcation. The city council shall actively solicit offers on a competitive basis from available,
qualified insurance or surety companies before purchasing the bonds. (1975 Code § 2.24.030)
D. Purchase: The council shall purchase all surety bonds for city officers and employees. A bond may cover an individual officer or employee or a blanket
bond may cover all officers and employees, or any group or combination of officers and employees. (1975 Code § 2.24.040)
E. Conditions:
1. Performance Of Duties: The condition of every official bond must be that the principal shall well, truly and safely perform all official duties then
required of him by law, and also such additional duties as may be imposed upon him by any law of the state or the city subsequently enacted, and
that he will account for and pay over and deliver to the person or officers entitled to receive the same, all monies or other property that may come
into his hands as such officer. The principal insureds upon any official bond are also, in all cases, liable for the neglect, default or misconduct in office
of any deputy, clerk or employee appointed or employed by such principal. (1975 Code § 2.24.050; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Signatures: All official bonds must be signed and executed by the principal and two (2) or more sureties or by the principal and one or more surety
companies organized as such under the laws of this state or licensed to do business herein. (1975 Code § 2.24.050)
ARTICLE A. CITY FINANCE OFFICER
1-7A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
Pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-4-4106, the positions of city clerk, an appointed position, and city treasurer, an appointed position, shall be
combined into one appointed position hereinafter referred to as the city finance officer. (Ord. 613, 11-18-1985, eff. 1-1-1986; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 14/242
Chapter 8
REVENUE AND FINANCE
ARTICLE A. SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT REVOLVING FUND
1-8A-1: ESTABLISHED:
In order to secure the prompt payment of the principal, interest, or both, of any bonds or warrants issued in payment of the improvements made in any
special improvement district created after the enactment laws of Montana of 1929, chapter 24, including such special improvement districts as may be
hereafter created and of any bonds and warrants issued in payment of any improvements ordered without creation of a special improvement district
pursuant to the provisions of Montana Code Annotated section 7-14-4109, there is hereby created and established in the city, a special fund to be known
and designated as the "special improvement district revolving fund". (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-2: MONIES PROVIDED FOR REVOLVING FUND:
For the purpose of providing funds for such special improvement district revolving fund necessary to meet the financial requirements of such fund, the city
council:
A. Shall, subject to the limitations contained within Montana Code Annotated section 7-12-4222, at the time of the annual levy of taxes for the city, levy and
collect for such fund such tax upon all the taxable property in the city as shall be necessary for said fund to meet the financial requirements and
obligations of such fund; and
B. May, from time to time, in addition to such levy and collection of taxes and subject to the limitations of Montana Code Annotated section 7-12-4222, by
resolution, transfer to such special improvement district revolving fund from the general fund, such other sum or sums as shall be necessary for said
fund to meet the financial requirements and obligations of such fund, such transfers from the general fund to the special improvement district revolving
fund to be deemed and considered to be, and shall be, loans to the special improvement district revolving fund;
the amount of such levy of taxes, together with the amount of such transfers from the general fund, shall not exceed in any one year five percent (5%)
of the principal amount of the then outstanding special improvement district bonds or warrants of all special improvement districts together with bonds
and warrants issued for improvements, pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-14-4109, of the city, but may, at the discretion of the city
council, unless the city is otherwise obligated as provided in section 1-8A-5 of this article, be less than five percent (5%) of the principal of the then
outstanding special improvement district and improvement bonds or warrants. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-3: USE OF FUNDS:
The money in the special improvement district revolving fund shall be used and expended as follows:
A. Insufficient Funds: Whenever any special improvement district bond or warrant, or any bond or warrant issued for improvements pursuant to Montana
Code Annotated section 7-14-4109, or any interest thereon, shall be due or payable or shall be about to become due or payable, and there shall then
be either no money or, not sufficient money in the appropriate district fund with which to pay the same, the city council shall enact a resolution loaning
and transferring from the special improvement district revolving fund to such district fund an amount sufficient to make up the deficiency therein, and
thereupon such bond or warrant, or any interest thereon, shall be paid from the money so loaned or from the money so loaned when added to such
insufficient amount, as the case may require;
B. Excess Funds: Whenever there is in the special improvement district revolving fund an amount in excess of the amount necessary for payment or
redemption of maturing bonds or warrants or interest thereon, as provided by subsection A of this section, the city council may, by resolution enacted
by the unanimous vote of all its members at a meeting called for that purpose, either:
1. Order such excess, or any part thereof, transferred to the general fund of the city; or
2. Order such excess, or any part thereof, for the purchase of property at sales for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, or which may have been
struck off or sold to the county of Toole for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, if there then be, against such property, any unpaid assessment
for special improvements on account whereof there are outstanding special improvement district bonds or warrants of the city. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-4: ANNUAL TRANSFER TO DELINQUENT DISTRICT FUNDS:
In connection with all special improvement district bonds or warrants and bonds or warrants issued for improvements pursuant to Montana Code
Annotated section 7-14-4109 hereafter sold by the city, the city council shall annually enact such resolution or resolutions as shall be necessary to
advance, loan, or transfer from the special improvement district revolving fund to the district or improvement funds such amounts as shall be sufficient to
make good the deficiencies in such district funds, as provided by subsection 1-8A-3A of this article. All proceedings hereafter taken for the sale of special
improvement district bonds or warrants and bonds or warrants issued for improvements pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-14-4109 shall
include an undertaking and agreement by the city to provide for such annual advancement, loan, or transfer, but failure to include such undertaking, and
agreement shall in no manner relieve the city of the obligation imposed upon it by this section. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-5: UNDERTAKING TO LEVY OR TRANSFER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 15/242
In addition to the undertaking and agreement required by section 1-8A-4 of this article, in any proceedings hereafter had for the sale of any special
improvement district bonds or warrants and bonds or warrants issued for improvements pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-14-4109, the city
council may further undertake and agree to provide funds for the special improvement district revolving fund by making an annual tax levy, as provided by
subsection 1-8A-2A of this article, in any agreed amount up to the maximum limitation provided in section 1-8A-2 of this article. In lieu of such undertaking
and agreement for an annual tax levy, the city council may undertake and agree to loan and transfer annually from the general fund to the special
improvement district revolving fund such agreed amount, as provided by subsection 1-8A-2B of this article, and subject to the same maximum limitation.
(Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-6: LIEN UPON UNPAID DISTRICT ASSESSMENTS:
Whenever any loan is made to any special improvement district fund from the special improvement district revolving fund, said revolving fund shall have a
lien therefor on all unpaid assessments and installments of assessments on such district, whether delinquent or not, and on all monies thereafter coming
into such district fund, to the amount of such loan, together with interest thereon from the time such loan was made at the rate, or percentage, borne by the
bond or warrant for payment of which, or of interest thereon, such loan was made; whenever there shall be money in any district fund to which such loan
has been made, which are not required for payment of any bond or warrant, or of interest thereof, of such district, sufficient of such money as may be
necessary to pay such loan shall, by resolution of the city council, be transferred to the revolving fund. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-7: TRANSFER OF EXCESS FUNDS:
Whenever there shall be monies in any special improvement district fund after all the bonds and warrants and interest thereon of such district have been
fully paid, all monies remaining in such district fund shall, by resolution of the city council, be transferred to and become a part of the special improvement
district revolving fund. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
1-8A-8: TAX CERTIFICATES AND TAX TITLE PROPERTY:
Any or all tax sale certificates purchased out of the special improvement district revolving fund as provided by subsection 1-8A-3B of this article, may be
sold at any time, upon resolution of the city council. Whenever the city shall acquire title to any property under any such tax sale certificate as shall be so
purchased out of the special improvement district revolving fund, the city council may lease such property or may sell such property at either public or
private sale and make conveyance thereof, or otherwise dispose of such property as the interest of the city may require. All proceeds from such sales of
tax certificates, and from such leasing, sale, or other disposition of such property, shall belong to and be paid into the special improvement district
revolving fund, and subject to the same uses as other monies paid into such fund as provided in section 1-8A-3 of this article. (Ord. 674, 1-6-1992)
ARTICLE B. SPECIAL SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER FUND
1-8B-1: CREATED:
There is created a fund to be known as the special sidewalk, curb and gutter fund. (1975 Code § 3.20.010)
1-8B-2: COLLECTIONS:
All monies collected from assessments made for the construction of sidewalks, curbs or gutters ordered by the city shall be placed to the credit of the
special sidewalk, curb and gutter fund. (1975 Code § 3.20.020)
1-8B-3: PAYMENTS:
When any sidewalk, curb or gutter, or any combination thereof, is constructed by or under the direction of the council of the city, payment for the
construction thereof shall be made by special warrant in the form prescribed herein, drawn against the special sidewalk, curb and gutter fund, which shall
bear interest at a varied rate per year, and the council may provide for the payment of such interest annually. (1975 Code § 3.20.030; amd. 2008 Code)
1-8B-4: WARRANTS:
A. Form Of Warrant: When any sidewalk, curb or gutter is constructed by or under the direction of the council, payment for the construction thereof shall be
made by special warrant. (1975 Code § 3.20.040; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Denomination: The special sidewalk, curb and gutter fund warrants shall be issued in the denomination of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or fractions or
multiples thereof, and may be issued in installments and may extend over a period not to exceed twenty (20) years. (1975 Code § 3.20.060)
C. Signatures: The warrants shall be signed by the mayor and the city finance officer and shall bear the corporate seal of the city and the coupons may
bear the facsimile signatures of the mayor and city finance officer. (1975 Code § 3.20.070)
1-8B-5: COUPON:
Interest coupons to be attached to the above and foregoing warrant shall be in substantially the following form:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 16/242
Coupon No. Shelby, Montana
On January 1, A.D. , the Finance Officer of the city of Shelby, Montana, will, at his office in the City of Shelby, Montana, pay to , Contractors, or bearer,
the sum of Dollars ($ ), being the interest due on said date of payment on its Special Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Fund Warrant No. , issued on account of
sidewalks.
CITY OF SHELBY, MONTANA
By:
Mayor
ATTEST:
City Finance Officer
(1975 Code § 3.20.050)
1-8B-6: ASSESSMENT PERIOD:
Payment of assessments to defray the cost of construction of the sidewalks and curbs and gutters may be spread over a term of eight (8) years, payment
to be made in equal annual installments. (1975 Code § 3.20.080)
1-8B-7: ANNUAL ASSESSMENT:
The council shall annually and before the first Monday in October of each year, pass and adopt a resolution levying an assessment and tax against each
lot or parcel of land in front of which sidewalks have been constructed under orders of the council. Such resolution levying such assessment shall be in
every manner prepared and certified the same as resolutions levying assessments for the making of improvements in special improvement districts. (1975
Code § 3.20.090)
Chapter 9
CITY COURT
1-9-1: ESTABLISHED:
A city court is established in the city. A city judge shall establish regular sessions of the court. On judicial days, the court must be open for all business,
civil and criminal. On nonjudicial days, as defined in Montana Code Annotated section 3-1-302, the court may transact criminal business only. (1975 Code
§ 2.48.010; amd. 2008 Code)
1-9-2: CONCURRENT JURISDICTION:
The city court has concurrent jurisdiction with the justice court of all misdemeanors punishable by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment, under the following conditions:
A. Violation Of City Ordinance: Any action charging the commission of an offense within the city limits in violation of a city ordinance shall be brought in the
name of the city as the plaintiff and against the accused as the defendant.
B. Violation Of State Law: Any other action brought for violation of a state law within the city shall be brought in the name of the state as the plaintiff and
against the accused as the defendant. (1975 Code § 2.48.020)
C. Search Warrants And Complaints Charging Felonies: Application for search warrants and complaints charging the commission of a felony may be filed
in the city court and when they are so filed, the city judge shall have the same jurisdiction and responsibility as a justice of the peace, including the
holding of a preliminary hearing. The city attorney may file an application for a search warrant or a complaint charging the commission of a felony when
the offense was committed within the city limits. The county attorney, however, must handle any action after a defendant is bound over to district court.
(1975 Code § 2.48.020; amd. 2008 Code)
1-9-3: EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION:
Except as provided in Montana Code Annotated section 3-11-104, the city court has exclusive jurisdiction of:
A. Proceedings for the violation of a city ordinance, both civil and criminal;
B. When the amount of the taxes or assessments sought does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), actions for the collection of taxes or
assessments levied for any of the following purposes, except that no lien on the property taxed or assessed for the nonpayment of the taxes or
assessments may be foreclosed in any such action:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 17/242
1. City purposes;
2. The erection or improvement of public buildings;
3. The laying out, opening, or improving of a public street, sidewalk, alley, or bridge;
4. The acquisition or improvement of any public grounds; and
5. Public improvements made or ordered by the city within its limits;
C. Actions for the collection of money due to the city or from the city to any person when the amount sought, exclusive of interest and costs, does not
exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
D. When the amount claimed, exclusive of costs, does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), actions for:
1. The breach of an official bond given by a city officer;
2. The breach of any contract when the city is a party or is in any way interested;
3. Damages when the city is a party or is in any way interested;
4. The enforcement of forfeited recognizances given to, for the benefit of, or on behalf of the city; and
5. Collection on bonds given upon an appeal taken from the judgment of the court in any action mentioned in subsections D1 through D4 of this
section;
E. Actions for the recovery of personal property belonging to the city when the value of the property, exclusive of the damages for the taking or detention,
does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and
F. Actions for the collection of a license fee required by an ordinance of the city. (1975 Code § 2.48.030; amd. 2008 Code)
1-9-4: PRELIMINARY EXAMINATIONS:
Proceedings in preliminary examinations in criminal actions in the city court must be held in conformity with the provisions of Montana Code Annotated
sections 46-10-106 and 46-10-201 et seq. (1975 Code § 2.48.040; amd. 2008 Code)
1-9-5: CRIMINAL ACTIONS:
Proceedings in city court in criminal actions, triable in such courts are regulated by Montana Code Annotated title 46. (1975 Code § 2.48.050; amd. 2008
Code)
1-9-6: CIVIL ACTIONS:
The proceedings of the city court and civil actions are regulated by Montana Code Annotated title 25. (1975 Code § 2.48.060)
1-9-7: SUBSTITUTE JUDGE CALLED IN:
In all cases in which the judge is a party, or in which he is interested, or when he is related to either party by consanguinity or affinity within the sixth
degree, and in case of his sickness, absence, or inability to act, the city judge may call in a city judge, justice of the peace, or some qualified person to act
in his stead or when a disqualifying affidavit is filed against him pursuant to the supreme court's rules on disqualification and substitution of judges. A city
judge of any city or a justice of the peace of any county may sit as city judge at the city judge's request. (1975 Code § 2.48.070; amd. 2008 Code)
1-9-8: MONIES COLLECTED:
The city judge shall collect all fines, costs and forfeitures that accrue to the city from cases tried or disposed of in the city court. The city judge shall give a
receipt therefor to the person paying the same, and pay the collected monies to the city finance officer. (1975 Code § 2.48.080; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 10
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN
1-10-1: CREATED:
There is created an affirmative action plan for the city of Shelby. It is the policy of the city and the law of the state of Montana to provide equal opportunity
to all employees and applicants for employment. All persons have the right to obtain and hold employment and the right to be free from discrimination
because of race, creed, religion, color, sex, physical and mental handicap, age, or national origin. (1975 Code § 2.52.010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 18/242
1-10-2: IMPLEMENTATION:
A. Merit And Qualification: All city officials and supervisory personnel shall recruit, appoint, assign, train, evaluate, and promote personnel on the basis of
merit and qualification without discrimination.
B. City Government Employment: Affirmative action shall be taken to ensure the implementation of the policy in city government employment. All city
departments shall:
1. Promulgate written directives to carry out this policy and to guarantee equal employment opportunities;
2. Regularly review their personnel practices to assure compliance; and
3. Conduct continuing orientation and training programs with emphasis on human relations and fair employment practices.
C. Equal Employment Opportunity Officer: The mayor or his appointee who shall be subject to approval by the city council shall act as the equal
employment opportunity officer for the city. The equal employment opportunity officer shall have the following responsibilities:
1. To ensure the affirmative action plan for the city is implemented;
2. To establish goals to be met by the departments of the city in city government employment; and
3. To establish objectives for the departments of the city to follow in meeting the goals for city employment. (1975 Code § 2.52.020)
1-10-3: EMPLOYMENT REFERRALS IN PLACEMENT SERVICES:
A. Employment Referrals: All city departments which provide employment referrals or placement services for city employment shall accept job orders on a
fair practice basis. A job request indicating an intention to exclude a person because of race, color, religion, creed, political ideas, sex, age, marital
status, physical or mental handicap, or national origin shall be rejected.
B. Cooperation With Commission For Human Rights: The city shall cooperate in programs developed by the state commission for human rights for the
purpose of broadening the base of job recruitment and with employers and organizations providing such programs. (1975 Code § 2.52.030)
1-10-4: EDUCATIONAL, COUNSELING AND TRAINING PROGRAMS:
All educational, counseling, and vocational guidance programs and all apprenticeship and on the job training programs which the city conducts or
participates in shall be open to all persons, who shall be accepted on a basis of merit and qualifications without discrimination. Such programs shall be
conducted to encourage the full development of the interests, aptitudes, skills, and capacities of all students and trainees, with special attention to the
problems of culturally deprived, educationally handicapped or economically disadvantaged persons. (1975 Code § 2.52.040)
1-10-5: NONDISCRIMINATION:
Every contract or subcontract for construction of public buildings or for other public work or for goods or services awarded by the city shall contain a
provision that all hiring must be on the basis of merit and qualifications and a provision that there may be no discrimination by the persons performing the
contract. (1975 Code § 2.52.050)
1-10-6: COOPERATION WITH STATE COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RIGHTS:
The city shall cooperate with the state commission for human rights in the commission's enforcement and educational programs. The city shall comply with
the commission's request for information concerning practices inconsistent with the state policy against discrimination and shall consider its
recommendations for effectuating and implementing that policy. (1975 Code § 2.52.060)
Chapter 11
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
1-11-1: POWER TO ANNEX:
The city shall have the power to annex territory outside its corporate boundaries by extending those boundaries to include that territory within the city.
(1975 Code § 2.60.010)
1-11-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Statute Procedures: The city shall follow the annexation procedures prescribed in Montana Code Annotated title 7, chapter 2, parts 43 through 47.
B. Conflict With Statute: If any portion or provision of this chapter is in conflict with the annexation procedures prescribed in the Montana Code Annotated
aforesaid, Montana Code Annotated shall be controlling. (1975 Code § 2.60.020)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 19/242
1-11-3: DEDICATIONS REQUIRED:
Prior to annexation, the city shall require the owner(s) of the territory to be annexed to lay out streets, avenues, alleys and/or utility easements in the
territory so that they are continuations, in both width and direction, of the streets, avenues, alleys and/or utility easements in the city. With the prior written
approval of the city council, the owner(s) of the territory to be annexed may lay out streets, avenues, alleys and/or utility easements in a scheme that
differs from that currently used by the city. (1975 Code § 2.660.030)
1-11-4: PREREQUISITES:
The city shall annex territory only when:
A. Streets, Avenues, Alleys And/Or Utility Easements Dedicated: The streets, avenues, alleys and/or utility easements have been properly dedicated and a
certificate of dedication has been signed by the mayor and the landowner and is shown on the face of the certificate of survey and/or final plat;
B. Legal Description Includes Dedications: The legal description of the territory to be annexed includes the land dedicated for streets, alleys, avenues
and/or utility easements; and
C. Legal Description Included On Certificate Of Survey: The legal description is indicated on the certificate of survey and/or final plat, the resolution of
intent to annex, and the resolution of annexation. (1975 Code § 2.60.040)
1-11-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The city shall further require that all such streets, avenues, alleys and/or utility easements as referred to in section 1-11-4 of this chapter be surveyed,
brought to proper grade, curbs and gutters installed, proper base material installed and surfaced in accordance with existing city specifications. All water
and sewer lines must be extended using appropriate sized pipes to meet the needs of the development and as required by city specifications. All street,
avenue and alley extensions, curbs and gutters and utility extensions are to be done at the sole expense of the owner(s) of the property to be annexed.
(1975 Code § 2.60.050)
1-11-6: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Upon petition for annexation, the proposed land use of that land covered by the petition for annexation must conform to the zoning of the land covered by
the petition for annexation and the zoning of the adjacent land already within the city limits. In the event the proposed land use is not in conformity with the
zoned land use of the area included within the petition for annexation and/or the zoning of the adjacent land already within the city limits, a request for
zone change must be submitted by the owners of the property included in the petition for annexation in accordance with those procedures as contained
within the zoning ordinance1 pertaining to zone changes. (1975 Code § 2.60.060)
1-11-7: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS AND/OR PREREQUISITES:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the city may, at its option or discretion, waive, suspend and/or place in abeyance the
requirements of sections 1-11-3, 1-11-4, 1-11-5 and/or 1-11-6 of this chapter. A request for such waiver or suspension must be submitted by the owner(s)
of the property included in the petition for annexation. In order for such a waiver or suspension of the aforesaid to be granted, the requesting property
owner(s) must specifically covenant and agree, pursuant to a recordable written document, to comply with sections 1-11-3, 1-11-4, 1-11-5 and/or 1-11-6 of
this chapter, subsequent to annexation, at the written request of the city, and must additionally covenant and agree therein to waive any right to protest or
object to the city's written request. The purpose of this section is not to eliminate the requirements and/or prerequisites set forth above, but to suspend
them to a date subsequent to annexation. (1975 Code § 2.60.070)
Chapter 12
SCHEDULE OF FEES
1-12-1: BUSINESS LICENSE FEES:
A. All Businesses: For all businesses, except those listed below, the annual license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. New Businesses: For all new businesses, the annual license fee shall be prorated as follows:
1. If business starts between July 1 and September 30 of any fiscal year, twenty five dollars ($25.00);
2. If business starts between October 1 and December 31 of any fiscal year, eighteen dollars seventy five cents ($18.75);
3. If business starts between January 1 and March 31 of any fiscal year, twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50);
4. If business starts between April 1 and June 30 of any fiscal year, six dollars twenty five cents ($6.25). (Ord. 722, 6-15-1997, eff. 7-17-1997)
C. Itinerant Vendors: For itinerant vendors the fee is twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a period of ninety (90) days from the date the license is issued.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 20/242
D. Transient Retail Merchants: For transient retail merchants the fee is twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a period of one week. (Ord. 831, 3-6-2017)
E. Secondhand Dealers: For secondhand dealers, the license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
F. Home Occupations: For home occupations as defined by the Municipal zoning ordinances1, the license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year. (Ord.
722, 6-15-1997, eff. 7-17-1997)
1-12-2: LIQUOR LICENSE FEES:
A. All Beverage License: Except as otherwise provided by law, a license to sell liquor, beer and wine at retail, an all beverage license, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and regulations of the Montana Department of Revenue, may be issued to any person, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the regulations of the Montana Department of Revenue; each licensee licensed under this chapter shall pay an annual license fee of
five-eighths (5/8) of the amount charged by the State of Montana for the license issued by the State of Montana to such person or persons. (1975 Code
§ 5.08.030)
B. Beer And Wine: Except as otherwise provided by law, a license to sell beer at retail or beer and wine at retail, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and regulations of the Montana Department of Revenue, may be issued to any person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
regulation of the Montana Department of Revenue; each licensee licensed under this section shall pay therefor an annual license fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for beer and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for beer and wine. (1975 Code § 5.08.030; amd. Ord. 677, 4-20-1992)
C. Prorated Fees; Refunds: Provided however, that where a license, as specified in subsections A and B of this section, is issued for a period commencing
subsequent to the first of the current year for which such license may be issued, a pro rata fee only shall be charged for the balance of such year, but
nothing herein shall be construed to entitle any licensee hereunder to any refund of any portion of the license fee in the event of his discontinuing such
business, or the suspension or revocation of his license, prior to the expiration of such year, except and save that he shall be entitled to a pro rata
refund in the event that his business is discontinued by virtue of said act being, by referendum petition, rendered inoperative awaiting such time it may
be passed upon at an election, and the determination and declaration of the result as provided by law. (1975 Code § 5.08.030)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 836 - LANDFILL COLLECTION RATES . Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 837 - GARBAGE / LANDFILL EXEMPTION FROM FEES . Go to new ordinance.
1-12-3: GARBAGE COLLECTION:
A. Commercial And Residential Services, Rate And Method Of Collection:
1. Within The Municipal Limits: All commercial and residential customers receiving water service within the Municipal limits of the City of Shelby shall
be charged monthly for the removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and waste upon the rate schedule below, with the applicable rate or charge to
be found in the appropriate column and line.
2. Outside The Municipal Limits: All commercial and residential customers receiving water service outside the Municipal limits of the City of Shelby
shall be charged monthly for the disposal of garbage, refuse and waste upon the rate schedule below, with the applicable rate or charge to be found
in the appropriate column and line. Removal of garbage, refuse and waste by the City of Shelby is optional upon request by customers but approval
is subject to Council discretion.
3. Users Using Garbage Service: All commercial and residential customers receiving Municipal garbage service are exempt from paying any further
fees when utilizing the City of Shelby's Municipal landfill. (Ord. 805, 4-4-2011)
4. Rate Table:
GARBAGE/LANDFILL COLLECTION RATES1
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL
Size Service 1 Time Per Week Pick Up Monthly Total 2 Times Per Week Pick Up Monthly Total
Minimum charge Garbage $14.50 $ 29.00 $ 29.00 $ 58.00
Landfill 14.50 29.00
11/2 yard container Garbage 26.00 57.00 52.00 114.00
Landfill 31.00 62.00
2 yard container Garbage 38.00 84.00 76.00 168.00
Landfill 46.00 92.00
3 yard container Garbage 52.00 114.00 104.00 228.00
Landfill 62.00 124.00
4 yard container Garbage 76.00 168.00 152.00 336.00
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 21/242
Landfill 92.00 184.00
Note:
1. Effective with the November 2014 utility billing.
(Ord. 817, 11-3-2014)
B. Rates For Non-City Of Shelby Residential And Business Customers Hauling Their Own Garbage:
1. Toole County Residential And Commercial Customers Located Outside Of The Municipal Limits: Except as provided in subsection A of this section,
the fee for Toole County residential and commercial customers who are located outside of the Municipal limits of the City of Shelby is one hundred
seventy four dollars ($174.00) per year for up to one ton of garbage.
2. Fee For Customers Not Specified: The fee for all customers not otherwise specified in this section is twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for up to one ton
and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional ton.
C. Violations: Violations of this section are prohibited pursuant to section 4-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. 823, 12-7-2015)
D. Animal Carcasses:
1. Small Animals: The cost of burying dogs and cats and similarly sized animals shall be five dollars ($5.00).
2. Large Animals: The cost of burying all large animals such as horses and cows shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 624, 1-26-1987)
1-12-4: ANIMAL CONTROL2:
A. Dog And Cat License Fees: Fees for licensing and registration shall be as follows:
1. During January of each and every year:
Spayed or neutered $10.00
Not spayed or neutered 20.00
B. Dog And Cat Impound Fees: Any dog or cat impounded or quarantined pursuant to title 6 of this Code, and not destroyed, may be redeemed by the
owner thereof paying all necessary fees, fines, and costs set forth in this section and, in addition, paying a fee to the City in the amount of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for an initial pick up fee and an additional twenty dollars ($20.00) for each twenty four (24) hour period, or any portion thereof, such dog
or cat is impounded or quarantined. In the event the impounded or quarantined dog or cat is with a licensed veterinarian, then the fee charged by such
a licensed veterinarian shall be payable prior to the dog or cat being released to its owner. (Ord. 830, 12-5-2016)
1-12-5: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE3:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
1-12-6: EXCAVATIONS4:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
1-12-7: OBSTRUCTIONS5:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
1-12-8: OVERNIGHT CAMPING6:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
1-12-9: MOVING BUILDINGS7:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
1-12-10: WATER RATES AND CHARGES8:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 22/242
A. Schedule Of Rates: Effective June 20, 2018 the rates and charges for the City's water system are as follows:
1. The monthly rate charge for an equivalent dwelling unit is:
Base charge:
Meter Size Rate
3/4" to 5/8" $60.00/month (includes up to 3,000 gallons)
1" to 11/4" $70.00/month (includes up to 3,500 gallons)
11/2" $100.00/month (includes up to 5,000 gallons)
2" $200.00/month (includes up to 10,000 gallons)
3" $400.00/month (includes up to 20,000 gallons)
4" $1,000.00/month (includes up to 50,000 gallons)
6" $1,000.00/month (includes up to 50,000 gallons)
$2.75 per each additional 1,000 gallons above base charge
Irrigation rates $0.73 per 1,000 gallons
2. All customers receiving water from the water main located south of Shelby and owned by North Central Montana Regional Water Authority will pay
an additional three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually for increased operation, maintenance, and pumping costs. (Ord. 834, 5-7-2018)
B. Minimum Meter Charges: Water service to all users of the system is metered and all charges will be based on consumption based on the above rate
schedule, or, only if consumption results in charges that fall below the applicable minimum charge, then the minimum meter charge will apply. (Ord.
815, 11-3-2014)
C. Correctional Facility Minimum Monthly Charge: These rates will be effective June 20, 2018:
Facility Size Gallons Used
Minimum
Monthly Charge
500 bed facility Up to 2,550,000 $ 6,802.32
1,000 bed facility Up to 5,100,000 9,667.16
1,500 bed facility Up to 7,650,000 13,800.08
(Ord. 834, 5-7-2018)
D. Approval Of Public Service Commission: This section shall be in full force and effect upon approval by the City Council, through the authority granted to
the City Council by section 69-7-101, Montana Code Annotated, and as adopted by resolution of the City Council. (1975 Code § 13.16.005)
E. Turning Water On After Discontinuance: The fee for turning water back on after it has been turned off for nonpayment or voluntarily turning off and then
back on again shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
F. Installing And/Or Turning On Fire Hydrant: The fee for installing and/or turning on a fire hydrant shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (1975 Code § 13.04.060;
amd. 2008 Code)
G. Late Fees: Late fees shall be five dollars ($5.00) per month. (Ord. 639, 10-16-1989)
1-12-11: WATER AND SEWER TAPPING FEES:
A. Generally: The cost therefor shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus labor and materials for tapping into Municipal water or sewer mains. (Ord.
811, 3-4-2013)
B. Property West Of I-15: Tapping fees for water and/or sewer extensions on all property located within the Municipal limits of the City west of I-15 pertain
to all extensions from said water and/or sewer lines constructed with funds from the U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic Development
Administration grant 05-01-02485 and/or State of Montana, Department of Commerce grant MT-CDBG-91ED-01. The following tapping fees are in
addition to those fees required pursuant to subsection A of this section:
Water tapping fees $8,316.67
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 23/242
Sewer tapping fees 7,160.00
(Ord. 683, 7-20-1992)
C. Water Taps Between Station 0+00 To 14+00 And Sewer Taps Between Station 0+00 To 2+00: Tapping fees for any water taps between station 0+00 to
14+00 and sewer taps between station 0+00 to 2+00 as shown on the Damschen and Associates plan sheets for job number 159-01-98 pertain to all
extensions from said water and/or sewer lines. The following fees are in addition to those fees required pursuant to subsection A of this section:
Water tapping fees $10,000.00
Sewer tapping fees 5,000.00
D. Other Materials: All other pipes, fittings, manifolds and related materials will be paid for by the applicant. (Ord. 744, 10-16-1989)
E. Tax Increment Financing District (TIFD): Tapping fees for water and/or sewer extensions on all property located in the current and future Tax Increment
Financing District (see map attachment to ordinance 792) pertain to all extensions from the City's current water and/or sewer lines. The following
tapping fees are in addition to those fees required pursuant to subsection A of this section:
Water tapping fees $8,316.67
Sewer tapping fees 7,160.00
(Ord. 811, 3-4-2013)
1-12-12: SEWER RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Permit And Inspection Fee: The following permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed:
Residential or commercial building sewer permit $35.00
Industrial building sewer permit 85.00
(1975 Code § 13.24.110; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Monthly User's Service Charge:
1. Residential And Nonresidential:
a. The following charges shall become effective with the July 2017 billing:
(1) Residential: All residential customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate sewer charge of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90)
per month plus four dollars fifty cents ($4.50) per thousand gallons. The total annual volume of all sewage will be computed as four (4) times the
water meter reading for a three (3) consecutive month reading period during the months of November through March of each fiscal year.
(2) Nonresidential: All commercial customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90) per
month plus four dollars fifty cents ($4.50) per thousand gallons. The volume will include a total annual metered usage exclusive of any irrigation
water measured through a secondary meter.
MINIMUM CHARGE - ALL CUSTOMERS
Size Of Water Service Line Minimum Monthly Charge
3/4 inch or 5/8 inch $25.40
1 inch 29.90
11/4 inch 29.90
11/2 inch 34.40
2 inch 43.40
3 inch 56.90
4 inch 70.40
b. The following charges shall become effective with the July 2018 billing:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 24/242
(1) Residential: All residential customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate sewer charge of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90)
per month plus five dollars seventy five cents ($5.75) per thousand gallons. The total annual volume of all sewage will be computed as four (4)
times the water meter reading for a three (3) consecutive month reading period during the months of November through March of each fiscal
year.
(2) Nonresidential: All commercial customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90) per
month plus five dollars seventy five cents ($5.75) per thousand gallons. The volume will include a total annual metered usage exclusive of any
irrigation water measured through a secondary meter.
MINIMUM CHARGE - ALL CUSTOMERS
Size Of Water Service Line Minimum Monthly Charge
3/4 inch or 5/8 inch $26.65
1 inch 32.40
11/4 inch 32.40
11/2 inch 38.15
2 inch 49.65
3 inch 66.90
4 inch 84.15
c. The following charges shall become effective with the July 2019 billing:
(1) Residential: All residential customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate sewer charge of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90)
per month plus seven dollars seventy five cents ($7.75) per thousand gallons. The total annual volume of all sewage will be computed as four
(4) times the water meter reading for a three (3) consecutive month reading period during the months of November through March of each fiscal
year.
(2) Nonresidential: All commercial customers of the City sewer system shall be charged a flat rate of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90) per
month plus seven dollars seventy five cents ($7.75) per thousand gallons. The volume will include a total annual metered usage exclusive of any
irrigation water measured through a secondary meter.
MINIMUM CHARGE - ALL CUSTOMERS
Size Of Water Service Line Minimum Monthly Charge
3/4 inch or 5/8 inch $ 28.65
1 inch 36.40
11/4 inch 36.40
11/2 inch 44.15
2 inch 59.65
3 inch 82.90
4 inch 106.15
(Ord. 832, 6-19-2017)
2. Industrial User: Any industrial user who discharges sewage with a strength higher than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L) for either BOD or
TSS will pay an additional charge for the extra strength of the sewage. The amount of the charge is $0.029 per twenty five milligrams per liter
(25 mg/L) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered water usage for either BOD or TSS. (Ord. 816, 11-3-2014; amd. Ord. 832, 6-19-2017)
1-12-13: PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMIT FEES
(All Fees Will Be Rounded Off To The Nearest Dollar)
Total Valuation Fee
$1.00 to $500.00 $23.50
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $23.50 for the first $500.00, plus $3.05 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00.
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00, plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including
$25,000.00.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 25/242
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.00 for the first $25,000.00, plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including
$50,000.00.
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00, plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including
$100,000.00.
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00
$993.75 for the first $100,000.00, plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including
$500,000.00.
$500,001.00 to
$1,000,000.00
$3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00, plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000.00.
$1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00, plus $3.65 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof.
Other inspections and fees:
Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge 2 hours) $47.00 per hour*
Reinspection fees 47.00 per hour*
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated 47.00 per hour*
Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to plans 47.00 per hour*
For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both Actual costs**
Notes:
* Or the total hourly cost to the City, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits
of the employees involved.
** Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
(Ord. 780, 5-21-2007)
1-12-14: SUBDIVISIONS9:
A. Preliminary Plat Review: To cover costs of reviewing plans, advertising, holding public hearings, and other activities associated with the review of a
subdivision proposal, the subdivider shall pay a nonrefundable fee at the time of application for preliminary plat approval. The fees, payable to the City
Finance Officer are as follows:
Number Of Proposed
Lots Or Dwelling Units Fee
1 - 5 (first minor subdivisions) $250.00
6 or more (major subdivisions) or subsequent minor subdivisions $500.00, plus $100.00 per lot
B. Other Reviews:
Mobile/manufactured home parks and spaces $50.00 per space
Condominiums $50.00 per unit
C. Final Plat Review And Inspection: To cover the cost of on site inspection of the subdivision and review of the final plat and supplementary materials, the
subdivider shall pay a nonrefundable fifty dollar ($50.00) fee at the time of application for final approval to the City Finance Officer.
D. Consulting And Engineering Fees: To cover the actual cost of consulting and/or engineering fees and expenses reasonably incurred by the Governing
Body in review of a subdivision plat and proposal, the subdivider shall commit to payment of all consulting and engineering fees incurred by the
Governing Body in review and approval or disallowance of the proposed plat. A surety bond or deposit in advance may be set and required to be
posted by the subdivider. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
1-12-15: ZONING10:
Refer to the current "schedule of fees and permits" on file at the City Hall or Department of Public Works. (2008 Code)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 26/242
Chapter 1
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT1
2-1-1: CREATED:
A board of adjustment is established as provided by statute. (1975 Code § 2.16.010)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
The board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the council, for terms of three (3) years. (1975 Code
§ 2.16.010)
2-1-3: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
The board shall hold its meetings in the council chamber in the city hall. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
(1975 Code § 2.16.010)
2-1-4: DUTIES AND POWERS:
A. Defined In Statute: The board's duties and powers shall be as defined in the state laws.
B. Assistance Of Other Departments: The board shall have power to call on any of the other municipal departments for assistance in the performance of its
duties, and it shall be the duty of such other departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably required.
C. Practical Difficulties Or Unnecessary Hardships: Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter
of title 13 of this code, the board of adjustment shall have the power, after public notice and hearing in a specific case, to vary or modify any of the
regulations or provisions related to the construction, structural changes in equipment or alterations of buildings or structures in harmony with their
fundamental purpose and intent, so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be conserved and substantial justice done.
D. Granting Or Denial Of Permit: In every case, however, where a permit is either granted or revoked by the board of adjustment, it must be affirmatively
shown that an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty exists, and the records of such board shall clearly indicate in what particular and specific
respects an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty would be created. (1975 Code § 2.16.010)
2-1-5: CHANGES IN DISTRICT REGULATIONS, RESTRICTIONS AND BOUNDARIES:
Changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of districts may be made only by the council in the manner designated by the state law. (1975
Code § 2.16.010)
Chapter 2
CITY-COUNTY PLANNING BOARD1
2-2-1: CREATED:
There is created a city-county planning board pursuant to and under the provisions of Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 31, as amended, to be
designated and known as the "city-county planning board". (1975 Code § 2.20.010; amd. 2008 Code)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Appointment: The city-county planning board shall consist of not less than nine (9) members to be appointed as follows:
1. Two (2) official members who reside outside the city limits but within the jurisdictional area of the city-county planning board to be appointed by the
board of county commissioners, who may, in the discretion of the board of county commissioners, be employed by or hold public office in the county.
2. Two (2) official members who reside within the city limits to be appointed by the city council, who may, in the discretion of the city council, be
employed by or hold public office in the city.
3. Two (2) citizen members who reside within the city limits to be appointed by the city mayor.
4. Two (2) citizen members who reside within the jurisdictional area of the city-county planning board to be appointed by the board of county
commissioners.
5. The ninth member to be appointed by the board of supervisors of a conservation district provided for in Montana Code Annotated section 76-15-311
from the members or associate members of the board of supervisors, subject to approval of the members provided for in subsections A1 through A4
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 27/242
of this section. (1975 Code § 2.20.020; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Terms: As soon as the city council has enacted the ordinance codified in this chapter, creating the city-county planning board, the city council shall elect
a member of its body to serve on the planning board. The terms of the members who are officers of the city or county represented on the board shall
be coextensive with their respective terms of office to which they have been elected or appointed; the terms of the other members shall be two (2)
years, except that the terms of the first members appointed shall be fixed by agreement and rule of the governing bodies represented on the board for
one or two (2) years in order that a minimum number of terms shall expire in any year. (1975 Code § 2.20.030; amd. 2008 Code)
C. Vacancy: The city council shall fill any vacancy occurring in its respective membership on the planning board. (1975 Code § 2.20.040)
D. Certification: The financial officer shall certify members appointed by its body. The certificates shall be sent to and become a part of the records of the
city-county planning board. The mayor shall make similar certification for the appointment of citizen members. (1975 Code § 2.20.050)
E. Citizen Members; Qualifications: The citizen members shall be qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to the development of the
city, and shall hold no other office in the city government, and shall be resident freeholders of the city. (1975 Code § 2.20.060; amd. 2008 Code)
F. County Representative: As soon as the city council has enacted the ordinance codified in this chapter creating the city-county planning board, the board
of county commissioners shall, within forty five (45) days, designate a representative of the county, which representative may be a member of the
board of county commissioners or an office holder or employee of the county, to the mayor for appointment to the planning board; in the event of the
failure of the county to designate such member, the mayor may appoint a person of his choosing and at his sole discretion as a representative of the
county. (1975 Code § 2.20.070)
2-2-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular: The city-county planning board shall fix the time for holding regular meetings, but it shall meet at least once in the months of January, April,
July and October. (1975 Code § 2.20.080; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Special:
1. Who May Call: Special meetings of the city-county planning board may be called by the president or by two (2) members upon written request to the
secretary. (1975 Code § 2.20.090; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Notice:
a. Required: The secretary shall send to all members, at least two (2) days in advance of a special meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place
of the meeting.
b. Not Required: Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting has been fixed in a regular meeting, or if all
members are present at the special meeting. (1975 Code § 2.20.090)
C. Quorum: A majority of the board members shall constitute a quorum; no action of the city-county planning board is official, however, unless authorized
by a majority of members of the board at a regular or properly called special meeting. (1975 Code § 2.20.110; amd. 2008 Code)
2-2-4: OFFICERS; EMPLOYEES:
A. President And Vice President Elected: At its first regular meeting in each year, the board shall elect from its members a president and vice president.
The vice president shall have authority to act as president of the board during the absence or disability of the president. (1975 Code § 2.20.110)
B. Secretary; Employees: The board may appoint and prescribe the duties and fix the compensation of a secretary and such employees as are necessary
for the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the board.
C. Other Services: The board may make contracts for special or temporary services and any professional services. (1975 Code § 2.20.120)
2-2-5: OFFICE SPACE:
The city shall provide a suitable place for the holding of meetings and the preservation of maps, plans, documents and accounts. (1975 Code § 2.20.130)
2-2-6: POWERS; DUTIES:
To effectuate the purpose of this chapter, the board shall have the power and duty to:
A. Administration: Exercise general supervision of and make regulations for the administration of the affairs of the board;
B. Investigative And Hearing Rules: Prescribe uniform rules pertaining to investigations and hearings;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 28/242
C. Fiscal Affairs: Supervise the fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the board;
D. Employees: Prescribe the qualification of, appoint, remove and fix the compensation of the employees of the board, and delegate to employees
authority to perform administrative acts in all cases except where final action of the board is necessary;
E. Records: Keep an accurate and complete record of all board proceedings, record and file all bonds and contracts and assume responsibility for the
custody and preservation of all papers and documents of the board;
F. Recommendations; Annual Report: Make recommendations and an annual report to the city council concerning the operation of the board and the
status of planning within its jurisdiction;
G. Reports; Proposed Ordinances And Proposed Resolutions: Prepare, publish and distribute reports, proposed ordinances and proposed resolutions and
other material relating to the activities authorized under this chapter;
H. Annual Budget: Prepare and submit to the city council an annual budget in the same manner as other departments of the city, and shall be limited in all
expenditures to the provisions made therefor by the city council. (1975 Code § 2.20.140)
I. Additional Powers: The city-county planning board shall possess and have all additional powers and authority granted by the provisions of Montana
Code Annotated, title 76, chapter 1, and shall perform all duties required thereunder. (1975 Code § 2.20.200; amd. 2008 Code)
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
The members of the city-county planning board shall receive no salary for serving on the city-county planning board, but may be reimbursed from local
funds for transportation and actual expenses up to, but not exceeding, state transportation reimbursement and allowable expenses incurred in attending
city-county planning board meetings. (1975 Code § 2.20.150; amd. 2008 Code)
2-2-8: EXPENSES:
When the city-county planning board determines that it is necessary for members or employees to attend, in another city, county or state, a regional or
national conference or interview dealing with planning or related problems, the city-county planning board may pay the actual expenses of the attending
members or employees, provided the amount has been made available in the board's appropriation. (1975 Code § 2.20.160)
2-2-9: FUNDS FOR OPERATION:
A. Appropriation: After the city council has by ordinance created the city-county planning board, the city council may appropriate funds to carry out the
duties of the planning board.
B. Tax Levy: The city may levy a tax upon the property located within such city not to exceed two (2) mills for planning board purposes under procedures
set forth in Montana Code Annotated sections 7-6-4201 to 7-6-4203, provided such tax shall not exceed the maximum levy authorized in Montana
Code Annotated sections 76-1-405 to 76-1-407. (1975 Code § 2.20.170; amd. 2008 Code)
C. Gifts And Donations:
1. Power To Accept: The city-county planning board is empowered and given the right to accept, receive, take, hold, own and possess any gift,
donation, grant, devise or bequest, or any property, real, personal or mixed, or any improved or unimproved park or playground, and utilize, hold or
dispose of the same for planning purposes, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Special Fund: Any money so accepted shall be deposited with the city in a special nonreverting planning board fund to be available for expenditures
by the city-county planning board for the purpose designated by the donor. (1975 Code § 2.20.190)
3. Warrants: The disbursing officer of the city shall draw warrants against such special nonreverting fund only upon vouchers signed by the president
and secretary of the city-county planning board.
4. Financial Aid: Upon approval of the city council, the city-county planning board may accept, receive and expend funds, grants and services from the
federal government or its agencies and instrumentalities, from the state or local government, or its agencies and instrumentalities, or from civic
sources and contact with respect thereto, and provide such information and reports as may be necessary to secure such financial aid. (1975 Code
§ 2.20.190)
D. Expenditures: The city-county planning board shall have authority to expend, under regular city procedure as authorized by law, all sums appropriated
to it for purposes and activities authorized by this chapter. (1975 Code § 2.20.180; amd. 2008 Code)
2-2-10: GROWTH POLICY:
A. Purpose: To assure the promotion of public health, safety, morals, convenants, order or the general welfare and for the sake of the efficiency and
economy in the process of community development, the city-county planning board shall prepare a growth policy and shall serve in an advisory counsel
to the city council. (1975 Code § 2.20.210; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 29/242
B. Policies: The planning board may also propose policies for:
1. Subdivision plats;
2. The development of public ways, public places, public structures and public and private utilities;
3. The issuance of improvement location permits on platted and unplatted lands;
4. The laying out and development of public ways and services to platted and unplatted lands. (1975 Code § 2.20.220; amd. 2008 Code)
C. Information Made Available: Whenever the city-county planning board undertakes the preparation of a growth policy, the department and officials of the
state, county, and city, and separate taxing units operating within lands under the jurisdiction of the planning board shall make available, upon request
of the board, such information, documents and plans as have been prepared; or, upon the request of the board, shall provide such information as
relates to the board's activity. (1975 Code § 2.20.230; amd. 2008 Code)
D. Contents: The city-county planning board shall prepare and propose a growth policy for its jurisdictional area, which growth policy may include any of
the provisions included in Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1, part 6. (1975 Code § 2.20.240; amd. 2008 Code)
E. Adoption: The growth policy as provided for in subsections A through D and subsection F of this section shall be adopted by the manner prescribed in
Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1, part 6. (1975 Code § 2.20.250; amd. 2008 Code)
F. Subdivision Conformance; Approval:
1. Where a growth policy has been approved, the governing body may, by ordinance, require subdivision plats to conform to the provisions of the
growth policy. Certified copies of such ordinances shall be filed with the city or city finance officer and with the county clerk and recorder of the
county.
2. Thereafter a plat involving lands within the jurisdictional area covered by the growth policy shall not be filed without first presenting it to the citycounty
planning board which shall make a report to the governing body advising as to compliance or noncompliance of the plat with the growth
policy. The governing body shall have the final authority to approve the filing of such plat.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to limit the present powers of the governing body but shall be an additional requirement before
any plat be filed of record or entitled to be recorded. (1975 Code § 2.20.260; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 3
ZONING COMMISSION
2-3-1: CREATED:
There is created a city zoning commission pursuant to and under the provisions of Montana Code Annotated section 76-2-306, to be designated and
known as the "city of Shelby zoning commission". (1975 Code § 2.14.010)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The city zoning commission shall consist of not less than five (5) members appointed by the city council upon the recommendation of the mayor. (1975
Code § 2.14.020)
2-3-3: TERM; VACANCIES:
A. Term: The term of office of the zoning commission members shall be two (2) years.
B. Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by the city council upon recommendation by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. (1975 Code
§ 2.14.030)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the zoning commission shall be as defined in the laws of the state of Montana. (1975 Code § 2.14.040)
2-3-5: RATIFICATION OF PRIOR ACTS:
All prior acts of the zoning commission appointed previously in accordance with the laws of the state of Montana are hereby ratified, adopted and
confirmed. (1975 Code § 2.14.050)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 30/242
Title 3
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSES1
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: Any and all industries, pursuits, commercial enterprises, occupations, professions and avocations, except those carried on in a temporary
manner by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational or like nonprofit organization solely as projects for fundraising.
EMPLOYEE: All owners, proprietors, partners, managers, salesmen, or employees engaged in or associated directly with the management and conduct of
the business concerned.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any association, firm or corporation organized for religious, charitable, educational, civic, scientific or literary purposes
which does not contemplate the distribution of pecuniary gains, profits or dividends to its members.
YEAR: A fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991; amd. 2008 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
For the protection and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, it is hereby declared that every business conducted within the city shall be subject to
the police power of the city, and accordingly, no person shall engage in business in the city without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided unless
such person is expressly made exempt by the laws of the state of Montana from such licensing authority of the city. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES2:
A. Fee Schedule: Annual license fees for businesses shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 722, 6-16-1997; amd. 2008
Code)
B. Manner Of Payment: All licenses herein provided for are payable in advance to the city finance officer. In no case shall the license be granted for longer
than one year. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991; amd. 2008 Code)
3-1-4: APPLICATION:
A. Forms: The city finance officer shall collect all fees for the licenses required by this chapter. The city finance officer shall procure blanks for applications,
books of account, receipts and license forms used in connection with the issuance of business licenses.
B. Required Information: All businesses required to be licensed by this chapter shall make application, in writing, which application shall contain the
following information:
1. The full business name, permanent address and phone number of applicant;
2. Brief description of the nature of the business;
3. The location or locations of the business in the city, giving the street address and phone number of each location and the name of the person in
charge at each location;
4. The number of local employees of the business, including owners, partners, proprietors, and managers;
5. The length of time the right to do business is desired, when applicable;
6. The endorsement of the city building inspector evidencing that the location sought to be licensed does not violate the city zoning and building
ordinances; provided, however, that such endorsement shall not be required on an application for renewal of a license;
7. If the party actually applying for a license is the agent or representative of the applicant, the full name, address and phone number of said agent or
representative, and the full name, address and phone number of the principal, if different than that of the applicant. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Issuance: It shall be the duty of the city finance officer to issue a license within thirty (30) days upon presentation of a properly completed application
blank together with tender of the appropriate license fee payable in advance, unless an inspection by the county health officer, sanitary inspector, fire
inspector, law enforcement agency, or building inspector indicates a violation of a city ordinance, state law, federal law, or regulation exists, or would
exist, at the place of business sought to be licensed, in which case a written description of said violation specifying the steps necessary to qualify the
premises for license shall be furnished to the applicant by the city finance officer. (Ord. 801, 6-7-2010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 31/242
B. Contents: Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall state upon its face the following:
1. Name of the licensee and any other name under which business is to be carried on.
2. Number of employees as herein defined.
3. The local address and phone number of the business.
4. The amount of the license fee.
5. The date of issuance and date of expiration.
6. Such other and further information as the ordinances of the city shall require.
C. Issuance Refused; Revocation: Whenever the city council shall deem it best for the public interest to do so, it may, by resolution passed by an
affirmative majority vote of all the members of the city council and approved by the mayor and attested by the city finance officer, refuse to authorize
the issuance of any license herein provided for, and the city council hereby expressly reserves, by resolution or affirmative vote of the majority of all of
the members of the city council and approved by the mayor and attested by the city finance officer, the right to revoke any and all licenses that may
have been issued as herein provided, when it shall deem best for the public interest to do so. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-6: TERM; LATE FEE:
All licenses shall be annual, payable in advance and, unless otherwise specified, commence on July 1 and expire on June 30 of each year. A ten dollar
($10.00) late fee will be assessed against each business license purchased by an existing business after July 31. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-7: SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Branch Establishment: A license shall be obtained in the manner herein provided for each branch establishment or location of a business; provided,
however, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a licensed business where no sales are made shall not be
deemed to be a branch establishment. Drive-in banking locations are not considered separate locations for existing banking institutions.
B. Multiple Businesses: Any person licensed by the city conducting more than one business at the time of license application shall be required to purchase
a license for each business that they operate. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-8: POSTING REQUIRED:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the business is conducted. Any
license for a business without a fixed place of business shall be carried upon the person of the licensee and shall be shown to any resident of the city or
city official upon demand. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-9: UNLAWFUL BUSINESSES:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to grant permission to carry on or conduct any unlawful business, or to conduct any business in an
unlawful manner, or to grant immunity to any business from lawful regulation and control. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed business, provided the new location complies with the requirements of the ordinances
of the city. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-11: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
In the event that a licensed business changes ownership, the current business license shall remain in effect until June 30 as if no change of ownership had
occurred without any further payment. A new business license, reflecting the transfer of ownership, will be required for the next business year commencing
on July 1. (Ord. 694, 3-21-1994)
3-1-12: DUTIES OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY:
The law enforcement agency shall make diligent inquiry and examination as to all persons in the city liable to pay licenses as required in this chapter and
shall aid the city finance officer in collection of all license fees required by this chapter and make personal demand at the request of the city finance officer
therefor and report all parties delinquent to the city finance officer and the city council. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
3-1-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 32/242
A. Violation: Every person carrying on or engaging in the transaction of any business for which a license is required, without first procuring the proper
license therefor, and any person making material misrepresentations or omissions in an application for a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. Every day business is conducted by a person without a license shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991)
B. Action To Enforce: The city council may direct to be brought or bring suit in the name of the city as plaintiff for the recovery of a license fee herein
provided for against any person required to obtain a license and who fails, neglects or refuses to procure such license and pay the fee therefor or who
attempts to carry on any business without such license. (Ord. 660, 2-4-1991; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR LICENSES1
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates. All
other words and phrases used in this chapter, the definitions of which are not given herein, shall be given the ordinary meaning:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, also called ethanol or the hydrated oxide of ethyl.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A compound produced and sold for human consumption as a drink that contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol
by volume.
BEER: A malt beverage containing not more than seven percent (7%) of alcohol by weight.
DEPARTMENT: The Montana department of revenue.
LIQUOR: Any alcoholic beverage except beer and table wine.
PERSON: Every individual, partnership, corporation, hotel, restaurant, club and fraternal organization, and all licensed retailers of liquor, whether
conducting the business singularly or collectively.
PUBLIC PLACE: A place, building, or conveyance to which the public has or may be permitted to have access and any place of public resort.
RESIDENCE: A building, part of a building or tent where a person resides, but does not include any part of a building that is not actually and exclusively
used as a private residence.
RETAILER: Any person, club, association, fraternal organization, partnership or any other kind of organization, engaged in the sale and distribution of
alcoholic beverages.
RULES AND REGULATIONS: Rules and regulations made and promulgated by the Montana department of revenue or the department of justice pursuant
to Montana Code Annotated.
SALE AND SELL: Exchange, barter, and traffic. These terms also include the selling or supplying or distributing, by any means whatever, of liquor, by any
partnership or by any society, association, or club, whether incorporated or unincorporated, and whether heretofore or hereafter formed or unincorporated,
to any person, partnership, society, association or club or to any member thereof.
STATE LIQUOR STORE: A retail store operated by the department of revenue for the purpose of selling distilled spirits and wines.
TABLE WINE: Wine that contains not more than sixteen percent (16%) alcohol by volume and includes cider.
WINE: An alcoholic beverage made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe fruit or other agricultural products without addition or
abstraction, except as may occur in the usual cellar treatment of clarifying and aging, and that contains more than one-half of one percent but not more
than twenty four percent (24%) of alcohol by volume. Wine may be ameliorated to correct natural deficiencies, sweetened, and fortified in accordance with
applicable federal regulations and the customs and practices of the industry. Other alcoholic beverages not defined in this section but made in the manner
of wine and labeled and sold as wine in accordance with federal regulations are also wine. (1975 Code § 5.08.010; amd. 2008 Code)
3-2-2: LICENSE:
A. Scope: Licenses may be issued to qualified applicants, as provided in this chapter, whereby the licensee shall be authorized and permitted to sell
alcoholic beverages at retail in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Qualified applicants include persons, hotels, clubs and fraternal
organizations. (1975 Code § 5.08.020)
B. Fees2: The annual license fee for the licenses required by this chapter shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and are
exclusive of and in addition to other license fees chargeable in this city for the sale of liquor, beer, wine and malt beverages. (1975 Code § 5.08.030;
amd. 2008 Code)
C. Application: Prior to the issuance of a license as provided in this chapter, the applicant shall file with the city finance officer an application, in writing,
signed by the applicant, and directed to the city council, which application shall specify the location by street and number of the premises where the
business is to be carried on under the license applied for, the name of the persons conducting the business if the same is a partnership or corporation,
and if the same is a fraternal order such fact must therein be set forth. The application must be accompanied by satisfactory evidence that the applicant
has the licenses required by section 3-2-3 of this chapter. Such application must be accompanied by the license fee as described in subsection B of
this section. (1975 Code § 5.08.040)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 33/242
D. Issuance: Upon the filing of the application prescribed in subsection C of this section, accompanied by the evidence thereby required, and upon the
payment of the required license fee, the city finance officer shall issue and deliver to the applicant a license to carry on the business for which the
applicant owns and holds subsisting licenses in respect to the same premises for which license is applied for as provided. (1975 Code § 5.08.050)
E. Contents Of License; Transferability: Every license issued under this chapter shall set forth the name of the person to whom issued and the location by
street and number of the premises where the business is to be carried on under such license. If it is a partnership, it shall set forth the names of the
persons conducting the business. Such license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be nontransferable; provided, however, that a transfer of any
such license may be made on application to the council, accompanied by satisfactory evidence of the consent of the Montana department of revenue,
to such transfer of the license by it issued under said act.
F. Display: Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises in respect to which it is issued and shall be exhibited to any member of
the law enforcement agency of the city whenever same is requested.
G. License Separate And Distinct; Expiration: Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter is separate and distinct, and no person, except the
licensee therein named, shall exercise any of the privileges granted thereunder, and all the licenses are applicable only to the premises in respect to
which they are issued. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. (1975 Code § 5.08.060)
H. Limit One Per Person; Business In Name Of Licensee: No person shall be granted more than one all beverage license in any year. No business may be
carried on under license issued under this chapter except in the name of the licensee. (1975 Code § 5.08.220)
3-2-3: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Required: No all beverage license, beer license or beer and wine license required by this chapter by any retailer shall be issued until the applicant
therefor has been granted a corresponding license by the Montana department of revenue.
B. Effect Of Suspension Or Revocation: Any revocation, withdrawal or suspension of any license granted by the state pursuant to the Montana alcoholic
beverage code shall at once and simultaneously therewith operate also as a revocation, withdrawal or suspension, as the case may be, of any license
granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter. (1975 Code § 5.08.070)
3-2-4: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES:
A. Prohibited Sales: No licensee or his or her employee or employees, nor any other person, shall sell, deliver, or give away or cause or permit to be sold,
delivered or given away any alcoholic beverage to the following persons: (1975 Code § 5.08.080)
1. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years; (1975 Code § 5.08.080; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Any intoxicated person or any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated;
B. Misrepresentation: Any minor, or other person who knowingly misrepresents his or her qualifications for the purpose of obtaining an alcoholic beverage
from such licensee shall be equally guilty with said licensee and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty as provided in this code and as
provided by the statutes of the state of Montana; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing or
permitting the sale of an alcoholic beverage to any person in violation of any federal law. (1975 Code § 5.08.080)
3-2-5: HOURS OF SALE:
A. Hours Sales Prohibited: No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, offered for sale or given away upon any premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at
retail on any day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
B. Exclusion Of Persons; Exceptions: During the hours when the licensed establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold at retail are required by this
chapter to be closed, it shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or give away any such alcoholic beverages, and during such hours all persons, save
employees of such licensed establishments, shall be excluded therefrom; provided, however, that when a licensed establishment is operated in
conjunction with a hotel, restaurant, bus depot, railway terminal or other lawful business other than that of the sale of alcoholic beverages, then such
other lawful business need not be closed, but only the part thereof where such alcoholic beverages are sold. (1975 Code § 5.08.090)
3-2-6: UNAUTHORIZED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any licensee to sell or keep for sale and/or have on his premises for any purposes whatever, any liquor and/or wine except that purchased
from a state liquor store. A licensee found in possession of, or selling and keeping for sale, any liquor and/or wine which was not purchased from a state
liquor store shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in subsection 3-2-15B of this chapter, and if the council shall be satisfied that any such liquor
and/or wine was knowingly sold or kept for sale within the licensed premises by such licensee or by his agents, servants or employees, it shall be
mandatory that the city council immediately revoke the license of said licensee. (1975 Code § 5.08.100)
3-2-7: EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person who has not been issued a license under this chapter to sell or keep for sale any alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 34/242
nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to those engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages at the following locations:
A. State Liquor Stores: At the various state liquor stores;
B. Railroad Dining Or Buffet Car: In any dining or buffet car operated by any railroad in connection with regularly operated train service, when the person
serving such alcoholic beverage is in the employ of said railroad is acting within the scope of his employment in doing so, provided a license has been
issued to said railroad under said act by the Montana department of revenue, liquor division, and the same, or a duplicate thereof, is displayed in such
car. (1975 Code § 5.08.110)
3-2-8: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The city council or any duly authorized representative thereof, or the mayor or law enforcement officer shall have the right at any time to make an
examination of the premises of such licensee as to whether this chapter is being complied with. (1975 Code § 5.08.130)
3-2-9: CONSUMPTION IN HOTELS RESTRICTED:
Except in the cases of alcoholic beverages kept or consumed in premises for which a license has been granted under the laws of the state of Montana and
under this chapter, and which premises form a part of the hotel, no person shall keep or consume alcoholic beverages in any part of a hotel other than a
private guestroom, and no person shall keep or have any alcoholic beverages in any room in a hotel unless he is a bona fide guest of the hotel and is duly
registered in the office of the hotel as an occupant of that room. (1975 Code § 5.08.150)
3-2-10: SPECIAL PERMITS:
A. Sale Of Beer:
1. Special Events: Any association or corporation conducting a picnic, convention, fair, civic or community enterprise, or sporting event shall, in the
discretion of the city council, be entitled to a special permit to sell beer to the patrons of such event to be consumed within the enclosure wherein the
event is held. (1975 Code § 5.08.160)
2. Application: The application of any such association or corporation shall be presented ten (10) days in advance and shall describe the location of
such enclosure wherein such event is held, the nature of such event, and the period when it is contemplated that the same will be held. Such
application shall be accompanied by the amount of the permit fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. (1975 Code
§ 5.08.160; amd. 2008 Code)
3. Times Sale Authorized: The permit issued to such association or corporation shall be a special permit, which shall not authorize the sale of beer
except starting one day in advance of the regular period when events are being held upon such grounds and during the period described in such
application, and for one day thereafter. (1975 Code § 5.08.160)
4. National Veterans' Organization Or Fraternal Organization:
a. Special Permit: Any post of a nationally chartered veterans' organization or any lodge of a recognized national fraternal organization, not otherwise
licensed under this chapter, shall in the discretion of the city council, without notice or hearing as provided herein, be entitled to a special permit to
sell beer at such post or lodge to members and their guests only, to be consumed within the hall or building of such post or lodge.
b. Contents Of Application; Fee: The application of such nationally chartered veterans' organization or lodge of a recognized national fraternal
organization shall describe the location of the hall or building where the special permit shall be used and the date it will be used. Such application
shall be accompanied by a permit fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.
5. Term Of Permit: The special permit issued shall be for a twenty four (24) hour period ending at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. only and the city council shall
not issue more than twelve (12) such permits to any such post or lodge during the calendar year. (1975 Code § 5.08.160)
B. Alcoholic Beverages:
1. Special Permit: Any post of a nationally chartered veterans' organization or any lodge of a recognized national fraternal organization, not otherwise
licensed under this chapter, shall in the discretion of the city council, without notice or hearing as provided herein, be entitled to a special permit to
sell all alcoholic beverages at such post or lodge to members and their guests only, to be consumed within the hall or building of such post or lodge.
2. Application; Fee: The application of such nationally chartered veterans' organization or lodge of a recognized national fraternal organization shall
describe the location of the hall or building where the special permit shall be used and the date it will be used. Such application shall be
accompanied by a permit fee as determined from time to time by the city council.
3. Term: The special permit issued shall be for one day only ending at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. only and the city council shall not issue more than twelve
(12) such permits to a post or lodge during a calendar year. (1975 Code § 5.08.170)
3-2-11: BEER, PURCHASE/SALE BY RETAILER:
A. Purchase: It is unlawful for a licensed retailer to purchase or acquire beer from anyone except a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the provisions of
the Montana alcoholic beverage code.
B. Restrictions On Sale: It is unlawful for any brewer, wholesaler or retailer, or his or her employee or employees to sell, deliver or give away, or cause or
permit to be sold, delivered or given away, any beer to: (1975 Code § 5.08.190)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 35/242
1. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years; (1975 Code § 5.08.190; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Any intoxicated person or any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated. (1975 Code § 5.08.190)
C. Sell Or Serve For Consumption On Premises: It is lawful for such retailer to sell and serve beer either on draft or in containers to the public to be
consumed on the premises of such retailer. (1975 Code § 5.08.200)
D. Sell For Consumption Off Premises: It is lawful for such retailer to sell or furnish beer to the public with intent that such beer shall be taken away from
the premises of such retailer for consumption off the premises of such retailer. (1975 Code § 5.08.210)
3-2-12: MISREPRESENTING AGE; ALTERING IDENTIFICATION CARD:
It is unlawful for any person to fraudulently misrepresent his or her age to any dispenser of alcoholic beverages, or to falsely procure an identification card,
or to alter any of the statements contained in the identification card as herein provided for. (1975 Code § 5.08.180)
3-2-13: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; RENEWAL:
A. Power To Suspend Or Revoke: The city council may, upon its own motion, and shall upon a written verified complaint of any other person, investigate
the action and operation of any licensee hereunder, and shall have the power to temporarily suspend and/or permanently revoke a license issued
under this chapter for violation of any provision of this chapter. (1975 Code § 5.08.120)
B. Citation:
1. Issuance: Upon the filing with the council of a verified complaint charging the licensee with the commission of any act which would be cause for the
suspension or revocation of a license, within one year of the date of filing said complaint, the city council shall forthwith issue a citation directing the
licensee to appear before the city council within ten (10) days after the date of the service of said citation and by filing his verified answer to the
complaint, show cause, if any, why his license should not be suspended or revoked. (1975 Code § 5.08.120)
2. Service: Service of the citation may be effected by mailing a true copy thereof, with a true copy of the complaint, by registered mail addressed to the
licensee at his last address of record, or by a law enforcement officer personally delivering to the licensee the above referred to documents.
3. Failure To Answer: Failure of the licensee to answer shall be deemed an admission by him of the truthfulness of the charge made and thereupon the
city council shall be authorized to forthwith suspend or revoke the license.
C. Hearing:
1. Required: Upon the filing of the answer, the city council shall fix the time and place of the hearing on the charges made, which hearing shall be in the
council chamber of the city hall, and not less than five (5) days' notice of such hearing shall be given to the complainant and licensee.
2. Notice Of Hearing: The notice of hearing shall be given in the same manner as is the option herein provided for. With the notice of the hearing to the
complainant, there shall be attached a true copy of the answer of the licensee. If either party has appeared by counsel, the notice shall be given in
like manner to the counsel of said party.
3. Evidence At Hearing: Upon the hearing, the council shall hear the evidence presented, which may be in the form of oral testimony or affidavits, or
both.
4. Council Decision: After the hearing has been concluded, the council shall, within ten (10) days, render its decision in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. Notice of the decision, with a copy thereof, shall be served upon the parties, or their counsel, in the manner herein provided as to other
notices. When the council shall have revoked or cancelled a license previously issued by it, the council shall notify the licensee, in writing, by
registered mail, to the address of such licensee, of its action, giving reasons thereof. (1975 Code § 5.08.120)
5. Appeal To District Court: Should the action of the council be arbitrary or capricious, anyone aggrieved thereby shall, by mandamus or other
appropriate proceedings, be entitled to have the action of the council reviewed by the district court of the state of Montana, in and for the county of
Toole. (1975 Code § 5.08.120; amd. 2008 Code)
D. Renewal: After suspension or revocation of a license, the city council shall have the power to renew the same if, in its discretion, a proper showing
therefor has been made. (1975 Code § 5.08.120)
3-2-14: DISPOSITION OF FEES AND FINES:
All receipts from licensee fees and fines collected under the provisions under this chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city, out
of which said fund the cost of administering this chapter shall be paid. (1975 Code § 5.08.140)
3-2-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Unlicensed Sale: Any person, who has not been issued a license under this chapter, who shall sell or keep for sale any alcoholic beverage, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Violation: Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 5.08.240; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 36/242
Chapter 3
SECONDHAND DEALERS
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
MINOR: Any male or female under the age of eighteen (18) years.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person who, within the city, as a business, engages in the purchase, sale, trade, barter, consignment or exchange of
secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, or any person who keeps any store, shops, room or place where secondhand goods, wares or merchandise of
any kind or description are bought, sold, traded, bartered, consigned or exchanged; provided however, that this chapter shall not apply to bona fide trade
or turn ins of secondhand goods, wares or merchandise on other goods, wares or merchandise, where no cash is paid to the person so trading or turning
in by the dealer or merchant to whom such trade or turn in is made. (Ord. 821, 6-15-2015)
3-3-2: LICENSE:
A. Required: It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a secondhand dealer without first procuring a city business license.
B. Multiple Places Of Business: Any person having more than one place of business where secondhand goods are bought, sold, traded, bartered,
consigned or exchanged, as defined herein, shall be required to procure a separate license for each such place of business.
C. License Fee1: The charge for such license shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, payable in advance to the city
finance officer.
D. Transferability: A secondhand dealer's license shall not be transferred from one person to another, but the licensee may have his license transferred to
a new location by the city finance officer, and the change of address shall be noted thereon, together with the date on which the change was made.
(Ord. 821, 6-15-2015)
3-3-3: RECORDS2:
Every secondhand dealer doing business in the city shall keep a record on such forms as the law enforcement agency may provide. Such record shall
show:
A. The date and the hour of purchase of all secondhand goods, wares or merchandise other than those excluded by the provisions of section 3-3-1 of this
chapter;
B. The name, age, physical description, city and street address of the vendor;
C. A full and accurate description of such goods so purchased;
D. The amount paid for such goods, wares or merchandise;
E. The date, name and address must be filled out in ink or indelible pencil by the vendor, if such vendor can write; otherwise the person filling in such
information must indicate that the vendor is unable to write. (Ord. 821, 6-15-2015)
3-3-4: INSPECTION:
Inspection of records, as well as of every article or thing purchased by such secondhand dealer, shall at all times be open to the law enforcement agency
or any law enforcement officer designated to make such inspections. (Ord. 821, 6-15-2015)
3-3-5: RESALE RESTRICTIONS:
Secondhand goods of any kind or description, bought or received by a secondhand dealer, must be kept separate from the main stock of merchandise
offered for sale for at least seven (7) days before they are sold or offered for sale, except when the goods have been inspected by any member of the law
enforcement agency designated for that purpose, and such member has, in writing, authorized the secondhand dealer to dispose of such goods within a
period less than seven (7) days. Such inspection, however, shall be made as promptly as possible when request therefor is made by any such
secondhand dealer and, in any event, once each week. (Ord. 821, 6-15-2015)
3-3-6: DEALING WITH MINORS3:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 37/242
It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer licensed as aforesaid to purchase or receive any goods, articles or things whatsoever from any minor. (Ord. 821,
6-15-2015)
Chapter 4
ITINERANT VENDORS1
3-4-1: STATUTE ADOPTED:
The city council hereby adopts the itinerant vendors law exactly as it is specified in Montana Code Annotated section 7-21-2301 through section 7-21-
2310, inclusive, with one exception. (Ord. 627, 8-17-1987)
3-4-2: EXCEPTION:
The city finance officer, rather than the county treasurer, shall be responsible for collecting the license fee, issuing the license, obtaining and recording
information about the itinerant vendor, obtaining any required bond, and performing any and all other functions that the county treasurer would under the
state statutes. (Ord. 627, 8-17-1987)
Chapter 5
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS1
3-5-1: STATUTE ADOPTED:
The city council hereby adopts the transient retail merchant's law exactly as it is specified in Montana Code Annotated section 7-21-2401 through section
7-21-2411, inclusive, with one exception. (Ord. 628, 8-17-1987)
3-5-2: EXCEPTION:
The city finance officer, rather than the county treasurer, shall be responsible for collecting the license fee, issuing the license, obtaining and recording
information about the transient retail merchant vendor, obtaining any required bond, and performing any and all other functions that the county treasurer
would under the state statutes. (Ord. 628, 8-17-1987)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
NUISANCES1
4-1-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
"Public nuisance" means:
A. A condition which endangers safety or health, is offensive to the senses or obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by the city or any neighborhood found therein, or by a considerable number of persons; or
B. Any premises where persons gather for the purpose of engaging in unlawful conduct; or
C. A condition which renders dangerous for passage any public street, avenue, alley or public place or right of way, or waters used by the people of the
city. (1975 Code § 8.02.010)
4-1-2: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to remain outside of any building or any dwelling or other structure, or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the
inside, without first removing the door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the icebox, refrigerator or container. (1975 Code § 8.28.010)
4-1-3: WELLS AND CISTERNS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 38/242
Every person or corporation owning, occupying or controlling premises within the city upon which there is a well or cistern, either in use or abandoned,
shall at all times, except when necessary to open it, keep such well or cistern covered with a substantial cover so that it cannot be opened by children who
might be attracted to such well or cistern. (1975 Code § 8.32.010)
4-1-4: MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Offense: A person commits the offense of maintaining a public nuisance if he knowingly creates, conducts or maintains a public nuisance. (1975 Code
§ 8.20.020)
B. No Less A Nuisance Because Of Extent Of Annoyance Or Damage Inflicted: Any act which affects the city or any neighborhood found therein, or any
considerable number of persons as specified in section 4-1-1 of this chapter is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted upon individuals is unequal. (1975 Code § 8.20.030)
4-1-5: DUMPING GARBAGE AND OTHER DEBRIS:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to dump or leave any garbage, dead animal or other debris or refuse in or upon any street, thoroughfare or alley of
this municipality, or in or upon any municipal recreational property. (1975 Code § 10.04.660)
4-1-6: ABATEMENT:
A. Action In Equity: The city attorney or any person with standing may take appropriate steps to enjoin a possessor of a property within the city where a
public nuisance is being maintained to abate the public nuisance. (1975 Code § 8.20.040; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Temporary Injunction: Upon the filing of the complaint in such action, the judge may issue a temporary injunction.
C. Evidence Of General Reputation: In such action, evidence of the general reputation of the premises shall be admissible for the purpose of proving the
existence of such nuisance.
D. Order Of Abatement: If the existence of the nuisance is established, an order of abatement shall be entered as part of the judgment in the case. The
judge issuing such order may, in his discretion:
1. Confiscate all fixtures used on the premises to maintain the nuisance and either sell them and transmit the proceeds to the city general fund, destroy
them or return them to their rightful ownership; or
2. Close the premises for any period not to exceed one year. During such period, the premises shall remain in the custody of the court; or
3. Allow the premises to be opened upon the posting of bonds sufficient in amount to assure compliance with the order of abatement. The bonds shall
be forfeited if the nuisance is continued or resumed. The procedure for forfeiture and/or discharge of the bond shall be as provided in Montana Code
Annotated sections 49-9-502 and 49-9-503; or
4. Any combination of the above. (1975 Code § 8.20.040)
4-1-7: PENALTY:
A person convicted of maintaining a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of such conduct constitutes a separate offense. (1975 Code
§ 8.20.050)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND RATES1
4-2-1: GARBAGE DEFINED:
The word "garbage", as used in this chapter, means and includes every kind of refuse, accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or
otherwise, waste, sweepings, paper, ashes and other refuse and filth. (1975 Code § 8.12.010)
4-2-2: REMOVAL; STORAGE PERMIT:
The removal of all garbage within the city shall be done at the expense of the city except that a fee2 to be fixed by the city council shall be charged for a
permit to store and place garbage cans in alleys, driveways and public streets and that such a fee charged for such storage of garbage shall be paid
monthly in advance to the city finance officer who shall issue permits therefor, and no removal of garbage and ashes from any premises shall be made
until a permit is secured. (1975 Code § 8.12.020)
4-2-3: COLLECTION; SUPERVISION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 39/242
All garbage accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the superintendent of streets. The city
council shall establish regulations concerning the days of collection, type and locations of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the
collection, conveyance and disposal as the council finds necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law. (1975 Code
§ 8.12.030)
4-2-4: CONTAINERS:
A. City To Provide: The city shall provide garbage containers to all residents within the city. (2008 Code)
B. Property Owners To Provide Clean, Hard Surface: The property owners shall provide a clean, hard surface for the containers at a location out of the
street or alley rights of way. The storage surface area should be made of a material that allows the containers to be easily picked up. The storage
surface should be designed with a depression for the wheels to prevent the containers from rolling by themselves. The surface should have no steps or
edges that the container must be moved over for garbage pick up service. (Ord. 666, 4-1-1991; amd. 2008 Code)
C. Location: Every owner, agent or occupant of each and every building, as prescribed in this chapter, shall cause the receptacles to be placed in such
convenient place upon the premises as is most convenient for the removal therefrom by the person authorized to do so; provided, however, that it is
unlawful to place such receptacles in such place as to cause offense to the occupants of adjoining premises. (1975 Code § 8.12.050)
D. Damaging Or Disturbing: It is unlawful for any person other than the owner or authorized collector to interfere with or disturb any garbage container or
any garbage after it has been put in a garbage container, nor shall any unauthorized person molest, hinder or delay or in any manner interfere with any
garbage collector in the discharge of his duty. (1975 Code § 8.12.060)
E. Sanitation: It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any and every building using such garbage container, to keep the same in a clean and
sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the city. (1975 Code § 8.12.070)
4-2-5: INFLAMMABLE OR EXPLOSIVE REFUSE:
Highly inflammable or explosive material shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the superintendent
of streets at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. (1975 Code § 8.12.080)
4-2-6: OWNERSHIP OF REFUSE:
Ownership of refuse material set out for collection or deposited on the city dump shall be vested in the city. (1975 Code § 8.12.090)
4-2-7: EQUIPMENT:
The city shall furnish all necessary equipment, machinery, trucks, vehicles and labor necessary to perform such work in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (1975 Code § 8.12.100)
4-2-8: GATHERING OF REFUSE:
No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, avenue or other public place, or onto any occupied or unoccupied premises within the city. (1975 Code
§ 8.12.110)
4-2-9: UNAUTHORIZED ACCUMULATION:
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or garbage upon any premises is a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of
refuse within the time specified by law shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (1975 Code § 8.12.120)
4-2-10: TRIMMINGS AND CLIPPINGS:
Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet (4') before being deposited for collection. (1975 Code
§ 8.12.130)
4-2-11: PRIVATE CARRIERS:
The city shall be the sole provider of garbage and solid waste disposal services within the municipal limits of the city. This section is not subject to those
restrictions which are mandated pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-13-4107, because the city has no individuals, firms or companies that
provide commercial garbage or solid waste disposal services and that qualify as private motor carriers authorized by the public service commission to
provide such services. (Ord. 678, 5-4-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 40/242
4-2-12: TOOLE COUNTY RESIDENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 823, 12-7-2015)
4-2-13: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Established: The fees, rates and charges for the collection of garbage and use of the city landfill shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the city council. (2008 Code)
Chapter 3
CITY LANDFILL
4-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall dump any garbage in any city garbage container or otherwise cause to be transported or delivered to the city landfill any garbage from
within the city limits or from outside the city limits without first having paid the applicable fee1. Any person hauling garbage to the city landfill shall comply
with all sections of chapter 2 of this title. Violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code and
Montana law. (Ord. 823, 12-7-2015)
4-3-2: CAMPING PROHIBITED:
The practice of camping upon the premises of the city landfill or the occupancy thereof or parts thereof by any person, is declared to be harmful to the
health of the persons affected and to the inhabitants of the city, and hazardous as creating an undue fire risk to the persons affected, the inhabitants of the
city and the owners of premises contiguous to the premises, and is prohibited. (1975 Code § 8.08.020)
4-3-3: PROHIBITED MATERIALS AND VEHICLES AT THE LANDFILL REFUSE TRANSFER SITE:
A. It is unlawful for any person to deposit or dump hazardous materials as defined by federal and state of Montana laws and regulations, dead animals,
liquids, petroleum products, building materials in excess of eight feet (8') in length, hot ashes, burning material, fill material, cement, appliances that
contained or still contain freon, tires, burn barrels, batteries, and paint.
B. It is unlawful for any person to use a dump truck, grain truck, or dump style trailer to transport refuse to the refuse transfer site.
C. Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code as well as liable for the cost
to remove the prohibited material. (Ord. 807, 5-7-2012)
4-3-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The city of Shelby may take any action necessary to enforce this chapter so that only those persons who have paid the applicable fee for use of the city of
Shelby landfill are using such landfill including, but not limited to, a card key system for entering the landfill. In addition, the city of Shelby reserves the right
to revoke the privilege of using the city of Shelby landfill from any non-city of Shelby resident or business for any reason. In the event that such revocation
occurs, the city of Shelby may, in its discretion, make any refund it believes is warranted under the circumstances to the person or business so affected.
(Ord. 823, 12-7-2015)
Chapter 4
WEED CONTROL
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
LOT: Includes all the area of a city lot, tract or other parcel including the area extended to the center of the adjacent city street or streets and alleyways.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: All raw vegetation growth of every kind and nature, including, but not limited to, kochia, sweet clover, clump grass, dandelions and all
weeds known as Canada thistle, Scotch bull thistle, Russian thistle, sow thistle, quack grass, leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, spotted knapweed, hoary
cress, dodder, beggar's lice, downey brome (cheat) grass, foxtail barley or any similar unwanted vegetation over six inches (6") in height. (Ord. 795, 4-20-
2009)
4-4-2: NOXIOUS WEEDS PROHIBITED:
No owner or owners of any lot, tract or other parcel within the city, or agent or lessee of such owner or owners, shall permit noxious weeds on such lot,
tract or other parcel. The existence of such noxious weeds is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 786, 10-1-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 41/242
4-4-3: EXTERMINATION:
It is hereby made the duty of the owner or owners of any lot, tract or other parcel, or agent or lessee of such owner or owners, to remove or eradicate all
noxious weeds thereon by cutting the same down or by some other effective method. (Ord. 786, 10-1-2007)
4-4-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY, NOTICE, AND ASSESSMENT:
A. Removal: If a lot violates sections 4-4-2 and 4-4-3 of this chapter, then the city of Shelby through its designated representative may direct or hire the
removal or eradication of noxious weeds in order to bring the lot into compliance with this chapter.
B. Assessment Of Minimum Charge: If the city of Shelby exercises its rights under subsection A of this section, then the city shall assess the lot owner or
owners a minimum charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus material and equipment costs. Any labor requiring more than one hour shall be
assessed an additional seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour, computed pro rata, plus any material and equipment costs.
C. Lien: Any amount so assessed shall constitute a lien on the lot and will be taxed as a special assessment against the real property.
D. Notice:
1. If the city superintendent and mayor determine that the weeds on a lot create an emergency, the city at its discretion may without further notice direct
or hire the removal and eradication of noxious weeds in order to bring the lot into compliance with this section. An emergency means noxious weeds
of such growth or species that create a health hazard, fire hazard, other safety hazard, or hazard of imminently producing seeds and spreading to
other lots. Once an emergency for weed removal has been determined, the city shall remove or cause to be removed the noxious weeds within forty
eight (48) hours.
2. If emergency removal of noxious weeds is not required, the city may, five (5) days after noticing the owner or resident of a property in violation of this
chapter, enter the property to remove the noxious weeds or direct the removal. Notice shall be by posting conspicuously by signage on the property.
The form of the notice shall be "Mow Notice". (Ord. 809, 9-4-2012)
4-4-5: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
Any and all officers charged with enforcement of this chapter may go upon the lands infested with noxious weeds, or suspected thereof, for any purposes
necessary to such enforcement. (Ord. 786, 10-1-2007)
4-4-6: PENALTY:
A. Imposition: Any owner, representative, contract purchaser or occupant of the property violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days or
by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation within a reasonable time.
B. Separate Offense: Each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Enforced Removal: The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 786, 10-1-
2007)
Chapter 5
JUNK AND DISABLED OR JUNK VEHICLES
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context otherwise indicates:
DISABLED OR JUNK VEHICLE: A discarded, ruined, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicle, including component parts, or that is not lawfully or validly
licensed, or remains in operative, or is incapable of being driven.
ENCLOSED AREA: Any area which is inaccessible to the public view from any public right of way.
JUNK: Any metal, glass, paper, rags, wood, machinery parts, appliance or equipment parts, cloth or other waste or discarded material of any nature or
substance whatsoever, or any scrap or salvage materials.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the city or any city property within or without the corporate limits which is not a street or highway.
STREET, ALLEY OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for the purpose of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 42/242
transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon, or any part
or portion thereof. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. Ord. 758, 3-18-2002)
4-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
It is a public offense punishable as hereinafter provided and it is declared to be a nuisance for any person to leave or permit to remain any wrecked,
damaged, demolished or disabled vehicle, or part or portion thereof, or junk upon any private property or public right of way. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
4-5-3: SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Officer: This chapter will be enforced by the building inspector/zoning administrator or such other person or persons as the city council
may from time to time direct to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Action Upon Determination Of Violation:
1. Determination Of Ownership: Upon a determination that a violation of this chapter exists, enforcement personnel shall ascertain the name and
mailing address of the owner of the disabled or junk vehicle or junk, if they can be located, or the person in custody of such. If located on private
property, the property owner upon which said materials are located shall be deemed as the custodian of the materials and be liable thereof. The
name and mailing address of the owner or custodian may be obtained from the current assessment list maintained by the state of Montana. (Ord.
755, 6-4-2001)
2. Written Notice: Written notice of the violation shall be served upon the owner or custodian, stating that such material is deemed to be a nuisance
within the provisions of section 4-5-2 of this chapter, shall briefly state the facts which are deemed to make such material a nuisance within the terms
of this chapter, and direct that the vehicle or junk shall be removed from the premises within seven (7) days or the city will cause the materials to be
removed, with costs thereof to be charged to the materials owner or landowner.
C. Unclaimed Vehicles And Junk: Vehicles and junk not claimed within seven (7) days after removal from private or public property may be disposed of by
sheriff's sale. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. Ord. 798, 10-19-2009)
4-5-4: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
Any and all officers charged with enforcement of this chapter may go upon the lands infested with such vehicle and/or junk, or suspected thereof, for any
purposes necessary to such enforcement. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
4-5-5: NOTICE OF VIOLATION1:
Notice of violation shall be made either: a) by posting a copy of the notice on the premises or b) by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner or custodian
by first class United States mail. The notice shall be deemed complete on the day the notice is posted or mailed. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
4-5-6: ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Removal By City; Costs: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or custodian, or their representative, contract purchaser, or any occupant, to
remove the vehicle or junk before the date specified in the notice described in section 4-5-5 of this chapter, the city is authorized to remove the vehicle
and/or junk and report to the city finance officer the same, together with the vouchers of the cost of such removal, plus a ten percent (10%) additional
charge to cover administrative cost.
B. Lien: If the costs of such removal are not paid forthwith, then the total cost shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land from which the vehicle has
been removed if removed from private property. The city finance officer shall each year prepare a resolution containing the name of the vehicle owner
or landowner, if known, and the amount of costs for removing such vehicle. When the same is passed by the council and approved by the mayor in the
same manner as other resolutions or special assessments, the assessments therein provided shall be a lien upon and against the lots or parcels of
land. A copy of the resolution shall be certified to the county treasurer by the city finance officer for collection in the same manner as other taxes. (Ord.
755, 6-4-2001)
4-5-7: DISPOSITION WHERE OWNER UNKNOWN:
When the owner or custodian of such vehicle cannot be located by reasonable search, the notice specified in section 4-5-5 of this chapter shall be
attached to such vehicle. If such vehicle is not removed within seven (7) days from such notice, the vehicle is declared to be abandoned property and shall
be removed at the direction of the mayor or his duly authorized representative to a suitable city storage area designated by the mayor. Such vehicles shall
be stored for a period of at least fifteen (15) days and the owner thereof shall be entitled to redeem the same by payment to the city of actual costs for its
removal and reasonable storage, but may not return the vehicle to the property from which it was removed unless placed within the confines of an
enclosed area. In the event such vehicle or junk is unredeemed, the mayor shall authorize such disposal of it in accordance with law. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
4-5-8: TEARING DOWN, STRIPPING, JUNKING, STORAGE, REPAIR OR SERVICING PROHIBITED:
The outside tearing down, stripping, junking, storage, repair or servicing of vehicles within any area in the corporate city limits is prohibited. (Ord. 755, 6-4-
2001)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 43/242
4-5-9: PENALTY:
Any owner, custodian, representative, contract purchaser or occupant of the property violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violation within a reasonable time. Each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
Footnote 1: See section 4-5-3 of this chapter for contents of notice.
Chapter 6
COMMUNITY DECAY
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter the following terms have the meanings indicated below:
ACCUMULATE: To store, gather, collect, heap or pile up.
BLIGHTED: Deteriorated, in a state of ill repair, filthy, decaying.
BLIGHTED PREMISES: Any vacant building or structure or any portion of said property that is defined by one or more of the following definitions:
A. It is determined by the department that existing conditions pose a serious or immediate danger to the community; i.e., a life threatening condition or
a condition which puts at risk the health or safety of the public;
B. It is not being maintained; the following factors may be considered in determining whether a structure or building is not being maintained: missing or
boarded windows or doors; a collapsing or missing wall, sagging or collapsed roof or floor; siding that is seriously damaged or missing; fire damaged;
a foundation that is seriously damaged or missing; a foundation that is structurally faulty; or garbage, trash or abandoned cars situated on the
premises (unless the premises is a legal junkyard);
C. It is becoming dilapidated;
D. It has attracted illegal activity;
E. It is a fire hazard;
F. It is a factor in materially depreciating property values in the immediate neighborhood because of its poorly maintained condition;
G. It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the
building or of other premises within the neighborhood;
H. It constitutes a health or sanitary problem.
COMMUNITY DECAY: A public nuisance:
A. Community decay shall apply to public nuisances on agricultural land which is not necessary to the normal operation of the agricultural land.
B. Community decay does not include properly permitted construction of demolition projects during the time any necessary permits are in effect.
C. Community decay does not include persons servicing, manufacturing or processing materials, goods, or products on lots in public view, so long as
the materials used in the normal operation of the business are neatly stacked or piled.
D. Community decay does not include normal residential maintenance or landscaping.
DEPARTMENT: The department, officer, or person the city council designates to enforce this chapter.
DILAPIDATED: A state of decay or partial ruin.
IN PUBLIC VIEW: Any area visible from a point up to six feet (6') above the surface of the center of a public roadway.
JUNK: Any metal, glass, paper, rags, wood, machinery parts, appliances or equipment parts, cloth, rubble, or other waste or discarded material of any
nature or substance whatsoever, or any scrap or salvage materials.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 44/242
JUNK VEHICLE: A discarded, ruined, wrecked, or dismantled motor vehicle including component parts, or that is not lawfully or validly licensed, or
remains inoperative, or incapable of being driven.
MOBILE HOME: A form of housing known as "trailers", "house trailers", or "trailer coaches" designed to be moved from one place to another by
independent power connected to the mobile home or any trailer, house trailer, or trailer coach used as a residence.
NUISANCE: Anything which is injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or which unlawfully obstructs to free passage or use, in the customary manner, or any navigable lake, river,
bay, stream, canal or basin or any public park, square, street, or highway including, but not limited to:
A. Any junk; or
B. Any junk vehicle; or
C. Dead animal(s); or
D. Animal waste; or
E. Appliances; or
F. Blighted premises; or
G. A mobile home that is not skirted.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, company, association, corporation, town, or any other entity whether organized for profit or not.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A nuisance, which affects, at the same time, an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although
the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
SHIELDING: Refers to fencing or other manmade barriers to conceal community decay from public view. It also refers to natural barriers. Any shielding
barrier must conform to all local, state, building and protective covenant provisions. Any shielding is to be sufficient height so that none of the violations on
the premises is visible to public view.
TRAILER SKIRT: A barrier that extends from the ground to the bottom of a mobile home that completely conceals and protects the area underneath a
mobile home. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-2: PURPOSE AND GOVERNING BODY:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, control, and prohibit conditions that contribute to community decay within public view in the city of Shelby.
The governing body to administer this chapter is the city council through its designated department. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-3: PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to own or maintain any public nuisance that results in community decay within public view. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-4: SHIELDING:
The maintenance of materials that would be considered a public nuisance under this chapter except for nuisances that generate offensive odors or cause
health problems beyond the shield shall be lawful if such materials are shielded from public view in accordance with the following standards:
A. When fences are used for shielding, the boards may be spaced and/or slanted to reduce wind load. The space between boards when viewed from a
broadside may not be more than one and one-half inches (11/2") wide. Chainlink fences with standard fiberglass or similar inserts are acceptable,
provided the gap between adjacent inserts does not exceed one and one-half inches (11/2").
B. No more than one of the approved shielding materials shall be used on any one side of a shielding fence.
C. The fencing is to be maintained by the property owner or occupant in a neat and workmanlike manner and shall be replaced and/or repaired when
necessary.
D. Screening with trees and shrubs must provide a similar degree of shielding at all times of the year. Trees and shrubs may best be used in conjunction
with other shielding materials. A berm may also be used, provided the slopes of the berm are covered and graded smooth, with not less than three
inches (3") of top soil, and seeded with a weed free seed mix.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 45/242
E. Any shielding must conform to all local, state, building code and protective covenant provisions applicable to the property and shall be sufficient height
that none of the nuisance materials on the premises is visible to public view.
F. The material being shielded may not present a threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-5: MOBILE HOME SKIRTING:
Mobile homes shall be skirted within fourteen (14) days of being moved onto a lot regardless of whether the home is stored on the lot or used as a
residence. Skirting shall be made of plywood or similar material, installed in a workmanlike manner, and kept in good condition. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-6: ABATEMENT AND MITIGATION:
The abatement or mitigation of conditions which constitute a public nuisance prohibited by this chapter shall be accomplished under the provisions of this
section.
A. Upon its own initiative, or within thirty (30) days of receiving a written, signed complaint that a condition of community decay exists, the department shall
inspect the subject property to determine whether there is a violation of this chapter.
B. If it is determined that there is a violation of this chapter, the department shall notify the owner, manager or lessee of the property, or other responsible
party in writing of the violation by certified mail, return receipt, and order its abatement or mitigation within thirty (30) days of their receipt of the letter.
The notice of violation shall:
1. Include a statement specifically describing the violation;
2. Specify that the owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party has thirty (30) days from the receipt of such notice to bring the property into
compliance, or to submit a corrective action plan to comply with this chapter by means of removal, shielding or mitigation of the conditions; and
3. Advise the owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party that if the violation is not resolved, the city of Shelby may undertake abatement or
mitigation and assess the costs to the owner.
C. Upon receipt of a notice of violation, the owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party, may submit a plan to the department which shall include:
1. A complete description of the plan to be undertaken.
2. The date for commencement of the corrective action.
3. The date for completion of the corrective action. An extension may be granted at the discretion of the department.
D. The department may accept or reject the plan, accept the plan with modifications, or request additional information before making a final determination.
E. The owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party may appeal the department's final decision according to the procedure set forth in section 4-
6-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-7: APPEAL PROCESS:
An alleged violator may appeal a department's decision in writing via certified mail to the Shelby city council within ten (10) days of the department's final
decision regarding:
A. A determination that a community decay violation exists,
B. Rejection of a corrective action plan, or
C. The assessment of a fine for noncompliance.
The city council shall hold a hearing within forty five (45) days from the date that the appeal was received. The city council shall, in writing, affirm,
modify or withdraw the department's decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. Once an appeal for a hearing has been made, the department's
decision shall be stayed until the city council has held the hearing and affirmed, modified or withdrawn the determination of the department. The city
council will issue an order of the city council's findings signed by the mayor. The order shall include what, if any, corrective actions are required, the
time period for the corrective actions, and that the department or city of Shelby is authorized to remedy the violation and assess costs to the
responsible party.
If a violator fails to resolve a violation upon order from the city council, the department shall be authorized to remedy the violation, and assess costs to
the property owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party. In the event that a violator does not appeal the department's decision and fails to
resolve the violation, the department will bring the matter before the city council for authorization to complete the corrective action, and assess costs to
the property owner, manager, or lessee, or other responsible party. If the assessment is not paid, it shall become a lien upon the property and may be
enforced, as is nonpayment of property taxes. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 46/242
A violation of this chapter, or plan approved under this chapter or order issued under this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation
is in existence may be considered a separate violation. Any court or judge before whom there may be pending any proceeding for the violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any fine or other punishment which it may impose for such violation, may order such nuisance abated. (Ord.
808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-9: JURISDICTION:
This chapter applies to all of the city of Shelby. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect thirty (30) days after its final passage and adoption by the Shelby city council. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
4-6-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified herein and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, and words thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses,
phrases or words have been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason any provisions of this chapter should be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, then the remaining chapter provision will be in full force and effect. (Ord. 808, 9-4-2012)
Title 5
LAW ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-1-1: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT:
5-1-1-1: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE ALARMS OR FIREFIGHTING OPERATIONS:
A. False Alarm Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to file, call in or in any way report or cause to be reported a false fire alarm to the fire department, to
any member of the fire department or to any officer of the city. (1975 Code § 9.04.010)
B. Interference With Fire Alarm Systems: No person shall use the public fire alarm except when an alarm of fire is given or with the permission of the chief
or assistant chief of the fire department, nor shall any person injure, in any way, any of the fire alarm boxes, bells, poles, wires or other appliances
connected with the public fire alarm systems of the city. (1975 Code § 9.04.020)
C. Hindering Firefighting Operations:
1. Interfering Or Hindering Prohibited: No person shall wilfully interfere with or hinder any municipal officer or fireman in the performance of his duty at,
going to or returning from any fire, or while such officer or fireman is attending to his duties as a member of the fire department.
2. Driving Over Hose Prohibited: No person shall wilfully or negligently drive any motor vehicle, streetcar, locomotive, train of cars or other vehicle
across, along or upon any hose used for firefighting purposes. (1975 Code § 9.04.030)
D. Following Firefighting Apparatus: The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to
a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire
alarm. (1975 Code § 9.04.050)
E. Driving Over Fire Hose1: No person shall drive any vehicle over fire hose except upon specific orders from the chief of the fire department or other
officer in charge where the hose is being used. (1975 Code § 9.04.060)
F. Right Of Way Of Fire Apparatus And Personal Cars Of Department Members: All motor equipment and all personal cars of fire department members
shall have right of way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. (1975 Code § 9.04.070)
5-1-1-2: RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICERS:
A. Resisting Or Obstructing Public Officer: No person shall resist, delay, obstruct or intimidate any official or employee of the city in the performance of his
or her official duty. (1975 Code § 9.08.010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 47/242
B. Resisting Arrest2:
1. A person commits the offense of resisting arrest if he knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent the law enforcement officer from effecting an arrest
by:
a. Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the law enforcement officer or another; or
b. Using any other means which creates the risk of causing physical injury to the law enforcement officer or another.
2. It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the arrest was unlawful, provided the law enforcement officer was acting under color of his
official authority. (1975 Code § 9.08.020)
5-1-1-3: FAILURE TO AID LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER3:
Where it is reasonable for a law enforcement officer of the city to enlist the cooperation of a person in effectuating or securing an arrest of another or
preventing the commission by another of an offense, a law enforcement officer may order such person to cooperate. A person commits the offense of
failure to aid a law enforcement officer if he knowingly refuses to obey such an order. (1975 Code § 9.12.010)
5-1-2: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY:
5-1-2-1: LIQUOR REGULATIONS:
A. Possessing Or Discarding Open Containers: Any person who consumes beer, liquor or wine or has in his possession an open container containing
beer, liquor or wine or who discards a beer, liquor or wine container on the streets of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 9.28.010)
B. Public Intoxication4: A person commits the offense of public intoxication if he appears in a public place in a state of visible intoxication as a result of the
use of alcohol or any dangerous drug and is:
1. Creating a risk to himself or others; or
2. Conducting himself in an offensive manner. (1975 Code § 9.28.020)
C. Restrictions On Open Containers In Williamson Park:
1. Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person or persons to possess or have in his or her immediate control any glass, cup, bottle, can, or other type of
vessel which contains any alcoholic beverage in Williamson park after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.; provided, however, that this section only prohibits
open alcoholic containers in Williamson park common areas after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and does not restrict the right of any individual to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at any time of the day or night in a tent, camper, or any other type of recreational vehicle designed to
accommodate overnight stays.
2. Penalty: Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code. (1975 Code § 9.28.030; amd. 2008 Code)
5-1-2-2: URINATING IN PUBLIC:
A. Definition: The term "urinating in public" is defined as urinating outdoors in or on any of the city streets or urinating anywhere in the city outdoors, which
occurs in plain view of anyone traveling any of the streets of Shelby, Montana. (1975 Code § 9.30.020)
B. Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person or persons to urinate in public within the boundaries of the incorporated limits of the city. (1975 Code § 9.30.010)
C. Lake Sheloole Watershed And Recreation Area: It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate within the boundaries of the Lake Sheloole
watershed and recreation area, except in the prescribed restroom areas. (1975 Code § 9.30.040; amd. 2008 Code)
D. Williamson Park Recreation Area: It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate within the boundaries of the Williamson park recreation area,
except within the prescribed restroom facilities. (1975 Code § 9.30.050; amd. 2008 Code)
E. Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any of the terms and conditions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code §§ 9.30.030, 9.30.040, 9.30.050; amd. 2008 Code)
5-1-2-3: EXPECTORATION:
No person in the city shall expectorate upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any theater, public building, church or room used for public assemblies
within the city limits of the city. (1975 Code § 8.24.010)
5-1-3: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 48/242
5-1-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT5:
A. Offenses Designated: A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if he knowingly disturbs the peace within the city, or within three (3) miles of
the city limits, by:
1. Quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; or
2. Making loud or unusual noises; or
3. Using threatening, profane or abusive language; or
4. Discharging firearms within the city limits; or
5. Rendering vehicular or pedestrian traffic impassable; or
6. Rendering the free ingress or egress to public or private places impassable; or
7. Disturbing or disrupting any lawful assembly or public meeting; or
8. Transmitting a false report or warning of a fire, impending explosion or other catastrophe in such a place that if occurring would endanger human life;
or
9. Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act that serves no legitimate purpose. (1975 Code § 9.36.010)
B. Failure Of Disorderly Persons To Disperse: Where two (2) or more persons are engaged in disorderly conduct, a law enforcement officer, judge or
mayor may order the participants to disperse. A person who knowingly refuses or knowingly fails to obey such order commits the offense of failure to
disperse. (1975 Code § 9.36.020)
5-1-3-2: DISTURBING MEETINGS:
No person shall, at any time, wilfully and wantonly disturb any lawful meeting or assembly by noise, rude, offensive or improper behavior or language of
any kind, or otherwise, or at all. (1975 Code § 9.40.010)
5-1-3-3: RIOTING6:
A. Definition: A person commits the offense of riot if he purposely and knowingly disturbs the peace by engaging in an act of violence or threat to commit
an act of violence as part of an assemblage of five (5) or more persons, which act or threat presents a clear and present danger of, or results in,
damage to property or injury to persons. (1975 Code § 9.44.010)
B. Prohibited: No person shall participate within the municipality, or within three (3) miles of municipal limits, in any riot. (1975 Code § 9.44.020)
C. Remaining Present After Warning To Disperse: No person shall remain present at the place of any riot within the municipality after the riot and rioters
have been lawfully warned to disperse, except public officers and persons assisting public officers in attempting to disperse the same. (1975 Code
§ 9.44.030)
5-1-3-4: NOISE:
A. Loud Noises Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any excessive or unusually loud noise or any noise measured or
unmeasured which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any reasonable person of normal
sensitivity within the limits of the city except for any variance specified in subsection C of this section. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 762, 10-21-2002; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful to perform any of the following acts within the city:
1. Horns And Signaling Devices: Sounding any horn or signaling device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city except as a warning signal.
2. Sound Amplifying Equipment: Using, operating, or permitting the use of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any normally sensitive and
reasonable person, or the operation of any such sets, instruments, televisions, phonographs, machines or devices in such a manner as to be in
violation of this section.
3. Operation Of Sound Producing Or Amplifying Equipment In Or From A Motor Vehicle: The use or operation of any radio, compact disc or tape player,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, or any other device used to amplify any type of sound, or which causes a vibration at a level where the sound or
vibration can be heard or felt at a distance greater than twenty five feet (25') from the exterior of the vehicle from which the device is being operated.
4. Construction Projects Or Repair Of Buildings: Operating equipment or performing any construction or repair work between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on buildings, structures or projects or operating any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick,
steam or electric hoist or other construction type device in such a manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any normally sensitive and
reasonable person.
5. Exceptions: The city council may establish exceptions to these prohibitions as specified in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 762, 10-21-2002)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 49/242
6. Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 762, 10-21-2002;
amd. 2008 Code)
C. Exceptions: The city council may, upon petition, grant any reasonable exception to these provisions. The city council may allow an individual or entity to
cause noise otherwise prohibited and outside of the permitted hours for such reasons as unusual construction requirements, parades, or celebrations.
Any grant of exception by the city council shall state specifically the act given a variance, any expanded hours for the variance, and the date the
variance expires. (Ord. 762, 10-21-2002)
5-1-4: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY:
5-1-4-1: OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE DITCHES7:
Any person, partnership, corporation or association which obstructs, interferes with, or tampers with any drainage ditch within the city limits is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 9.52.010)
5-1-5: CONSUMER PROTECTION:
5-1-5-1: UNINVITED SOLICITORS8:
A. Nuisance: The practice of going in and upon private residences in the municipality by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of the private residences, for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is a nuisance and punishable as such
nuisance or a misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 9.60.010)
B. Suppression And Abatement: The law enforcement agency of the city is required and directed to suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as
is described in subsection A of this section. (1975 Code § 9.60.020)
5-1-6: FIREARMS9:
No person shall shoot or fire off a gun, pistol or any firearm within the limits of the city or any private enclosure which contains a dwelling house. (1975
Code § 9.88.010)
Chapter 2
MINORS
5-2-1: CURFEW; LOITERING:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having custody of a minor to permit such minor to be upon any public street, thoroughfare,
avenue or alley or in any public place or other place without acceptable supervision under the following conditions:
1. Minors Under Twelve: The curfew for a minor under the age of twelve (12) years shall be:
a. Weekdays: On weekdays, the hours from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. in the evening until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning, beginning
Sunday evening and including Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and ending at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Friday morning;
b. Weekends: On weekends, from eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Friday evening until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday morning, and from
eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Saturday evening until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Sunday morning.
2. Minors Twelve But Under Eighteen: The curfew for a minor twelve (12) years of age, but under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be:
a. Weekdays: On weekdays, the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. in the evening until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning, beginning
Sunday evening including Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and ending at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Friday morning;
b. Weekends: On weekends, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on both Saturday and Sunday mornings. (1975 Code
§ 9.68.010)
B. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. (1975 Code § 9.68.020)
C. Responsibility Of Parents: It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor child as defined in
subsection A of this section to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, avenues, thoroughfares,
alleys or in any public place, or other place, between the hours as defined in subsection A of this section. (1975 Code § 9.68.030)
D. Duty Of Law Enforcement Agency: It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency of the city to apprehend and take into custody any minor found in
violation of this section. Any minor violating the provisions of this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile laws of the state. (1975
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 50/242
Code § 9.68.040)
E. Penalty: Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating the subsections of this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 9.68.050; amd. 2008 Code)
5-2-2: LIQUOR1:
A. Visiting Bar Or Tavern: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter or visit any bar, tavern or other establishment where
beer or liquor is sold for on premises consumption, or to loiter about or remain at such establishment, unless such person is accompanied by a parent,
spouse or legal guardian. (1975 Code § 9.72.010)
B. Permitting To Visit Bar Or Tavern: It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a bar, tavern or any other establishment where beer or liquor is sold
for on premises consumption, or any agent or employee of such person who is working or employed in or about such bar, tavern or other establishment
where beer or liquor is sold for on premises consumption, to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter or visit such
establishment, or to loiter about or remain therein, unless such person is accompanied by a parent, spouse or legal guardian. (1975 Code § 9.72.020)
C. Purchase:
1. Definition: The words "beer", "wine" and "liquor" as used in this section shall be defined in accordance with the definitions given in the Montana retail
liquor act and the Montana beer act, and amendments thereto. (1975 Code § 9.72.030)
2. Purchase Prohibited: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall purchase any beer, wine or intoxicating liquor. (1975 Code § 9.72.040)
3. Misrepresentation Of Age: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly misrepresent his age by any means
whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining beer, wine or intoxicating liquor. (1975 Code § 9.72.050)
D. Unlawful Possession:
1. Prohibited; Exception: A person who has not reached the age of majority commits the offense of possession of intoxicating substance if he knowingly
has in his possession an intoxicating substance; except, a person who has not reached the age of majority does not commit the offense of
possession of an intoxicating substance when in the course of his employment, he bags, carries or transports beer for customers at a grocery store.
(1975 Code § 9.80.010)
2. Penalty: Any minor violating the provisions of this subsection shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile laws of the state. (2008 Code)
5-2-3: UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS WITH CHILDREN2:
A person commits the offense of unlawful transactions with children if he knowingly:
A. Explosives: Sells or gives explosives to a child under the age of majority except as authorized under appropriate city ordinances; or
B. Intoxicating Substances3: Sells or gives intoxicating substances to a child under the age of majority; or
C. Junk Dealer, Pawnbroker Or Secondhand Dealer4: Being a junk dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, he receives or purchases goods from a child
under the age of majority without authorization of the parent or guardian. (1975 Code § 9.76.010)
Title 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 1
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
6-1-1: SUPERVISION:
The animal control officer's position shall be governed by the terms of the personnel policy of the city. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-1-2: DUTIES:
The animal control officer's duties shall be those stated in the personnel policy of the city. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-1-3: TERM CLARIFICATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 51/242
All references contained in this title to "law enforcement officer" or "animal control officer" shall mean the personnel of the city-county consolidated
department of public safety. In the event that the department of public safety is dissolved, "law enforcement officer" or "animal control officer" shall mean
the personnel of the city law enforcement agency. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL REGULATIONS1
6-2-1: FOWL:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing chickens, ducks, geese or other poultry to allow the same to run at large on the streets
and alleys of the city or upon the property of any other person without the consent of the owner of such property. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
B. Penalty: Any person owning or possessing chickens, ducks, geese or other poultry, who allows the same to run at large upon the streets or alleys of the
city or upon the property of any other person without the consent of the owner of such property is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
6-2-2: DOGS:
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city, whether such dog is registered or
unregistered. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-3: LIVESTOCK:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing cattle, horses, sheep, pigs or other commonly domesticated hoofed animals to allow the
same to run at large on the streets and alleys of the city or upon the property of any other persons without the consent of the owner of such property.
(Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
B. Penalty: Any person owning or possessing cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, or other commonly domesticated hoofed animals, who allows the same to run at
large upon the streets or alleys of the city or upon the property of any other person without the consent of the owner of such property is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
6-2-4: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
All cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, or other commonly domesticated hoofed animals in violation of section 6-2-3 of this chapter shall be deemed a public
nuisance. Upon a third conviction under said section, the nuisance animal shall be seized and taken up by the animal control officer and may be sold by
the animal control officer at public auction. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-5: IMPOUNDING:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and to impound such
dog in the city pound or other suitable place. The animal control officer shall, upon receiving any dog, make a complete registry, entering the breed, color
and sex of such dog and the number of the registration tag if known. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-6: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION:
After impoundment of any dog, the owner thereof, if the same can be ascertained, shall be notified as expeditiously as possible verbally or in writing of
such impoundment. The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon proof of compliance with rabies vaccination provisions as provided,
and upon payment of all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintenance of such dog and upon purchasing a license for the
impounded dog if that dog had not been licensed prior to capture. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-7: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED DOGS:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all dogs so impounded for a period of seven (7) calendar days. If, at the expiration of seven (7)
calendar days from the date of notice to the owner of a registered dog, or at the expiration of seven (7) calendar days from the date of impounding of any
unregistered dog, such dog has not been redeemed, it may be destroyed or sold. Any unregistered dog required by law to be registered, or any dog which
appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be released, but may be
forthwith destroyed. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-8: CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS:
No dogs of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensity and no female in heat shall be released from confinement, except upon approval of the animal control
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 52/242
officer after payment of the fees provided for in this chapter; provided, however, that if any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog is found running at large and
cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain by any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-2-9: CATS:
A. Vaccination Required: Persons owning or caring for domestic cats within the city limits shall vaccinate their cats against all common feline diseases
including rabies. Owners shall provide proof of vaccination either by tags on their cat or by keeping a record of vaccination. If an owner fails to provide
proof of vaccination, the animal control officer shall impound the cat until the owner provides proof of vaccination, up to a maximum of seven (7)
consecutive days. If after seven (7) consecutive days, the owner has not provided proof of vaccination, the animal control officer may humanely
euthanize the cat. A cat owner providing proof of vaccination may claim the cat after paying the appropriate kennel fees as published in the city
schedule of fees.
B. Running At Large: Domestic cats, feral or otherwise, shall not run at large within city limits. Upon a single or multiple complaints from a city resident or
residents, the animal control officer shall set traps or catch cats at large. The city shall make reasonable effort to give notice of impending trapping
through media notice or residential posting. After trapping or catching cats, the animal control officer shall confine the cats for a period of seven (7)
consecutive days. During that seven (7) consecutive day period, any person wishing to claim a cat may do so by paying the kennel fee and providing
proof of compliance with other ordinances pertinent to animals. The kennel fee is published in the city schedule of fees. If, after seven (7) consecutive
days, no person comes to claim a cat, then the animal control officer may humanely euthanize the cat. Traps, methods to catch cats, confinement, and
euthanization shall be humane and in accordance with state laws. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
C. Cats To Be Licensed: All cats kept, harbored, or maintained in the city shall be registered on or before January 31 of each year. Registration tags shall
be issued by the city finance officer upon proof of current vaccination for rabies prior to the time such registration is applied for and upon payment of a
registration fee.
D. Number Of Cats: A kennel license is required for three (3) or more cats. Any person who wishes to maintain three (3) or more cats over the age of six
(6) months must obtain a kennel license.
1. Consent Of Neighbors: Anyone making application for a cat kennel license must obtain the written consent of at least seventy five percent (75%) of
the neighbors within a two hundred foot (200') radius of the property line of the person requesting the license.
2. Renewals: Licenses expire on December 31 of each year no matter when obtained during the year. Licenses must be renewed within thirty (30) days
of the expiration date.
3. Increase In The Number Of Cats: If a person holding a kennel license wishes to increase the number of cats maintained, the person must submit a
new application for a kennel license including the consent of any neighbors as required under subsection D1 of this section.
4. Exclusions: Veterinary hospitals, city owned or recognized animal shelters, and government zoological parks are not required to obtain a kennel
license.
5. Fees: The fee for a cat kennel license is set forth in the schedule of fees.
E. Nuisance Prohibited: No person owning any cat shall permit such cat to damage property not belonging to the cat owner or cause an unsanitary,
dangerous, or offensive condition.
F. Penalty: Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 825, 5-16-2016)
6-2-10: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAPS:
No person shall interfere with the animal control officer's placement or use of traps set. Furthermore, no person except for the animal control officer shall
release or otherwise handle trapped animals. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
787, 12-3-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
6-2-11: REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT:
A. It is unlawful for any person in control of an animal to cause or permit such animal to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
such person, or to fail to immediately remove feces left by the animal. When accompanying the animal outside his or her property, the owner shall have
on his or her person suitable means for the removal of such feces, which then must be placed in a double bag or flyproof container and then in an
approved refuse container for sanitary removal.
B. The accumulation of animal feces on any private property is hereby declared a nuisance. Every person who is the owner or occupant of private property
or the agent in charge of such property is charged with the duty of keeping such property free of any accumulation of feces.
1. "Accumulation" for purposes of this section shall mean: Any quantity that constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, or convenience of persons other
than the owner of the animal; or any quantity that interferes with the use or enjoyment of any neighboring property as the result of odors, visual
blight, or attraction of insects or pests.
2. Each owner, occupant, or agent having charge of such property, described in this subsection B, who is notified in accordance with the provisions set
forth herein by the animal control officer to remove such feces shall be charged with the duty of removing such feces and satisfactorily disposing of
the same within forty eight (48) hours of the effective date/hour of the notice to do so.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 53/242
3. Notice of violation shall set forth in writing the date of inspection, the address of the property found in violation and the fact that an accumulation of
feces was observed. Notice may be served either personally by leaving a copy with an occupant of the premises, or by posting notice in a
conspicuous place upon the property.
4. If the premises where an accumulation of feces is found contains only a single-family dwelling, then notice shall be directed to the occupant of such
premises whether such occupant be the owner or lessee. If the premises where the accumulation of feces is found contains more than one dwelling
unit, then notice shall be directed to the record owner of such premises or the agent in charge of the premises.
C. Any owner, occupant or agent in charge of such property who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a minimum fine of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) and a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be ordered to remove the excrement within a reasonable time and
may also be subject to other penalties. (Ord. 788, 5-19-2008)
Chapter 3
DOG LICENSES1
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family or a person authorized by the
owner, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
CONTROL: Controlled by leash, at "heel", beside a competent person, obedient to a competent person's commands, or within the proper limits of
premises controlled by the owner or other person consenting thereto.
DOG: Both male and female.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
RESIDENCE: The house of the dog's owner, not any outbuildings, or the real property of the owner upon which said house is situated. (Ord. 787, 12-3-
2007)
6-3-2: REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION:
A. Required: All dogs kept, harbored or maintained in the city shall be vaccinated and registered as provided in this chapter on or before January 31 of
each year. Registration tags shall be issued by the city finance officer upon proof of current vaccination for rabies prior to the time such registration is
applied for and upon payment of a registration fee. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
B. Fees2: Fees for licensing and registration shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007; amd. 2008
Code)
C. Application: The owner shall state, at the time of application for registration and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his name, address and
the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by him.
D. Certificate Of Vaccination: Prior to registration, dog owners shall first display a certificate of vaccination from a registered, licensed and practicing
veterinarian, after which the city shall issue the registration tag upon payment of the registration fee set forth in subsection B of this section. The
vaccination fee shall be paid the veterinarian by the dog owner. Vaccination shall be required for all dogs three (3) months old or older. Dogs are not
required to be registered prior to reaching the age where they are old enough to be vaccinated for rabies. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-3: TAG AND COLLAR:
A. Issuance Of Registration Certificate And Tag: Upon rabies vaccination and showing proof thereof, and upon payment of the registration fee as provided
in this chapter, the city shall issue to the owner a registration certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so registered. The tag shall be replaced each
year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued, a number corresponding with the number of the certificate, and the words "Dog
Tag" and "Shelby, Montana".
B. Collar: Such tag shall be attached to the collar of the dog and such collar and tag shall be worn by said dog at all times when said dog is not in the
residence of the owner. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-4: NUMBER OF DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person, persons, or family to keep, harbor or maintain in or on the same premises more than two (2) dogs over six (6) months of age,
without first obtaining a kennel license as provided in section 6-3-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-5: KENNEL LICENSE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 54/242
A. License Required: A kennel license will be required by any person, persons, or family who wish to maintain more than two (2) dogs over the age of six
(6) months or for the purposes of boarding, training or breeding.
1. Inspection: The intended facilities must be inspected by the animal control officer upon initial application and annual renewal, such inspection to
include the physical facilities as well as the effect on the neighborhood.
2. Recommendation: Following the inspection, the animal control officer will recommend to the licensing authority either approval or disapproval of the
application.
3. Fee: There shall be no annual fee, but the number of dogs must be specified in the initial application and any application for renewal.
4. Zoning: Kennels may be allowed in all zoned areas inside the city limits.
5. Consent: Anyone making application for a kennel license must obtain the written consent of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the adjoining
neighbors within a two hundred foot (200') radius of the property line of the person requesting the license.
6. Renewals: Licenses must be renewed within thirty (30) days of the expiration date or the application will be treated as a new application. In any
event, license shall expire on December 31 of each year, no matter when obtained during the year. In the event a kennel license is renewed and
there is no increase in the number of dogs stated in the application upon which the renewal is based, then consent is unnecessary for such renewal.
In the event there is such an increase in the number of dogs, a new application must be submitted and consent must be obtained for the license to
be renewed.
7. Exclusions: No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, city owned animal shelter or government zoological park.
8. Separate Facilities: Every facility regulated by this section shall be considered a separate enterprise and shall have an individual license.
B. License Revocation: All kennel licenses will expire December 31 of each year unless sooner revoked. The animal control officer will investigate all
complaints concerning unlicensed or improperly operated kennels, including, but not limited to, any nuisance, any increase in the number of dogs over
that stated in the application and/or moving, altering and/or the general dilapidation of the facility and may recommend revocation of the license if it is
deemed necessary. The licensee will be given at least five (5) days' written notice of such recommendation during which time he may appeal the
animal control officer's recommendation. The licensing authority will then take action as required. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-6: LICENSE AGENT:
The city council shall appoint the animal control officer as license agent and may appoint additional license agents as they may deem necessary or
expedient. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-7: AGE REQUIREMENT:
Any person licensing any facility or registering any dog or obtaining a dog tag pursuant to this chapter must be eighteen (18) years of age or older to do so,
and such person may be denied a license or registration or dog tag based upon failure to produce proof of age. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person, partnership or corporation found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to misdemeanor provisions and penalties pursuant to section
6-7-1 of this title. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
Chapter 4
RABIES CONTROL
6-4-1: ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABIES:
A. Seizure: Every dog or other animal which has been bitten by, or exposed to, any animal suspected to have been infected with rabies shall be forthwith
seized and taken up by the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer and securely and separately impounded in the city animal shelter.
B. Quarantine: All such animals shall be quarantined in the pound or at a licensed veterinarian hospital for a period of ten (10) days.
C. Notice To Public Health Officer: It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the public health officer of every such animal impounded.
D. Adjudged Free Of Rabies: If, after observation under the supervision of the public health officer for such period, any such animal is adjudged free of
rabies, the owner may reclaim the animal, upon payment of the regular keeping fees and upon compliance with licensing requirements.
E. Diagnosed Rabid: In the event that any animal under quarantine is diagnosed as being rabid, it shall be disposed of only under the orders and
directions of the public health officer in his absolute discretion. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 55/242
Chapter 5
NUISANCE AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
6-5-1: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
A. Nuisance Behavior Enumerated: It is declared a public nuisance for any dog or other animal to destroy property or other pets; to bite or chase after
persons not trespassing on the property of, or injuring or attempting to injure the person, family or property of, the owner; to chase vehicles in public
streets or ways; or by prolonged howling, yelping, barking; or by any other means, cause annoyance or disturbance to any person.
B. Power To Impound: Any such nuisance animal may be taken up and impounded by the animal control officer.
C. Issuance Of Tickets And Complaints: It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or maintain any such nuisance animal, and it shall be the duty of
the animal control officer and all law enforcement officers to issue tickets and file complaints for all such violations occurring in their presence. Any
person aggrieved by a nuisance animal may file a complaint in the city court charging the owner with the violation of this section where the offense is
not committed in the presence of the animal control officer or a law enforcement officer.
D. Third Conviction: Upon a third conviction under this section, the nuisance animal shall be seized and taken up by the animal control officer and put to
death forthwith. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-5-2: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Definition: "Vicious animal" is defined to mean:
1. Any animal with one or more convictions under section 6-5-1 of this chapter; or
2. Any animal with one or more convictions under subsection 6-5-3B of this chapter.
B. Animal Bite:
1. Affidavit Before City Judge; Order For Seizure: Whenever affidavit is made before the city judge that any dog or other animal has bitten a person and
that the person bitten was not at the time trespassing upon the property of, or injuring or attempting to injure the person, family or property of the
owner, the city judge shall issue an order requiring the animal control officer to immediately seize the animal and impound said animal unless the
animal in question has current vaccinations which occurred in excess of thirty (30) days prior to the bite, in which case, there shall be no quarantine
ordered.
2. Quarantine: In the event there is no record of a current vaccination occurring in excess of thirty (30) days prior to the bite, the animal in question
shall be placed under quarantine by the city at the animal control shelter or at a licensed veterinarian hospital for the period and under the same
conditions as stated in chapter 4 of this title.
3. Animal Put To Death: Any dog or other animal which has bitten persons under the circumstances set forth in this section on three (3) separate
occasions shall be put to death by the animal control officer.
4. Hybrid Or Nondomestic Animal: In the event that the animal in question is a wolf hybrid or a nondomestic animal then, in that event, the animal shall
be seized and impounded and quarantined for the period and under the same conditions as stated in chapter 4 of this title, whether or not it has been
currently vaccinated in excess of thirty (30) days prior to the bite.
5. Notice Of Seizure: The owner of any dog or animal seized under this chapter or chapter 4 of this title shall be afforded notice of said seizure by
personal service and by posting notice of said seizure at the house of the owner, if known.
6. Right To Protect From Attack: Any person may protect his pets, his property, his person or the person of any other human being from the attack of a
vicious or dangerous dog or other animal by force, even to the extent of slaying the same if reasonably necessary.
C. Standards For Keeping Vicious Animals: Any person as owner, keeper or harborer of a "vicious animal" as hereinabove defined, within the municipal
limits of the city, shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Leash And Muzzle: No person shall permit a vicious animal to go outside its kennel or pen unless such vicious animal is securely leashed with a
leash no longer than four feet (4') in length. No person shall permit a vicious animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its
kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash, and is of the age of sixteen (16) years or older. Such vicious animal may not be
leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all vicious animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be
muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such vicious animal from biting persons or other animals.
2. Confinement: All vicious animals shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and
muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to
confine vicious animals must be locked with a combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure
bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet (2'). All structures
erected to house vicious animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
3. Confinement Indoors: No vicious animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the vicious animal to
exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the vicious animal from exiting the structure.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 56/242
4. Signs: All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals within the city shall within ten (10) days of the effective date hereof, display in a prominent
place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public, using the words "Danger, Vicious Animal". In addition, a similar sign is required to be
posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
5. Insurance: All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals must, within ten (10) days of the effective date hereof, provide proof to the city
finance officer of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for bodily injury to or death
of any person or persons, or for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such
animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten (10) days' written notice is first given to the city
finance officer.
6. Identification Photographs: All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals must, within ten (10) days of the effective date hereof, provide to the
city finance officer two (2) color photographs of the animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal.
7. Reporting Requirements: All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals must, within ten (10) days of the incident, report the following
information, in writing, to the city finance officer as hereinafter required:
a. The removal from the city or death of the vicious animal;
b. The new address of the vicious animal owner should the owner move within the corporate city limits.
8. Irrebuttable Presumptions: There shall be an irrebuttable presumption that any "vicious animal", as defined in subsection A of this section, within the
municipal limits of the city is in fact an animal subject to the requirements of this section.
9. Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious animal within the municipal limits of the city to fail to comply with
the requirements and conditions set forth in this title. Any vicious animal found to be the subject of a violation of this title shall be subject to
immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the license of such animal resulting in the
immediate removal of the animal from the city.
10. Violations And Penalties:
a. Penalty: Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section or permitting the violation of any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction in city court, be subject to the misdemeanor penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
b. Removal Of Animal From City; Contempt: In addition, the court shall order the vicious animal removed from the city. Should the defendant refuse
to remove the vicious animal from the city, the city court judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation
and impoundment of the animal.
c. Separate Offense: Each day that a violation of this title continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
d. Costs And Expenses: In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food,
handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-5-3: VICIOUS BEHAVIOR:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
LAWFUL PRESENCE: A person is peaceably and lawfully upon the private property of another when in the performance of any duty imposed upon
him by the laws of this state or any city or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when he is on such property upon
invitation, express or implied.
VICIOUS BEHAVIOR: Any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the
following behavior:
1. An attack which requires a defensive action by any person or animal to prevent bodily injury and/or property damage in a place where such
person or animal is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully.
2. An attack that results in an injury to any animal in a place where such animal is conducting itself peaceably and lawfully.
3. Any behavior that constitutes a physical threat or bodily harm to a person or animal in a place where such person or animal is conducting
himself peaceably and lawfully.
4. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked as evidenced by its habitual or repeated chasing, snapping,
or barking at human beings or domestic animals so as to potentially cause injury or to otherwise endanger their safety.
B. Public Nuisance: Any person who keeps, feeds, harbors or allows to stay about the premises occupied or controlled by him within the city any animals
exhibiting vicious behavior is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Presumption: An animal is presumed to have exhibited vicious behavior if it demonstrates or has demonstrated any of the behavior set forth in
subsection A of this section. Such presumption is rebuttable.
D. Third Conviction: Upon the third conviction of maintaining a public nuisance with a particular vicious animal, said animal shall immediately be destroyed
by the animal control officer. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 57/242
Chapter 6
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
6-6-1: OFFENSE DESIGNATED:
A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals if, without justification, he knowingly or negligently subjects an animal to mistreatment or neglect by:
A. Overworking, beating, tormenting, injuring or killing any animal; carrying any animal in a cruel manner; or
B. Failing to provide an animal in his custody with proper food, drink or shelter; or
C. Abandoning any helpless animal or abandoning any animal on any highway, railroad, public thoroughfare or in any other place within the city where it
may suffer injury, hunger or exposure or become a public charge. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
6-6-2: ISSUANCE OF COMPLAINT AND SUMMONS:
If an animal is being mistreated or neglected as hereinabove provided and if the owner of said mistreated or neglected animal is known, then the animal
control officer shall be required to issue a complaint and summons for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
Chapter 7
PENALTIES
6-7-1: PENALTIES DESIGNATED:
A. Generally: Unless otherwise provided any owner found violating any provision of this title, with the exception of section 6-2-2 of this title, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense.
B. Dogs At Large: The penalty for a violation of section 6-2-2 of this title shall be a minimum fine of ten dollars ($10.00), with the penalty for each
subsequent offense occurring within twelve (12) months from the most recent prior offense being, at the minimum, a fine double that of the most recent
prior offense, with a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Applicability: The provisions of this section apply except as otherwise provided in the other provisions of this title. (Ord. 787, 12-3-2007)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS1
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, fire patrol, law enforcement vehicles and such ambulances and emergency
vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations or of persons as are designated or authorized by the council.
BICYCLE: A. Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels and a seat height of more
than twenty five inches (25") from the ground when the seat is raised to its highest position, except scooters and similar devices; or
B. Every vehicle equipped with two (2) or three (3) wheels, foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion and an independent power source providing a
maximum of two (2) brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement may not exceed 3.05 cubic inches
(50 centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in the power source. The power source must not be capable of propelling the device,
unassisted, at a speed exceeding thirty (30) miles an hour (48.28 kilometers an hour) on a level surface. The device must be equipped with a power
drive system that functions directly or automatically only and does not require clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged.
CROSSWALK: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street
or thoroughfare measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. Additionally, "crosswalk" includes any
portion of a street or thoroughfare at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 58/242
roadways of two (2) streets or thoroughfares which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon
different streets or thoroughfares joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower, and every
bicycle with motor attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle propelled by its own power and designed or used to transport persons or property upon the highways of the state.
MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and a saddle on which the operator sits or a platform on
which he stands and a driving wheel in contact with the ground in addition to the wheels of the vehicle itself. A motorcycle may carry one or more
attachments and a seat for the conveyance of a passenger. The term does not include a tractor or a bicycle as defined in Montana Code Annotated
section 61-1-123.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or
privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT: Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and incidentally operated or
moved over the streets or thoroughfares, including farm tractors, road construction or maintenance machinery, ditch digging apparatus, well boring
apparatus and concrete mixers. The foregoing enumeration shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other such vehicles which are within
the general terms of this definition.
STREET OR THOROUGHFARE: The entire width between the boundary lines of every street, thoroughfare and related structure as have been or shall be
built and maintained with appropriated funds of the city and which have been or shall be built and maintained with funds of the state, or which have been
or shall be dedicated to public use or have been acquired by eminent domain.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or thoroughfare, except devices
moved by animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1975 Code § 10.04.010; amd. 2008 Code)
7-1-2: DRIVING RULES:
A. Driving On Right Side; Exceptions:
1. Regular Traffic: Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
a. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement;
b. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; (1975 Code § 10.04.020)
2. Slow Traffic: Upon all streets or thoroughfares, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or
into a private road or driveway. (1975 Code § 10.04.020)
B. Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Direction: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon
streets or thoroughfares having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of
the main traveled portion of the street or thoroughfare as nearly as possible. (1975 Code § 10.04.030)
C. Overtaking Vehicle On Left: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those
limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
1. Vehicle Overtaking: The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Vehicle Being Overtaken: Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right
in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1975 Code § 10.04.040)
D. Overtaking On Right:
1. When Permitted: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
a. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
b. Upon a street or thoroughfare with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of
moving vehicles in each direction;
c. Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway upon which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 59/242
2. Safe Movement; Driving Off Payment Prohibited: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions
permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled portion of the street or
thoroughfare. (1975 Code § 10.04.050)
E. Limitations On Overtaking On Left: No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street or thoroughfare in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to
permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the street or thoroughfare before coming
within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. (1975 Code § 10.04.060)
F. Following Too Closely:
1. Due Regard For Speed: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due
regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or thoroughfare.
2. Caravan Or Motorcade; Exception: Motor vehicles being driven upon any street or thoroughfare outside of a business or residential district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or
combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral
processions. (1975 Code § 10.04.070)
G. Turning Movements; Required Signals:
1. Reasonable Safety; Appropriate Signal: No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as
required, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
2. Turning Signals: A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet
(100') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
3. Stop; Sudden Decrease In Speed: No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the
manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. (1975 Code § 10.04.080)
H. Signals:
1. Stop Or Turn Signals Required: Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp
or lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection H2 of this section.
2. Signal Lights: Any motor vehicle in use on a street or thoroughfare shall be equipped with, and the required signal be given by, a signal lamp or
lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds
twenty four inches (24"), or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds
fourteen feet (14'). The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle or to any combination of vehicles. (1975 Code § 10.04.090; amd. 2008
Code)
3. Hand And Arm Signals: All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
a. Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
b. Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward;
c. Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1975 Code § 10.04.100)
I. Approaching Or Entering Intersection:
1. Yield To Vehicle Already Entered Intersection: The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has
entered the intersection from a different street or thoroughfare.
2. Vehicle On Left To Yield: When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or thoroughfares at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. (1975 Code § 10.04.110)
J. Turning Left At Intersection; Exception: The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having
so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this section, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching
the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
applicable where it is otherwise directed by appropriate signs or signals. (1975 Code § 10.04.120)
K. Entering Through Street Or Stop Intersection:
1. Through Street: The driver of a vehicle shall stop as hereinafter required at the entrance to a through street or thoroughfare and shall yield the right
of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through street or thoroughfare or which are approaching so closely on the
through street or thoroughfare as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection on the through street or thoroughfare shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the
through street or thoroughfare.
2. Stop Intersection: The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is
erected at one or more entrances thereto, although not a part of a through street or thoroughfare, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 60/242
not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. (1975
Code § 10.04.130)
L. Entering Highway From Private Road Or Driveway: The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or thoroughfare from a private road or
driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the street or thoroughfare. (1975 Code § 10.04.140)
M. Approaching Yield Right Of Way Sign: When the intersection is designated by the council as a yield right of way intersection, the driver of a vehicle
approaching the "yield right of way" sign shall slow to a speed of not more than fifteen (15) miles per hour and yield right of way to all vehicles
approaching from the right or left on the intersecting roads or streets, which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. If a driver is involved in
a collision at an intersection or interferes with movement of other vehicles after driving past a "yield right of way" sign, such collision or interference
shall be deemed evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. (1975 Code § 10.04.150)
N. Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall
yield the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway. (1975 Code § 10.04.160)
O. Overtaking And Passing School Bus: The driver of a vehicle upon a street or thoroughfare, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school
bus which has stopped on the street or thoroughfare for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren, shall stop the vehicle before
reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the school bus a visual signal as specified by state law, and the driver shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. (1975 Code
§ 10.04.170)
P. Limitations On Backing: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1975 Code § 10.04.180)
7-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Obedience To And Required Traffic Control Devices:
1. Obedience Required: The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance
with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this title.
2. Enforcement; Improperly Placed Or Illegible Sign: No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator
if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. (1975 Code § 10.04.220)
B. Interference: No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. (1975 Code § 10.04.230)
C. Traffic Signs, Markers, Signals And Devices: No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall operate or drive such vehicle upon the streets, avenues and
alleys of the city except in accordance with all of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, and in accordance with all signs, markers, traffic
signals and devices erected or maintained by authority of the city council. (1975 Code § 10.04.240)
7-1-4: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
1. Responding To Emergency Call Or In Pursuit Of Suspected Violator: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm,
may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
2. Privileges Granted: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
3. Audible And Visual Signals: The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the state, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a law enforcement
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
4. Due Regard To Safety: The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of
others. (1975 Code § 10.04.280)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 61/242
B. Operation Of Vehicle On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle: Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals, or of a law enforcement vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway
clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a law enforcement officer. (1975 Code § 10.04.290; amd. 2008 Code)
7-1-5: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
A. Lighted Lamps Required: Every vehicle upon a street or thoroughfare within this municipality at any time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half
(1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the
streets or thoroughfares are not clearly discernible at a distance of five hundred feet (500') ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices
as required by state law for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles. (1975 Code § 10.04.300)
B. Headlamps:
1. Motor Vehicles Other Than Motorcycle Or Motor Driven Cycle: Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) headlamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements
and limitations set forth by state law.
2. Motorcycle Or Motor Driven Cycle: Every motorcycle and every motor driven cycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two (2)
headlamps which shall comply with the requirements and limitations of state law. (1975 Code § 10.04.310)
C. Taillamps:
1. Required: Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer and any other vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be
equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear; provided, that in the case of a train of vehicles, only the taillamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually
be seen from the distance specified. And further, every such above mentioned vehicle, other than a truck tractor, registered in this state and
manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1956, shall be equipped with at least two (2) taillamps mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as
herein required, shall comply with the provisions of this subsection.
2. Height: Every taillamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not more than seventy two inches (72") nor less than twenty inches (20").
3. Rear Registration Plate: Either taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration
plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear. Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. (1975 Code
§ 10.04.320)
D. Brakes: The following brake equipment is required:
1. Motor Vehicles Other Than Motorcycles Or Motor Driven Cycles: Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle, when operated
upon a street or thoroughfare shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two
(2) separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two (2) wheels. If these two (2)
separate means of applying brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism
shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two (2) wheels.
2. Motorcycles And Motor Driven Cycles: Every motorcycle and every motor driven cycle, when operated upon a street or thoroughfare, shall be
equipped with at least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot. (1975 Code § 10.04.330)
E. Horns And Warning Devices:
1. Horn: Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or thoroughfare shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn or other warning device shall emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give
audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street or thoroughfare.
2. Siren, Whistle Or Bell: No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell except as otherwise
permitted in this title. (1975 Code § 10.04.340)
F. Mufflers:
1. Required: Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good condition and good working order and in constant operation to
prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on
a street or thoroughfare.
2. Fumes Or Smoke: The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of
excessive fumes or smoke. (1975 Code § 10.04.350)
G. Mirrors: Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street or thoroughfare for a distance of at
least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such motor vehicle. (1975 Code § 10.04.360; amd. 2008 Code)
H. Windshields:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 62/242
1. Obstruction Of View: No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side
wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street or thoroughfare or any intersecting street or
thoroughfare.
2. Windshield Wipers:
a. Required: The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for clearing rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield,
which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle.
b. Maintenance: Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. (1975 Code § 10.04.370)
I. Vehicles Without Required Equipment Or In Unsafe Condition: No person shall drive or move on any street or thoroughfare any motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer or pole trailer or any combination thereof unless the equipment upon any and every vehicle is in good working order and adjustment, as
required in this chapter, and the vehicle is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other occupant or any person upon the
street or thoroughfare. (1975 Code § 10.04.380)
J. License Plates: It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets or thoroughfares within the municipal limits without having license
plates for the current year displayed thereon. (1975 Code § 10.04.390)
7-1-6: ACCIDENTS:
A. Death Or Personal Injury:
1. Stop Required: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at
the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Montana Code Annotated section 61-7-105.
2. Obstruction Of Traffic: Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. (1975 Code § 10.04.400)
B. Damage To Vehicle:
1. Stop Required: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible and shall forthwith return to and in every event shall
remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Montana Code Annotated section 61-7-105.
2. Obstruction Of Traffic: Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
3. Failure To Stop: Any person failing to stop or comply with these requirements under such circumstances is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1975 Code
§ 10.04.410)
C. Duty To Give Information And Render Aid: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to
any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall,
upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of, or person attending any
vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of
arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. (1975 Code § 10.04.420)
D. Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and
there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the
unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the
owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. (1975 Code § 10.04.430)
E. Striking Fixtures Or Other Property: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon
or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare shall take reasonable care to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of
his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's or
chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required by state law. (1975 Code § 10.04.440)
F. Immediate Notice To Police: The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an
apparent extent of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident
to the police department. (1975 Code § 10.04.450)
7-1-7: OPERATOR'S AND CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSES:
A. Required: No person, except those expressly exempted under Montana Code Annotated section 61-5-102, shall drive any motor vehicle upon a street
or thoroughfare of this municipality unless such person has a valid license as an operator or chauffeur. (1975 Code § 10.04.460; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Unlawful Use Of License: It is a misdemeanor for any person:
1. To display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his possession any cancelled, revoked, suspended, fictitious or altered operator's or
chauffeur's license;
2. To lend his operator's or chauffeur's license to any other person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 63/242
3. To display or represent as one's own any operator's or chauffeur's license not issued to him;
4. To permit any unlawful use of an operator's or chauffeur's license issued to him;
5. To do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this title. (1975 Code § 10.04.470)
C. Required To Be Carried; Exhibition On Demand: Every licensee shall have his operator's or chauffeur's license in his immediate possession at all times
when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the same upon demand of a law enforcement officer of this municipality. However, no person charged
with violating this subsection shall be convicted if he produces in court or to the office of the arresting officer an operator's or chauffeur's license
theretofore issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest. (1975 Code § 10.04.480)
D. Suspended Or Revoked License: Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any street or thoroughfare of this municipality at a time when his privilege
so to do is suspended or revoked is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1975 Code § 10.04.490; amd. 2008 Code)
E. Restricted Licenses: It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted
license issued to him by the state. (1975 Code § 10.04.500)
7-1-8: VEHICLE OPERATION BY MINORS:
A. Unlawful Operation By Child Under Eighteen2: The city court of the city shall have concurrent original jurisdiction with the district court and the justice
court of the state in all proceedings concerning the unlawful operation of motor vehicles by children under the age of eighteen (18) years. Whenever,
after a hearing before the court, it is found that a child under the age of eighteen (18) years has unlawfully operated a motor vehicle, the court may:
(1975 Code § 10.04.510; amd. 2008 Code)
1. Impose a fine, not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), provided such child shall not be imprisoned for failure to pay such fine;
2. May revoke the driver's license of such child, or suspend the same for such time as may be fixed by the court; and
3. May order any motor vehicle owned or operated by such child to be impounded by the probation officer for such time, not exceeding sixty (60) days,
as shall be fixed by the court; provided however, that if the court finds the operation of such motor vehicle was without the consent of the owner, then
such vehicle shall not be impounded. Upon nonpayment of any fine herein provided for, the court may order that any motor vehicle owned by the
child or operated by the child with the consent of the owner shall be impounded until the fine is paid, or may order that the driver's license of such
child shall be taken up and held by the probation officer until payment of the fine, or may cause both the motor vehicle and the driver's license to be
taken up and impounded until such fine shall be paid; but no child shall be committed to or held in any detention facility or jail by reason of
nonpayment of such fine. (1975 Code § 10.04.510)
B. Permitting Unauthorized Minor To Drive3: No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of eighteen (18) years to drive a
motor vehicle upon any street or thoroughfare when such minor is not authorized hereunder or in violation of any of the provisions of the state. (1975
Code § 10.04.520)
C. Issuing Summons To Child Under Eighteen: Whenever any child under the age of eighteen (18) unlawfully operates a motor vehicle in the presence of
any law enforcement officer, such officer may deliver to the child a form of summons describing the nature of the offense, with instructions thereon to
report to the city court; and the court shall be informed thereof by the delivery of a copy of the summons to the probation officer, who shall in turn
deliver the same to the judge. (1975 Code § 10.04.530; amd. 2008 Code)
7-1-9: MISCELLANEOUS VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
A. Clinging To Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, rollerskates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway. (1975 Code § 10.04.620)
B. Unattended Motor Vehicles: No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and
effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street or thoroughfare in
such a manner as to prevent the vehicle from rolling onto the roadway. (1975 Code § 10.04.630)
C. Riding On Fenders Or Running Boards: Any person driving a vehicle shall not permit passengers to ride on the fenders or running boards nor shall any
passenger ride on the fenders or running boards of a vehicle. (1975 Code § 10.04.640)
D. Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors: No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers. (1975 Code § 10.04.650)
7-1-10: RECKLESS, INTOXICATED AND EXHIBITION DRIVING:
A. Reckless Driving:
1. Offense Enumerated: Any person who drives any vehicle in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless
driving.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 64/242
2. Penalty: Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 10.16.010;
amd. 2008 Code)
B. Driving Under Influence: The city adopts the current provisions of Montana Code Annotated section 61-8-401, and all related statutes referred to
therein, relating to persons driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, which relate to misdemeanor criminal offenses. (Ord. 748, 6-5-2000,
eff. 6-5-2000)
C. Exhibition Driving:
1. Definition: "Motor vehicles" include automobiles, trucks, buses, tractors, motorcycles, motorbikes and motor scooters.
2. Misdemeanor Action Enumerated: Persons who drive a motor vehicle within the limits of the city in such a manner that creates or causes
unnecessary engine noise, or horn noise, or tire squeal skid, or skid upon acceleration or stop, or simulates a temporary race, or that causes the
vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway, is guilty of exhibition driving, a misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 10.16.030)
3. Penalty: Conviction for violation of this subsection C is punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 10.16.030; amd. 2008
Code)
7-1-11: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES:
A. Obedience To Law Enforcement Officers: No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any law enforcement
officer pertaining to the use of the streets and thoroughfares by traffic. (1975 Code § 10.04.670)
B. Violation; Penalty:
1. Misdemeanor: It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the sections in this chapter unless such violation is by this title or other law of this
state declared to be a felony.
2. Penalty: Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the sections of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
3. Failure To Pay Fines: On a failure of payment of fines, the offender, in cases of misdemeanor, shall be imprisoned in the county jail, and the
imprisonment shall be as determined annually by the board of county commissioners by resolution. (1975 Code § 10.04.680; amd. 2008 Code)
4. Court Costs: Upon conviction, the court costs, or any part thereof, may also be assessed against the defendant at the discretion of the court. (1975
Code § 10.04.680)
Chapter 2
SPEED LIMITS1
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the text indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
STREET OR AVENUE: The entire width between the boundary lines of every street, avenue and related structure as have been or shall be built and
maintained with appropriated funds of the city, and which have been or shall be built and maintained with funds of the state, or which have been or shall be
dedicated to the public use or have been acquired by eminent domain.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or avenue. (1975 Code § 10.08.010)
7-2-2: GENERAL SPEED LIMITATION:
No vehicle shall be run on any public street or avenue within the city limits at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour except as provided in
section 7-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 737, 5-19-1999, eff. 6-17-1999)
7-2-3: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS2:
A. Ten Miles Per Hour: Vehicles equipped with solid rubber or cushion tires shall be operated at a speed not in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. (1975
Code § 10.04.200)
B. Fifteen Miles Per Hour:
1. The speed limit on Valley Street between Oilfield Avenue and Westwood Avenue and on Prairie Street between Oilfield Avenue and Westwood
Avenue shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 738, 5-17-1999, eff. 6-17-1999; amd. 2008 Code)
2. The speed limit in all designated school zones shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
3. The speed limit on Twelfth Avenue between First Street South and Third Street North shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 65/242
C. Thirty Five Miles Per Hour: The speed limit on South Front Street (Main Street South) on City Shop Road between the hospital parking lot exit and
Benjamin Road, on Thirteenth Street South between Ninth Avenue South and Marias Valley Road, on Marias Valley Road between Thirteen Street
South and Third Street North, and on Correctional Facility Road (including Frontage Road and Heath Road) shall not exceed thirty five (35) miles per
hour. (Ord. 738, 5-17-1999, eff. 6-17-1999)
7-2-4: SPEED RESTRICTIONS; BASIC RULE:
A. Basic Rule: A person operating or driving a vehicle of any character on a street or thoroughfare within the municipality shall drive the same in a careful
and prudent manner, and at a rate of speed no greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into
account the amount and character of traffic, condition of brakes, weight of vehicle, grade and width of highway, condition of surface and freedom of
obstruction to view ahead, and he shall drive it so as not to unduly or unreasonably endanger the life, limb, property or other rights of a person entitled
to the use of the street or thoroughfare.
B. Intersections; Railway Grade Crossing; Curves: The driver of a vehicle shall, consistent with subsection A of this section, drive at an appropriate
reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon a narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic
or by reason of weather or highway condition. (1975 Code § 10.08.050)
7-2-5: SPEED CONTESTS:
No race or contest for speed shall be held and no person shall engage in or aid or abet in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on a
street or thoroughfare of this municipality without written permission of the city council and unless the same is fully and efficiently patrolled for the entire
distance over which such race or contest for speed is to be held. (1975 Code § 10.04.210)
7-2-6: WILLIAMSON PARK ROAD:
A. Speed Limit: The speed limit on the Williamson Park Road from the frontage road at the Marias River bridge next to Interstate 15 and on to the
Williamson park boundary shall not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour.
B. Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code
§ 10.08.060; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 3
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
ARTICLE A. STOP SIGNS
7-3A-1: PLACEMENT:
Stop signs shall be erected and placed on the corners of Ash Avenue, Birch Avenue and Cedar Avenue where these respective streets intersect with Fifth
Street South. (Ord. 629, 11-16-1987)
7-3A-2: PENALTY:
Any person, partnership or corporation not obeying such stop signs shall be guilty of committing a misdemeanor and the penalty for such violation shall be
the same as the penalty for violating any similar stop sign violation within the city. (Ord. 629, 11-16-1987)
ARTICLE B. PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
7-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT: Those individuals who request the city council to designate a certain area as a parking zone for the physically impaired.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Shelby.
MOTOR HOME: Any self-propelled vehicle with living quarters.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every device in or upon which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or thoroughfare, except devices
moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
PICKUP CAMPER: Any portable, nonself-propelled unit containing living quarters situated on a pickup or other self-propelled vehicle and exceeds the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 66/242
vehicle's cab height by more than twelve inches (12").
RATED VEHICLE WEIGHT EXCEEDING TEN THOUSAND POUNDS: Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, whose rated vehicle weight
exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds.
STREET OR AVENUE: The entire width between the boundary lines of every street, avenue and related structure as have been or shall be built and
maintained with appropriated funds of the city, and which have been or shall be built and maintained with funds of the state or which have been or shall be
dedicated to public use or have been acquired by eminent domain.
TRAILER: Any nonself-propelled vehicle towed by a self-propelled vehicle.
TRUCK: Any vehicle with a rated vehicle weight exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-2: MAIN STREET:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park or leave the same at any point or place on Main Street in the city between First Avenue
Southeast and Fifth Avenue for a period of more than two (2) hours between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
of any day except Sundays and holidays. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
7-3B-3: NO PARKING:
Division Street: It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park or leave the same at any time on Division Street.
Prairie Street: It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park or leave the same in any place on either side of Prairie Street except for
the south side of the street between Teton Avenue and Sunrise Terrace.
First Avenue South: It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park or leave the same in any place on the east side of First Avenue
South. (Ord. 814, 4-21-2014)
7-3B-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 814, 4-21-2014)
7-3B-5: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A. Specified Places: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Along or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
7. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
8. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or thoroughfare;
9. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
10. In the designated street right of way behind any curb area.
B. Moving Vehicle Into Prohibited Area: No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb
such distance as is unlawful. (Ord. 781, 5-7-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
7-3B-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park or leave the same in or upon any alley in the municipality. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-7: PARALLEL PARKING:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, every vehicle stopped or parked upon the streets of the city where there are adjacent sidewalks, curbs, and
gutters, or any combination thereof, shall be stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of
the right hand curb, unless the city council designates a specific area for angle parking. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 67/242
7-3B-8: ANGLE PARKING:
It shall be lawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park the same at an angle to the sidewalk, curb and gutter, or combination thereof, in the
following areas:
A. On the north side of Main Street between Fifth Avenue and Sixth Avenue on Saturdays and Sundays.
B. On the north side of West Central Avenue between Mineral Street and Galena Street.
C. On the west side of Galena Street between Central Avenue and Dawson Avenue. (Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
7-3B-9: DOUBLE PARKING:
No person shall stop or park a vehicle on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb on Main Street in the city between First
Avenue and Fifth Avenue except for the purpose of expeditiously dropping off or picking up a passenger or passengers. (Ord. 824, 3-21-2016)
7-3B-10: PARKING AREAS FOR PHYSICALLY IMPAIRED:
A. Fee: There shall be no fee for any application for a parking zone for the physically impaired made pursuant to this article.
B. Application: Any person, business or other entity owning real property or having a place of business or residence located within the city limits may apply
to the governing body for a parking zone for physically impaired designation. The space requested must be located on a curb adjacent to or near
applicant's real property, business or residence. Applicant must provide, at a minimum, the following requirements:
1. Applicant's space must be located on a smooth, level surface as near as practicable to building entrances or walkways that have curb cuts and
appropriately designed ramps and access lanes to accommodate wheelchairs.
2. If parallel to curbside, applicant's requested parking space must be separated from an adjacent space, either in front or the rear, by at least five feet
(5') of striped no parking area.
3. If at an angle to curbside, applicant's requested parking space must be at least eight feet (8') wide and free of obstruction if located at the end of a
line of angle parking spaces, and each other angle parking space designated for a person with a disability must be at least thirteen feet (13') wide.
4. Applicant's parking space reserved for a person with a disability must be designated by a sign showing the international symbol of accessibility,
indicating that a permit is required, and stating the penalty for violation. The sign must be attached to a wall or post in such a way that it is not
obscured by a vehicle parking in the space.
5. Applicant shall be responsible for purchasing and erecting the sign required by subsection B4 of this section at applicant's cost.
6. Applicant shall be responsible for outlining the designated parking zone with proper painting of the curb and striping of the area in accordance with
subsections B2 and B3 of this section. Further, applicant shall be responsible for providing for the maintenance of the designated parking zone by
keeping the sign in good and readable condition and by keeping the curb painting and striping in such a condition that the designated zone is clear.
Subsections B1 through B4 of this section meet the minimum requirements of Montana Code Annotated subsection 49-4-302(4) and are deemed to
be amended in accordance with the language thereof should said Montana Code Annotated subsection 49-4-302(4) be amended by act of the
legislature.
C. Designated Areas: The following areas are hereby designated to be parking zones for the physically disabled:
1. The twenty two feet (22') of the northwest corner of Pine Avenue which will run from the curb located at the northeast corner of the Turner and
Iverson cedar square building and running twenty two feet (22') south along Pine Avenue.
2. The westerly three feet (3') of the driveway at the residence known as 501 Main Street, Shelby, Montana, and the adjacent nineteen feet (19') of curb
running west along Main Street.
Any approval of an application for designation of a parking zone for physically impaired individuals, granted subsequent to the passage hereof, shall
be set forth in a new ordinance which delineates the area designated, and that area shall be incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
D. Violations; Special Permits: Any person who parks in a zone designated a parking zone for the physically impaired shall be in violation of this section.
Violations shall not apply to those who hold a department of justice special parking permit pursuant to Montana Code Annotated sections 49-4-301, 49-
4-302 and 49-4-304 as from time to time amended.
E. Penalty: Any person found violating the provisions of this section by parking in any zone established by this section without a special permit as stated in
subsection D of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Montana Code Annotated
section 49-4-307 as from time to time amended.
F. Prior Ordinances: In the event that any other ordinances of the city are found to be inconsistent with this section, this section shall govern as to parking
zones designated for the physically impaired. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 68/242
7-3B-11: VEHICLES EXCEEDING TEN THOUSAND POUNDS:
A. Residential District Abuts Nonresidential District: If a residential district street abuts a nonresidential zoning district, the provisions of this article shall
apply to both sides of the street that abut the residential district. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Excess Weight Parking Permit Required: It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle whose rated vehicle weight exceeds ten thousand
(10,000) pounds to park or leave the same at any place or point on Main Street west of First Avenue Southeast without first receiving the proper city
parking permit. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001; amd. Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
C. Residential Districts: No person shall stand or park any vehicle whose rated vehicle weight exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds in any street or
avenue in a residential district for any purpose or period of time other than for the following:
1. The expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicles;
2. In cases where the standing or parking of such vehicle is used in connection with the construction or repair of buildings;
3. Service calls;
4. The moving of household goods;
5. A bus, while the vehicle is parked at a designated bus stop;
6. The operation of vehicles exceeding a rated vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds owned or operated by the city, public utility, any
contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city
limits;
7. The owner of a vehicle exceeding a ten thousand (10,000) pound rated vehicle weight shall be allowed to provide for a place on his property, off of
the street, to park any such vehicle, so long as the same does not interfere with public use of any roadway, street, alley or sidewalk. In the event the
owner of any vehicle exceeding a ten thousand (10,000) pound rated vehicle weight chooses to provide a place for parking the same in a residential
area, the owner shall nonetheless be subject to the laws of the state of Montana and the ordinances of the city concerning such vehicle exceeding a
ten thousand (10,000) pound rated vehicle weight including, but not limited to, those pertaining to public nuisance, specifically, no vehicle exceeding
a ten thousand (10,000) pound rated vehicle weight subject to this article shall be allowed to run at night if parked on residential property, save and
except that twenty (20) minutes as necessary to warm up such vehicle exceeding a ten thousand (10,000) pound rated vehicle weight. (Ord. 755, 6-
4-2001)
7-3B-12: SPECIAL PARKING ZONES:
The city council is empowered to designate special "no parking zones" within the city limits. No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park such
vehicle in such an area restricted to such parking by authority of the city council. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-13: MAXIMUM PARKING FOURTEEN DAYS:
No person shall stand or park any vehicle upon any street or avenue, regardless of designation, for any purpose, for a continuous period of time that
exceeds fourteen (14) calendar days. For greater clarity, the purpose of this section is to keep vehicles from remaining stationary on city streets or
avenues for a fourteen (14) day period without being moved. In the event that there are certain streets or avenues or portions thereof within the city limits
upon which standing or parking continuously is limited to a time of less than fourteen (14) days, then those time periods shall govern those particular
streets or avenues or portions thereof. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-14: PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRAILERS, MOTOR HOMES, OR PICKUP CAMPERS:
A. It shall be unlawful to park any truck, trailer, motor home, or pickup camper upon the streets or avenues of the city, with the following exceptions:
1. Trucks may be parked on the streets or avenues of the city for a period not exceeding four (4) hours while loading or unloading is in progress;
2. Recreational vehicles whose rated vehicle weight may exceed ten thousand (10,000) pounds may be parked on the streets or avenues of the city for
a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours while loading or unloading is in progress;
3. By a permit approved by the city council;
B. Trucks, trailers, motor homes, or pickup campers shall not be parked on the city streets and avenues unattended with the engine running. The above
exceptions are not to conflict with sections 7-3B-2 through 7-3B-7 and 7-3B-9 and 7-3B-10 of this article. (Ord. 804, 4-18-2011)
7-3B-15: PARKING SIGNS, MARKERS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES:
No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park such vehicle upon the streets and avenues of the city except in accordance with all of the ordinances,
rules and regulations of the city and in accordance with all signs, markers, painted curbs, signals and devices erected or maintained by authority of the city
council. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-16: SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 69/242
This article will be enforced by the Toole County/city of Shelby office of public safety. Upon a determination that a violation of this article exists the vehicle
may be ticketed. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-17: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
All vehicles which are parked within the city limits in violation of specific sections of this article may be removed by the city, and the cost of removing and
storage of the same shall be charged to the owner, operator or possessor of such vehicle. Vehicles will be held for thirty (30) days and then disposed of at
a sheriff's sale. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3B-18: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of any section of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
ARTICLE C. OFF STREET PARKING
7-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the off street parking requirements is to provide convenient and safe access to property, alleviate hazards associated with access to traffic
generating business and industrial uses, provide adequate and safe parking areas for residents and business customers, protect residential uses from the
undesirable effects of exceeding the abutting traffic carrying capacity of the road system serving Shelby and the region. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-2: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this title, an "off street parking space" consists of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both
sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-3: WHEN REQUIRED:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces: No building or structure may be erected, substantially remodeled, razed, moved or altered, or its use changed
unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this title.
B. Additional Spaces Required: Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date hereof is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of
employees, number of housing units, seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces,
additional parking spaces must be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change provided. Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the
effective date hereof is enlarged to the extent of twenty five percent (25%) or more in floor area, number of employees, number of housing units,
seating capacity or otherwise, said building or structure will then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 755, 6-
4-2001)
7-3C-4: LOCATION IN RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Residential Districts: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings located in any residential zoning district must be located on the same lot as the dwelling.
Such parking spaces may not be located in any front yard except in the driveway, but may be located in the side or rear yards. Each parking space
accessory to a multi-family dwelling must be unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle to enter or exit from the
parking area.
B. Business And Industrial Districts:
1. Distance From Use: Parking and loading spaces accessory to any business, industrial, or institutional use must be located within five hundred feet
(500') of the use served, and not on required front yards.
2. Location In Residential District Prohibited: No parking space accessory to any use located in business or industrial districts may be located in any
residential district.
3. Different Buildings Or Uses At Single Location:
a. When Allowed: In any business or industrial district, off street parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided at a single location if
the total number of spaces is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use and if any regulations governing location of parking
spaces in relation to the use served are observed.
b. Parking Demand At Different Times: Further, if parking provided for more than one use at a single location is for uses that have parking demand at
different times of the day or different days of the week, the number of spaces may be limited to the number required for the use requiring the
greatest number of parking spaces. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-5: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 70/242
Each required parking space must be at least ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet (20') long, exclusive of driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas.
Aisles within parking lots must be sufficiently wide to permit safe and efficient vehicular movement in the aisles, and into and out of parking spaces. Aisles
designed for two-way traffic must be at least twenty two feet (22') wide. One-way aisles must be eighteen feet (18') wide. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-6: ACCESS STANDARDS:
A. Business And Industrial Districts: Parking and loading areas in the business and industrial districts must be designed so that ingress to or egress from a
parking or loading space is from an aisle or driveway, not directly from the public right of way.
B. Distance From Corner Formed By Intersection: No accessway to any parking or loading area may be located within fifty feet (50') of any corner formed
by the intersection of the rights of way of two (2) or more streets. At intersections where traffic control devices are installed, the administrator may
increase this requirement as necessary to prevent traffic hazards.
C. Minimum Width: The accessway to every parking lot must be at least twenty four feet (24') wide unless two (2) one-way drives, each fourteen feet (14')
wide, are provided. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
D. Loading Space Dimensions: A loading space must have minimum dimensions of not less than twelve feet (12') in width, fifty feet (50') in length,
exclusive of driveways, aisles, and other circulation areas, and fifteen feet (15') of overhead.
E. Distance From Residential District Or Places Of Public Assembly: No access drive for a business or industrial use may be located within two hundred
feet (200') of a residential district or use, an institutional use for human care, or fire stations, schools, libraries, churches, parks, playgrounds, or other
places of public assembly.
F. Permanent Markers Required: The entrance and exits to all parking areas must be marked as such with permanent markers.
G. Wheel Stops; Curbing Material: For all business, industrial, and institutional uses, the frontage between access points must be barricaded with wheel
stops or other acceptable curbing material.
H. Distance Between Accessways: The distance between accessways in the highway business and the industrial districts must be not less than fifty feet
(50'). The outside point of any accessway may be not less than twenty five feet (25') from the abutting property line. When road alignment and
associated sight distance, road width, abutting topography, existing or potential traffic volume in relation to the road capacity of the public right of way
warrant an increase in the required distance between access points, the zoning administrator may require an increase in such distances. (Ord. 755, 6-
4-2001)
7-3C-7: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
For the purpose of this title the following parking space requirements shall apply:
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
RESIDENTIAL:
Community residential care facility 1 for each 2 residents
Multi-family dwelling 2 for each unit
Mobile homes 2 for each mobile home
Single-family or two-family dwelling 2 for each unit
COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE:
Auto repair and body shops 2 for each service bay
Banks, financial institutions 1 for each 400 square feet of floor area. Drive-up windows must be provided with 4 stacking
spaces per window
Car wash 3 stacking spaces for each wash bay plus 1 parking space for each employee
Drive-in restaurants 1 space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area or a minimum of 10 spaces, whichever is
greater. Drive-up windows must be provided with 5 stacking spaces per window
Funeral parlors, mortuaries 1 for each 100 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms or parlors
Hotels, motels, tourist homes, and boarding
houses
1 for each sleeping room plus 1 space for each 2 employees
Medical, dental, and veterinary offices 4 spaces for each doctor plus 1 for each employee
Motor vehicles, sales, repair and rental 1 space for each 400 square feet of
sales, rental, and repair area
Offices, business, professional and governmental
1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurants, taverns 1 for each 4 seats plus 1 for each employee
Service station 1 for each 2 gasoline pumps plus 2 for each service bay
All other retail, service or business uses permitted
in the business districts
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 71/242
RECREATIONAL:
Auditoriums 1 space for each 4 seats
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley plus 1 for each employee
Clubs and lodges 1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area
Miniature golf 1 space for each tee
Theaters, drive-in 8 stacking spaces for each ticket booth
Theaters, indoor 1 space for each 4 seats plus 1 for each employee
INSTITUTIONS:
Churches and other for religious assembly 1 for each 4 seats
Hospitals 1 for each bed
Libraries, museums, and art galleries 1 for every 400 square feet of floor area
Nursing homes 1 for each 2 beds
Schools, elementary, childcare centers, nursery
schools
2 for each classroom and 1 for each 8 seats in auditoriums or assembly halls
Schools, postsecondary 1 for each 2 students and 1 for each teacher and employee
Schools, secondary 1 for each 4 students and 1 for each teacher and employee
INDUSTRIAL:
Freight terminals, parcel delivery, and similar uses
1 for each employee and 1 for each vehicle maintained on the premises
All types of manufacturing, storage, and
wholesale uses permitted in any industrial district
1 for every employee (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) plus 1 for each
motor vehicle used in the business
(Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-8: LIGHTING OF PARKING LOTS:
Any parking area which is intended to be used during nondaylight hours must be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any light used to illuminate a
parking lot must be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-9: MAINTENANCE:
The owner of property used for parking and/or loading must maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of trash and other debris. (Ord.
755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-10: LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
One off street loading space shall be provided for every separate use requiring delivery of goods and having a gross floor area of up to five thousand
(5,000) square feet. One loading space shall be provided for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-11: MAJOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. Definition: For purposes of these regulations, "major recreational vehicle" includes snowmobiles and snowmobile trailers, boats and boat trailers, travel
trailers, pickup camper tops (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used
for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
B. Parking Or Storage Restricted: No major recreational equipment may be parked or stored in any required front or side yard, other than the driveway;
provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises not to exceed twenty four (24) hours during loading or
unloading.
C. Use For Living, Sleeping Or Housekeeping Purposes: No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or
stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use.
D. Exceptions: If used for temporary living quarters, major recreational vehicles may be parked in rear yards, side yards or driveways as a temporary
accessory structure for a period of time not to exceed two (2) weeks. Such units must be equipped with self-contained sanitary facilities. (Ord. 755, 6-4-
2001)
7-3C-12: PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
A. Residential Districts:
1. Number Limited: No more than one automotive vehicle of any kind or type without current vehicle registration may be parked or stored on any
residentially zoned property other than in a completely enclosed building.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 72/242
2. Premises Must Be Occupied: This vehicle storage exception will only be granted when the property has an occupied residential unit in place on the
property in question.
B. Public Right Of Way: No motor vehicle or trailer of any kind or type without current vehicle registration may be parked on any public right of way within
the corporate city limits. The vehicle registration requirement will be enforced by the Toole County/city of Shelby office of public safety. (Ord. 755, 6-4-
2001)
7-3C-13: HOME OCCUPATION, EXCESS DEMANDS ON PARKING AND TRAFFIC:
No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard1. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-14: SUPERVISION; ENFORCEMENT:
This article will be enforced by the Toole County/city of Shelby office of public safety. Upon a determination that a violation of this article exists the vehicle
may be ticketed. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-15: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
All vehicles which are parked within the city limits in violation of specific sections of this article may be removed by the city, and the cost of removing and
storage of the same shall be charged to the owner, operator or possessor of such vehicle. Vehicles will be held for thirty (30) days and then disposed of at
a sheriff's sale. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
7-3C-16: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of any section of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 755, 6-4-2001)
Chapter 4
PEDESTRIANS
7-4-1: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALK:
A. No Traffic Control Signal; Vehicle To Yield: When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of
way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so close from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger; but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
B. Vehicle Approaching Rear Of Stopped Vehicle: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such
stopped vehicle. (1975 Code § 10.04.540)
7-4-2: INTOXICATED PEDESTRIANS1:
No person shall walk upon or along the streets or thoroughfares while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (1975 Code § 10.04.550)
7-4-3: PROHIBITED CROSSINGS:
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross any place except in a crosswalk. Additionally,
no pedestrian shall cross Main Street other than in a crosswalk. (1975 Code § 10.04.550)
Chapter 5
SNOWMOBILES1
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated herein, unless the context otherwise clearly requires that another meaning
be intended:
CURFEW: The hours designated in this chapter during which it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile within the city limits.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 73/242
OPERATOR: Includes every person who operates or is in actual physical control of the operation of the snowmobile.
OWNER: Includes every person as defined herein, other than a lienholder or other person having a security interest only, holding record title to a
snowmobile, and entitled to the use of possession thereof.
ROADWAY: Includes only those portions of any highway, road or street improved, designed or ordinarily used for travel or parking of motor vehicles.
SNOWMOBILE: Includes any self-propelled, track driven vehicle designed primarily for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain, which may be steered by
wheels, skis or runners, and which is not otherwise registered or licensed under the laws of the state. (1975 Code § 10.20.010)
7-5-2: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
The operator of a snowmobile who operates his vehicle upon a public highway, street or roadway when allowed to do so under the provisions of this
chapter shall have in his possession a license to drive a motor vehicle as required by the laws of the state. (1975 Code § 10.20.020)
7-5-3: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
A. Violation: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
B. Parent Or Guardian: The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Applicability: These regulations applicable to snowmobiles shall apply whenever a snowmobile is operated upon any street or any public path or
property set aside for the exclusive use of snowmobiles. (1975 Code § 10.20.030)
7-5-4: OPERATION AND ROUTE DESIGNATIONS:
A. Controlled Access Highway Or Facility: No person shall operate a snowmobile upon a controlled access highway or facility.
B. Express Permission Required: No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city on any private or public property, including all parks, playgrounds and
designated streets, other than the areas defined in this chapter, without the expressed permission of the owner of the property.
C. Sidewalks, Boulevards, Driveways Or Parking Lots: No person shall operate a snowmobile on any sidewalks, boulevards, driveways or parking lots
except for the purpose of directly removing from or returning a snowmobile to its place of storage.
D. Operation Prohibited: It is forbidden to operate a snowmobile on the following city streets:
1. Main Street, U.S. Highway 2 or Roosevelt Highway;
2. Front Street;
3. Oilfield Avenue;
4. Sixth Avenue North and South; (1975 Code § 10.20.040)
5. First Avenue Southeast; (Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
6. The viaduct and its access roads;
7. All streets and avenues abutting property occupied by hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or housing for the elderly.
E. Crossings: A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway where such crossings are necessary to get to another authorized area of
operation. All crossings by snowmobiles shall be made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street, and a place
where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing. The snowmobile shall make a complete stop before entering upon any part of the highway,
street or road, and the operator shall yield the right of way to oncoming traffic.
F. Headlights; Taillights: No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street or highway when permitted to do so by this chapter, unless equipped with at
least one headlamp and one taillamp, which shall be lighted at all times during such operation, and unless it is equipped with a suitable braking device
which may be operated by either hand or foot.
G. Curfew: No snowmobiling shall be done between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except in going to and returning
from a ride.
H. Persons Under Sixteen: No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate nor shall any snowmobile owner knowingly authorize any person
to operate a snowmobile on any public street or property in the city.
I. Riding On Streets: All snowmobile operators within the city shall be as far to the right side of the street as possible, and shall yield the right of way to all
pedestrians and vehicular traffic, and shall ride in single file if there is more than one snowmobile, on all streets and roadways. (1975 Code
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 74/242
§ 10.20.040)
7-5-5: UNLAWFUL OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile in any one or more of the following manners:
A. Speed: At a rate of speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour, or lesser posted speed, or reasonable and proper under all existing conditions;
B. Stop Signs: Without a full stop at any and all stop signs;
C. Careless Or Reckless Manner: In a careless or reckless manner so as to endanger the person or property of another, or to cause injury or damage to
either;
D. Headlight; Taillight: Without a lighted headlamp and taillight at all times;
E. Operation By Person Incapable Of Operating: Operating a snowmobile, or permitting such operation, by any person who by reason of age, physical or
mental disability or who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or other drugs, is incapable of operating the snowmobile under the
existing laws;
F. Muffler: Without a muffler in good working order and in constant operation which shall prevent excessive or unusual noise and effluents;
G. Unattended With Motor Running Or Starting Key In Ignition: No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by him to remain
unattended on any public highway or public property with the motor running or with the starting key left in the ignition;
H. Towing: No owner or operator of a snowmobile may attach, tie or tow, either himself or the snowmobile, to any other vehicle upon the streets or
roadways;
I. Parking On Street: All snowmobiles when parked on a street must be against the curb in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to vehicle and
pedestrian traffic. (1975 Code § 10.20.050)
7-5-6: DESIGNATED SNOWMOBILE AREA:
A. Area Designated: The following area owned by the city is designated as a permissible area to operate snowmobiles: All of the area above and north of
the lower or main dam in the Lake Sheloole park area and the total diversion ditch and its borders.
B. Area Prohibited: It is unlawful to operate snowmobiles in the camping or recreation areas of Lake Sheloole park below the main dam. (1975 Code
§ 10.20.060)
7-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975
Code § 10.20.070; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 6
MOTORCYCLES1
7-6-1: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle or quadricycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry
any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle or quadricycle unless such motorcycle or quadricycle is designed to carry more than one
person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to
the rear or side of the operator. (1975 Code § 10.04.590; amd. 2008 Code)
7-6-2: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Interference With Operation Or View: No passenger shall be carried in a position that will interfere with the operation of the motorcycle or quadricycle or
the view of the operator.
B. Carrying Packages, Bundles Or Articles: No person operating a motorcycle shall carry any packages, bundles or articles which would interfere with the
operation of the vehicle in a safe and prudent manner.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 75/242
C. Sidesaddle Riding: Sidesaddle riding on a motorcycle or quadricycle is prohibited.
D. Lights: Motorcycles or quadricycles are to be operated with lights on at all times when operated on any street or thoroughfare; except that, if a
motorcycle is registered under Montana Code Annotated section 61-3-411 as a collector's item, it may be operated without lights from one-half (1/2)
hour before sunrise to one-half (1/2) hour after sunset if persons and vehicles are clearly discernible at a distance of five hundred feet (500').
E. Riding Side By Side: No more than two (2) motorcycles shall be operated side by side in a single traffic lane.
F. Use Of Traffic Lane: All motor vehicles, including motorcycles and quadricycles, are entitled to the full use of a traffic lane, and no vehicle shall be driven
or operated in such a manner so as to deprive any other vehicle of the full use of a traffic lane, except that motorcycles may, with the consent of both
drivers, be operated not more than two (2) abreast in a single traffic lane.
G. Rights And Duties: Every person riding a motorcycle or quadricycle upon a street or thoroughfare shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application. (1975 Code
§ 10.04.600; amd. 2008 Code)
7-6-3: HEADGEAR:
An operator and passenger under eighteen (18) years of age of a motorcycle or quadricycle operated upon the streets or highways of the city shall wear
protective headgear upon the head. The headgear must meet the standards established by Montana department of justice. A person may not operate a
motorcycle upon a highway in the city of Shelby unless all passengers under eighteen (18) years of age are in compliance with this section. (Ord. 747, 5-1-
2000, eff. 5-1-2000)
7-6-4: NOISE SUPPRESSION DEVICES:
All motorcycles and quadricycles operated on the streets and thoroughfares of this municipality shall be equipped at all times with noise suppression
devices including an exhaust muffler in good working order and in constant operation. (1975 Code § 10.04.610; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 7
BICYCLES1
7-7-1: APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or thoroughfare shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this title, except as to special regulations hereinafter provided and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature
can have no application. (1975 Code § 10.04.570)
7-7-2: SPEED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (1975 Code
§ 10.04.580)
7-7-3: RIDING ON MAIN STREET:
A. Restricted: The riding of bicycles on the sidewalk on either side of that portion of Main Street located between Montana Avenue and Fifth Avenue within
the city is prohibited. (Ord. 638, 9-5-1989; amd. Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
B. Penalty: The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord.
638, 9-5-1989)
Chapter 8
TRAINS
7-8-1: SPEED LIMIT:
It is unlawful for any train, or part thereof, to travel within the municipal limits of the city at a speed in excess of forty five (45) miles per hour. (Ord. 644, 3-
5-1990)
7-8-2: COMPLAINT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 76/242
Any formal complaint filed for a violation of this chapter shall state the name of the train, such as Amtrack or Burlington Northern, the approximate time and
date of the violation, the approximate speed of said train, the train route number, which can be obtained from the Shelby trainmaster, and, if possible, the
number of the lead locomotive. Any complaint shall be served on the Shelby trainmaster. (Ord. 644, 3-5-1990)
7-8-3: PENALTY:
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 644, 3-5-1990; amd.
2008 Code)
Chapter 9
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLERBLADES AND SCOOTERS
7-9-1: RIDING ON MAIN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades or scooter on the sidewalks of Main Street between Fifth Street and
Montana Avenue. (Ord. 663, 2-19-1991; amd. 2008 Code; Ord. 797, 9-21-2009)
7-9-2: PENALTY:
The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 663, 2-19-1991; amd.
2008 Code)
Title 8
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT1
8-1-1: CREATED; OBJECTIVES:
The Shelby volunteer fire department, hereafter to be known as the "department", is created, the object of which shall be the prevention and control of fire
and the protection of life and property within the limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 835 - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. Go to new ordinance.
8-1-2: COMPOSITION; OFFICERS:
A. Composition: The department shall consist of a chief, assistant chief, fire captain, fire lieutenants, and as many officers as the chief, mayor and city
council may deem necessary for the effective operation of the department.
B. Elections:
1. Chief: The chief shall be elected annually by the department, subject to the approval of the mayor and the city council.
2. Additional Officers: The assistant chief, fire captain and fire lieutenants shall be likewise elected annually by the department, subject to the approval
of the mayor and the city council. These officers shall be accountable only to the chief and are subject to removal by the chief.
3. Time Of Election: The annual election of the chief and other officers shall be held on the first regular meeting in the month of December.
C. Police Powers: The fire chief, assistant chief, fire captain and fire lieutenants are given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 835 - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. Go to new ordinance.
8-1-3: CHIEF:
A. Tenure: The chief's tenure of office shall depend upon good conduct and efficiency.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 77/242
B. Qualifications: The chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to command firefighters and hold their
respect and confidence.
C. Removal: The chief shall be removed only for just cause. The chief can request a public hearing before the city council and mayor.
D. Reports:
1. Generally: The chief shall be held accountable to the mayor and city council only, and shall make written and verbal reports thereto as the mayor and
city council may require. All other department officers shall be accountable to the chief only.
2. Quarterly: The chief shall report quarterly to the mayor and the city council the condition of the apparatus and equipment; the number of fires during
the month, their location and cause and date of same and loss occasioned thereby; the number and purpose of all other runs made; and the number
of members responding to each fire or other run; and any changes made in membership.
3. Annual: The chief shall make a complete annual report to the mayor and the city council within one month before the close of the fiscal year, such
report to include the information specified in subsection H of this section, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for
improving the effectiveness of the department and funds needed for the ensuing year.
E. Formulation And Enforcement Of Rules: The chief shall formulate and enforce a set of rules and regulations to govern the department, and shall be
responsible to the mayor and the city council for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department.
F. Determining Composition And Number Of Companies: The chief shall determine the number and kind of companies of which the department is to be
composed and shall determine the response of such companies to alarms.
G. Conducting Drills: The chief shall, at least once a month, conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and
rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good
firemanship and safety of life and property from fire.
H. Keeping Records: The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other
information about the work of the department. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 835 - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. Go to new ordinance.
8-1-4: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Qualifications:
1. Residence: The membership of the department shall consist of such persons as may apply and be approved by the department and shall be able
bodied citizens residing within the city, preferably property owners whose business activities are normally within the confines of Shelby.
2. Physical Examination: Determination of whether candidates are able bodied shall be determined by a physical examination by a practicing physician
duly authorized to practice in this state, which examination shall be in writing and filed with the city finance officer. Such examination shall disclose
the ability of such applicant to perform such physical work usually required of firefighters in the performance of their duty.
3. Other Qualifications: All other qualifications except the physical one shall be determined by the chief and such requirements shall be approved by
the mayor and city council.
4. Age: Minimum age shall be legal age, able bodied and fireline interviewed for all new applicants.
B. Suspension Or Discharge: Any member of the department may be suspended or discharged from the department by the chief at any time the chief may
deem such action necessary for the good of the department. On written request of such member to the mayor and the city council, the member shall be
given a public hearing on the charges brought by the chief. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-5: EQUIPMENT AND APPARATUS:
A. Generally: The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency
and properly protect life and property from fire.
B. Recommendations Of Apparatus Needed; Purchasing: Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief, and after
approval by the mayor and the city council shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the mayor and the city council.
C. Housing: All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the mayor and the city
council. Such places shall be heated during the winter season.
D. Use For Private Purposes: No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for private purposes, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper
authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 78/242
E. Unauthorized Handling: No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the
department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department.
F. Hiring Out Or Assigning For Response To Calls: No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the city, except in response to a call for aid at a
fire in a neighboring community, without the consent of the mayor. The officer in charge of the department shall have power to assign equipment for
response to calls for outside aid in accordance with section 8-1-8 of this chapter, and in other cases only when the absence of such equipment will not
jeopardize protection in this city.
G. Provisions Concerning City Owned Apparatus: Section 8-1-8 of this chapter and subsection F of this section shall pertain only to city owned apparatus.
(Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-6: BADGE:
Each member of the department shall be issued a badge designating rank. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-7: INSIGNIA OR WARNING DEVICE FOR CAR:
Each member of the department driving a car shall be issued a suitable insignia and other permittable warning devices to be attached to the car. (Ord.
810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-8: CONTRACTS FOR PROTECTION WITH OTHER COMMUNITIES:
The city is authorized to enter into agreements or contracts with nearby incorporated communities or governing bodies or other organizations to provide
the members of such communities or organizations with fire protection or to establish a mutual aid system, or with individuals residing adjacent to the city.
(Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-9: SUPPRESSION OF ARSON; INVESTIGATIONS:
The chief or other fire officer is required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the
cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-10: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an
ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, the fire chief of the city may, upon presentation of
proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance;
provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give
the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty four (24) hours' written notice of the fire chief's intention to inspect. The
notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused,
inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate or judge. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses
entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
(Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-11: NOTICE TO ABATE FIRE HAZARD:
Any person served with a notice to abate any fire hazard or hazards shall comply therewith and promptly notify the chief. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-12: ARRANGEMENTS FOR TURNING IN ALARMS:
Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm, and for notifying all members of the department so that they may
promptly respond. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
8-1-13: SOCIAL OFFICERS:
A. Election; Term: The department may elect a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer, to be known as social officers. Such officers may be
elected in any manner and for a term of one year, the election being held the same night as the annual election for the chief and other active officers.
B. Duties: The duties of the social officers are to arrange for and manage any or all social functions sponsored by the department and to conduct the
regular monthly business meeting.
C. Functions Not To Interfere With Other Officers: The functions and duties of the social officers shall in no way interfere with those of the regular
department officers who are charged with the responsibility for all fire service activities of the department. (Ord. 810, 1-7-2013)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 79/242
Chapter 2
FIRE ZONE1
8-2-1: BOUNDARIES DESIGNATED:
The fire zone is defined to be as follows:
Commencing at the southeast corner of Lot 1, Block 4, Original Townsite of Shelby, thence in a southwesterly direction along said lot line produced to
the centerline of First Street South; thence northwesterly along the centerline of First Street South to the centerline of Third Avenue; thence northeasterly
along the centerline of Third Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of the alley running through Block 5 in the Original Townsite of Shelby; thence
northwesterly along the centerline of said alley to the centerline of Fifth Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Fifth Avenue to the southerly
boundary line of Front Street; thence southeasterly along said southerly boundary line of Front Street to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Block 12, Second
Addition to Shelby; thence southwesterly along the east line of said Lot 1 and as produced to the point of beginning.
(1975 Code § 15.16.010)
Chapter 3
FIREWORKS
8-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "fireworks" means any combustible explosive composition or any substance, or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
providing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation and includes blank cartridges, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns
in which explosives are used, the types of balloons which require fireworks underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, sparklers or any other
fireworks of a like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance.
"Fireworks" shall not include railroad or auto flares, paper caps containing less than one-fourth (1/4) of a grain of explosive composition per cap, and toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for the use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-
21-1997)
8-3-2: PERMIT FOR DISCHARGE:
A. Public Display: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode any fireworks within the city limits with the exception that the chief of the fire
department shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the
city, fair associations and other organizations. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the sheriff of Toole County
and the chief of the fire department and shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the chief of the fire
department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
B. Application For Permit: Application for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display to the chief of the
fire department of the city.
C. List Of Fireworks: The permittee shall submit a complete list of all fireworks that will be used in the fireworks display as part of any application for a
fireworks display permit.
D. Issuance: After such privilege shall have been granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that
purpose only.
E. Transferability Of Permit: No permit granted under this chapter shall be transferrable. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-3: BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The permittee shall furnish, pursuant to the following list, a bond or liability insurance conditioned for payment of all damages which may be caused to
person or persons, or to property, by reason of the licensed fireworks display and arising from any acts of the licensee, his or her agents, employees or
subcontractors:
A. Projectile Distance No Greater Than Twenty Feet: If the permitted fireworks display is comprised entirely of fireworks that have a projectile distance of
no greater than twenty feet (20') horizontally or vertically for any individual fireworks, the permittee shall either post a bond with the city or possess
liability insurance in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
B. Ground Display And/Or Projectile Distance No Greater Than Fifty Feet: If the permitted fireworks display is comprised entirely of a ground display
and/or fireworks having a projectile distance no greater than fifty feet (50') horizontally or vertically for any individual fireworks, the permittee shall either
post a bond with the city or possess liability insurance in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 80/242
C. Projectile Distance In Excess Of Fifty Feet: If the permitted fireworks display includes any fireworks that have a projectile distance in excess of fifty feet
(50') horizontally or vertically, the permittee shall either post a bond with the city or possess liability insurance in an amount of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-4: CONDUCT OF DISPLAY:
The permittee for a permitted fireworks display shall conduct the fireworks display pursuant to this chapter in a manner that is not likely to expose persons
or property to risk or injury. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-5: DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS:
Any fireworks that remain unfired after a permitted fireworks display is concluded shall immediately be disposed of in a manner and way safe for the
particular type of fireworks remaining and approved by the chief of the fire department. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-6: SALE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale or sell at retail any fireworks within the city limits. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-7: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Possession For Display: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the possessing or sale of any kind of fireworks to a person holding a
permit pursuant to this chapter for a supervised public display of fireworks authorized pursuant to Montana state law.
B. Blank Cartridges: This chapter does not apply to the military or naval forces of the United States or this state, or peace officers or to the sale or use of
blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or athletic events. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-8: VIOLATION; SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS:
A. Fireworks Permitted By State: It shall not be an offense pursuant to this chapter to possess fireworks permitted by Montana state law for use within the
state of Montana.
B. Seizure: The chief of the fire department or any law enforcement officer who is a member of the Toole County sheriff's department shall seize, take,
remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or held in violation of this chapter or in
violation of Montana law. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
8-3-9: PENALTY:
The penalty for violating the provisions of this chapter shall solely be a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). There shall be no penalty of
imprisonment for a violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 724, 7-21-1997, eff. 8-21-1997)
Chapter 4
OPEN BURNING
8-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Open burning" as used in this chapter is defined as the burning of any material within the city limits. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
8-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall cause, allow or permit the open burning of any material within the city limits unless he/she has applied for and been issued a permit for
such open burning from the Shelby fire department. To be eligible for such a permit, the permittee shall be an adult resident of the city of Shelby. (Ord.
732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
8-4-3: NOTIFICATION:
The Shelby fire department and the sheriff's office must be notified of the intent to initiate burning twenty four (24) hours prior to the actual burning. The
issuance of a permit does not relieve the permittee from this notification requirement unless the permit is issued within twenty four (24) hours prior to the
burn and the Shelby fire department and the sheriff's office has been duly notified at that time. Permittee is responsible and liable for damages and
expenses incurred due to his/her neglect. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
8-4-4: RESTRICTED BURNING SEASON:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 81/242
Fire control authorities retain the right to restrict the burning season in the event of excessively dry or hazardous conditions. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-
20-1998)
8-4-5: PRECAUTIONS:
The permittee shall take the following precautions:
A. The permittee shall take every precaution to prevent the spread of fire or particulate emissions from the open burn beyond his/her property.
B. The permittee shall have on hand the necessary materials and personnel to keep the open burn under control at all times.
C. The permittee shall burn only clean, dry materials and in a small enough area that it can be observed and controlled at all times.
D. The permittee shall have an adult attending to the open burn at all times.
E. The permittee shall be sure that the open burn is completely out before abandoning the same.
F. The permittee shall not burn in a period of high wind or excessively dry conditions.
G. The permittee shall not burn in an area where the wind drift is such that smoke from the open burn will create a hazard on a roadway or other public
facility or otherwise create a public nuisance.
H. The permittee shall not burn animal droppings, garbage, dead animals, tires or any rubber materials, oil, or any type of petroleum products, railroad ties,
tar paper, plastic material or toxic waste. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
8-4-6: RIGHT OF INVESTIGATION:
Fire control authorities of the Shelby fire department shall retain the right to enter private property to investigate and/or suppress open burns if deemed
necessary solely in the discretion of the Shelby fire department official or officials on the scene. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
8-4-7: PENALTY:
Any individual, person, partnership, and/or corporation and/or private or business entity of any kind found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus any applicable surcharge, for each such offense. In the event the Shelby fire department incurs any expenditure related to an unlawful
open burn, the judge may also assess such costs. (Ord. 732, 4-20-1998, eff. 5-20-1998)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE1
9-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: No person shall build, construct, reconstruct or alter any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter, or any combination thereof, in any street,
avenue or alley or build or construct any boulevarding or parking or any improvement of any nature whatsoever in any street, avenue or alley unless
the same be constructed strictly in accordance with the ten (10) current standard specifications and plans for such work and under the supervision of
an employee of the city. No improvement mentioned in this section shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the city. The permit can be
obtained upon written application to and approval of the superintendent of streets of the city. (1975 Code § 12.04.010)
B. Application: An applicant for permit hereunder shall file with the city finance officer or superintendent of streets an application showing:
1. Name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area;
2. Name and address of the party doing the work;
3. Location of the work area;
4. Attached plans showing details of the proposed construction, reconstruction or alteration;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 82/242
5. Estimated cost of the alteration;
6. Such other information as the superintendent finds reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder. (1975
Code § 12.04.020)
C. Fees2:
1. Permit Fee: A fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council will be charged for the issuance of each permit. (1975 Code
§ 12.04.030; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Inspection And Engineering Fees: The superintendent shall charge a fee for all inspection and engineering services done in behalf of an applicant or
permittee hereunder. The inspection and engineering fee shall be computed from a schedule of charges based upon anticipated actual costs. Such
schedule shall be posted for public inspection in the office of the city finance officer. (1975 Code § 12.04.040)
D. Standards For Issuance: The superintendent shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds that:
1. The work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public works of like character;
2. The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, the means of egress
to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; and
3. The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. (1975 Code § 12.04.050)
9-1-2: SUPERVISION BY SUPERINTENDENT:
All operations for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the superintendent of streets. (1975 Code
§ 12.04.060)
9-1-3: ESTABLISHED GRADE:
Sidewalk construction on improved or graded streets must conform with the established street grade and sidewalk line. On all other streets, sidewalks
must be laid to the proper sidewalk line, and otherwise to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets. (1975 Code § 12.04.070; amd. 2008 Code)
9-1-4: WIDTH AND SLOPE:
A. Width: All sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be of the following width or as otherwise ordered by the council:
1. Business District: On all streets and avenues used for business purposes, eight feet (8') wide, or match the existing width of the existing sidewalk,
whichever is greater for the purpose of this section.
2. Residential And Other Districts: On all residential and other streets and avenues, five feet (5') wide or match existing width, whichever is greater. For
the purpose of this section, such "residential and other streets and avenues" shall be defined as all streets and avenues of the city of Shelby not
named in the above mentioned business district.
3. Alleys: In all alleys, a two foot (2') width may be constructed and laid in such a manner that it will not interfere with traffic.
B. Slope: All sidewalks shall rise one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot from the curb grade to the property line.
C. Permit; Compliance: Anyone who shall construct a sidewalk in the city shall first obtain a permit and shall comply with all requirements and restrictions
set forth therein.
D. Noncompliance:
1. Notice Of Noncompliance: In the event of noncompliance with this section, the city council shall instruct the city building inspector to give notice to
said owner or owners of said noncompliance, by certified mail, return receipt requested, ordering said sidewalk to conform to this section, along with
a description of such nonconformance.
2. City's Right To Take Action: If noncompliance exists at the end of the thirty (30) days herein above mentioned, the city shall have the right to take
such action as is necessary to bring the nonconforming sidewalk into compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, tearing out and
reinstalling said sidewalk and shall bill the owner or owners of said property the actual costs of such work expended in realizing compliance.
3. Lien: If said installation is not paid for in full within thirty (30) days of billing, the city shall have the right to place a lien upon the property for which the
action was taken to bring the sidewalk into compliance in an amount equal to the actual cost of such work, plus filing fees, plus any interest allowed
by law. The city reserves the right to foreclose on said lien pursuant to Montana statute pertaining to foreclosure of liens.
E. Adverse Weather Conditions: The city council may adjust the time schedule hereinabove set in order to accommodate adverse weather conditions.
(Ord. 701, 8-15-1994)
9-1-5: CURB CUTS, CURBS AND GUTTERS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 83/242
Curb cuts, curbs and gutters, or any combination thereof shall be constructed strictly in accordance with the then current standard specifications and plans
for such work. (1975 Code § 12.04.090)
9-1-6: CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS AND GUTTERS WITHOUT FORMATION OF SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT:
A. Order For Construction: The city council may order sidewalks, curbs and gutters or any combination thereof constructed in front of any lot or parcel of
land without the formation of a special improvement district, and whenever the council orders any such sidewalk, curb and gutter or any combination
thereof constructed, such order shall be entered upon the minutes of the council and shall name the street along which the sidewalk, curb and gutter or
any combination thereof is to be constructed.
B. Notice: After the making of such order, written notice thereof shall be given the owner or agent of such property in such manner as the council may
direct. If personal service cannot be obtained, then the notice shall be published in a permanently displayed advertisement once a week for four (4)
successive weeks in a newspaper in the municipality.
C. Failure To Comply; Construction By City; Lien: If the owner or agent of such lot or parcel of land fails or neglects for a period of thirty (30) days after the
date of service of such notice to cause such sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any combination thereof, to be constructed, the city may construct or cause
such sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any combination thereof, to be constructed, and shall assess the cost thereof, including engineering costs and the
costs enumerated in Montana Code Annotated title 7, chapters 7, 12, and 14, against the property in front of which the same is constructed.
D. Payment For Construction: Where any such sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any combination thereof, is constructed by or under direction of the city
council, payment for the construction thereof shall be made by special warrants in such form as may be prescribed by ordinance, drawn against a fund
to be known as the special sidewalk, curb and gutter fund, and the council may provide for the payment of the interest annually.
E. Assessments: The payment of assessments to defray the cost of construction of the sidewalks, curbs and gutters or any combination thereof may be
spread over a term of not to exceed eight (8) years, payment to be made in equal annual installments.
F. Levy Of Assessment: The city council shall annually, and before the first Monday of October of each year, pass and adopt a resolution levying an
assessment and tax against each lot or parcel of land in front of which sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or any combination thereof, have been constructed
under orders of the city council. The resolution levying such assessment shall be in every manner prepared and certified the same as resolutions
levying assessments for the making of improvements in special improvement districts. (1975 Code § 12.04.100)
9-1-7: CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR BY CITY OR CONTRACT:
The construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters or any combination thereof as provided in section 9-1-2 of this chapter shall be done by the city,
or it can be done by contract, the same to be let to the lowest responsible bidder and in accordance with the specifications prepared by the authorized
representative of the city council. (1975 Code § 12.04.110)
9-1-8: WHEELCHAIR RAMP SPECIFICATIONS:
No person shall build, construct, reconstruct or alter any sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any combination thereof, in or at any intersection within the corporate
limits of the city unless the same include and conform to the wheelchair ramp specifications attached to ordinance 586 as exhibit A on file in the office of
the city finance officer and incorporated herein by this reference with the same full force and effect as if set forth at length herein. (1975 Code § 12.04.120)
9-1-9: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
A. Duty To Repair; Safety Measures: It shall be the duty of the owners and tenants of any premises within the limits of the city to keep the sidewalk, curb
and gutter, or any combination thereof, in front of and adjoining their premises, in good, safe and substantial condition, and the owners and tenants
shall see that all breaks or unsoundness resulting from natural deterioration, or from any cause whatever, be repaired with all possible dispatch, and
when by reason of the construction or repairs of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or any combination thereof, from any cause whatsoever, any sidewalk,
curb and gutter or section thereof is removed or rendered dangerous or impassable to the public, such spaces or openings shall be securely fenced
and from dark until sunrise red lights shall be maintained thereon, while such dangerous condition exists3; and a plank walk not less than two inches
(2") in thickness and not less than three feet (3') in width shall be constructed around such construction or dangerous walk, the same to extend from
sidewalk to sidewalk, curb to curb and gutter to gutter, on each side of the opening or obstruction. (1975 Code § 12.08.010)
B. Failure To Repair: Any sidewalk, curb and gutter or any combination thereof which is now or may, by reason of natural deterioration or decay, or by
unevenness, steps, rapid slopes or from any cause whatsoever, be dangerous to the public safety, may be condemned by the city council, and may be,
by order of the city council, immediately removed, remodeled, rebuilt, repaired or newly built, as in the city council's judgment to be most expedient.
The cost thereof shall be a lien upon the lot abutting upon such sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any combination thereof, and may be recovered by a suit
before any court of competent jurisdiction against the owner or may be assessed and collected as a special tax against the lot. (1975 Code
§ 12.08.020)
Chapter 2
EXCAVATIONS
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 84/242
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EXCAVATION: Includes any ditch, trench, cut, hole or change of grade.
STREET: The entire width of a street or avenue between the boundary lines of other public or private properties on the sides. (1975 Code § 12.16.010)
9-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED1:
A. Required: No person shall open up, dig into, excavate or tunnel in any of the streets, avenues, public places or alleys of the city, where the two (2)
connect with any of the mains or pipes, to connect with any sewer, or for any other purpose, without having first: (1975 Code § 12.16.020)
1. Obtained a permit from the superintendent and paid the permit charge therefor;
2. Made a cash payment with the superintendent for all resurfacing costs incurred by the city; (1975 Code § 12.16.010; amd. 2008 Code)
3. Filed with the city financial officer a good and sufficient surety bond. (1975 Code § 12.16.020; amd. 2008 Code)
B. Rules And Regulations; Waiver Of Bond: The council shall make rules and regulations as to the amount and conditions under which such payment shall
be made. The council may, in its discretion, waive the filing of bonds. (1975 Code § 12.16.020)
9-2-3: BOND:
The bond required by section 9-2-2 of this chapter shall be in the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and shall be executed by a surety company
authorized to do business in the state, conditioned to save the city harmless from any damage or injury whatsoever to any person or property of any
description, however owned, by reason of leaving open any excavation or tunnel or by reason of failure to properly guard any such excavation or tunnel or
failure to place red lights at such excavation or tunnel at night. Any person may furnish a yearly bond conditioned as hereinabove set forth. (1975 Code
§ 12.16.030)
9-2-4: MINIMUM TRAVEL INTERFERENCE:
Excavations in streets, avenues, public places or alleys shall be made in such manner as to impede travel as little as possible. At no time during the
progress of the work shall sidewalks be unnecessarily blocked to travel. (1975 Code § 12.16.040)
9-2-5: LIMITS ON TIME FOR OPEN EXCAVATION:
The time that any street, avenue, public place or alley excavation is open may be limited by the superintendent of streets or other responsible official of the
city. (1975 Code § 12.16.050)
9-2-6: BACKFILLING:
The superintendent of streets, with the approval of the city council, shall make rules and regulations as to the method and conditions pertaining to
backfilling of any excavation undertaken within or upon the streets, avenues, public places or alleys of the city. (1975 Code § 12.16.060)
9-2-7: BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS2:
A. Required: Whenever excavation work in any street in the city is in progress, sufficient barricades shall be erected by the contractor or other person in
control around all trenches or embankments made by him within the limits of any street, avenue, alley, public place or sidewalk. Red lights shall be
maintained thereon from dusk to daylight until the street, avenue, alley, public place or sidewalk is restored to a safe and passable condition.
B. Failure To Protect: Failure or omission to protect against accident, in the manner required by this chapter, shall cause a forfeiture of any permit which
may have been granted with reference thereto. (1975 Code § 12.16.080)
C. Travel Upon Streets With Barricades: No person shall walk upon or drive upon any street, alley, avenue or sidewalk barricade as stated in subsections
A, B, D and E of this section and sections 9-2-8 and 9-2-9 of this chapter. (1975 Code § 12.16.090)
D. Moving Or Removal Prohibited: Whenever any barricade, red light or other warning device is placed upon the streets, alleys, avenues, public places or
sidewalks of the city by any official or employee of the city in the course of his duty, or by any contractor working on any street, alley, avenue, sidewalk
or public place, no person shall move or remove such red light, barricade or other warning device. (1975 Code § 12.16.100)
E. Removal Upon Completion: Following completion of the construction work and restoration of the street or sidewalk to a safe and passable condition, the
contractor or person in charge of the work shall promptly remove all barricades, warning lights and other safety devices from the street or sidewalk.
(1975 Code § 12.16.080)
9-2-8: MARKING WET CONCRETE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 85/242
Where lights, signs, barricades or obstructions have been placed and maintained to protect concrete, no person shall walk, run, drive, ride or step upon
the newly laid concrete, so as to mark, mar or in any way injure the same. (1975 Code § 12.16.110)
9-2-9: CHIPPING CONCRETE:
No person other than the superintendent of streets, a member of his force or a concrete inspector shall intentionally or wilfully chip, break, cut or in any
manner deface or injure any concrete in any sidewalk, curb, gutter or pavement. (1975 Code § 12.16.120)
9-2-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Revocation: Any permit issued under authority of this chapter may be revoked for failure of the permittee to perform the work in accordance with the
specifications, methods or time limit required or approved by the city.
B. Hearing: Any permittee whose permit is revoked may, upon request, receive a hearing before the city council or person designated by the council. The
council, after such hearing, may reinstate the permit or take any other action it deems proper. (1975 Code § 12.16.070)
Chapter 3
OBSTRUCTIONS1
9-3-1: PERMISSION REQUIRED:
No person shall encumber or obstruct or cause to be encumbered or obstructed any street, avenue, sidewalk or alley or other public place in the city or
place therein or thereon any building materials, trash, vehicle, earth, garbage, rubbish, debris or accumulated snow and ice removed from an adjoining
private premises, without first having obtained permission, in writing, from the city finance officer or other responsible city official. (1975 Code § 12.20.010)
9-3-2: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION OR LITTER MAY BE ORDERED:
The superintendent of streets or the law enforcement agency is authorized to order any article or thing of the kind mentioned in section 9-3-1 of this
chapter which encumbers, litters or obstructs any street, avenue, or alley or other public place within the city to be removed. If such removal shall not be
made within six (6) hours after notice to the owner or person in charge thereof, or if the owner cannot be readily found for the purposes of such notice, the
city shall cause the same to be removed to some suitable place to be designated by such official, at the expense of the person responsible therefor. (1975
Code § 12.20.020)
9-3-3: SIGNS, FENCES; PERMIT REQUIRED2:
No person shall place or maintain any shafts of wood, iron or other material, billboards, signs, fences, poles, rods, tables or wires in any of the streets,
avenues or alleys or public places of the city without first having obtained a permit from the city council. (1975 Code § 12.20.030)
9-3-4: STRUCTURAL OBSTRUCTIONS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall maintain a building, fence, porch, steps, gallery or other structure upon any street, avenue, alley or public place within the
city.
B. Allowed For Limited Time: The city council may, in its discretion, grant permits to persons which will allow them to maintain such structures for a limited
time to be specified in the permit.
C. Order To Remove:
1. Notice To Owner Or Person Responsible: Any building, fence, porch, steps, gallery or other structural obstruction now upon or hereafter placed or
erected upon any street, avenue, alley or public place within the city, or which may be upon any new street, avenue, alley or public place which may
thereafter be opened or created within the city, shall be removed therefrom within a reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days and not less than
three (3) days after an order to remove, in writing, has been given to the owner or person responsible for such obstruction.
2. Unfound Owner; Removal By City; Costs: If the owner or person responsible for such obstruction cannot be readily found for the purpose of such
notice, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets in his discretion or the law enforcement agency in its discretion to cause the obstruction to
be removed. The expense of such removal shall be recoverable from the owner or person responsible for the obstruction.
3. Interference, Resistance Or Obstruction: Any person who interferes with, resists or obstructs by acts or threats, the removal of any such obstruction
is guilty of a violation of this chapter. (1975 Code § 12.20.040)
9-3-5: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Notice to remove obstructions described in sections 9-3-3 and 9-3-4 of this chapter specifying the same, and the place and extent of the same, shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 86/242
given to the occupant or owner of the land involved or to the person owning or causing such obstruction. Notice shall be given by leaving it at the place of
residence of the person to be served, if he resides in the city, or by posting it on the obstruction, if such person does not reside in the city. (1975 Code
§ 12.20.060)
9-3-6: REFUSAL TO REMOVE; COURT ORDER; REMOVAL BY CITY ABATEMENT:
A. Abatement As A Nuisance: If the obstruction required to be removed by notice of section 9-3-5 of this chapter is denied, and the owner, occupant or
other person controlling the matter or thing charged with being an obstruction refuses either to remove or permit the removal thereof, the municipality
shall commence in the proper court and action to abate the same as a nuisance; and if the municipality recovers judgment, it may, in addition to having
the same abated, recover ten dollars ($10.00) for every day such nuisance remained after such notice, and also costs in the action.
B. Removal By Law Enforcement Agency: The city council may, at any time, order the law enforcement agency to forthwith remove any such obstruction
without commencing an action. (1975 Code § 12.20.070)
9-3-7: PUTTING GLASS OR HARMFUL SUBSTANCES ON STREET:
A. Prohibited: No person shall throw or deposit upon any street, avenue, alley or public place any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street, avenue, alley or public place.
B. Removal Required: Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.
C. Wrecked Or Damaged Vehicle, Removal Of Glass: Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other
injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. (1975 Code § 12.20.080)
Chapter 4
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE1
9-4-1: KEEPING SIDEWALKS CLEAR:
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the limits of the municipality to keep the sidewalk of and abutting his premises clear of more than
one inch (1") of snow, any amount of snowpack, any amount of ice, any amount of slush, any amount of mud, and all other threats to safe foot travel
and to prevent the accumulation of same.
B. A property owner shall have twenty four (24) hours after a snowstorm ends to clear the sidewalk of snow greater in depth than one inch (1").
C. A property owner shall have twenty four (24) hours after snowpack, ice, slush, mud, or other threats to safe foot travel accumulate to remove the
snowpack, ice, slush, mud, or threat.
D. In the event that snow or ice cannot be reasonably removed due to possible damage to the sidewalk or it is otherwise largely impractical to remove, the
owner shall put on the sidewalk sand or other abrasive material in such an amount and manner to make foot traffic reasonably safe. The owner shall
maintain that condition until weather permits the removal of the snow or ice. (Ord. 794, 3-16-2009)
9-4-2: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Upon the failure of the owner of any premises to keep the sidewalk abutting his property in compliance with section 9-4-1 of this chapter, the city of Shelby
shall have the right to remove such snow, snowpack, ice, slush, mud, and other threats to safe foot travel and assess the cost thereof against the property
abutting the sidewalk. (Ord. 794, 3-16-2009)
9-4-3: NO NOTICE REQUIRED:
The city of Shelby is not required to provide any notice to the owner of the premises abutting a sidewalk before it exercises its rights under section 9-4-2 of
this chapter. (Ord. 794, 3-16-2009)
9-4-4: PENALTY:
Any owner of any premises within the limits of the municipality who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding two (2) days,
or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such hereunder. (Ord. 796, 5-18-2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 87/242
Chapter 5
STREET SPRINKLING
9-5-1: METHOD:
The method of sprinkling of the streets of the city in sprinkling districts heretofore and hereafter created shall be as follows: All sprinkling done under the
provisions of this chapter shall be done with water, oil, salt or any other dust palliative best suited to practices, economy and efficiency for monies
expended under the direction of the committee on streets and alleys. The sprinkling shall be done with forces employed by the city or contract. (1975 Code
§ 12.24.010)
9-5-2: DISTRICTS:
A. Creation: A resolution dividing the whole or any part of the city into sprinkling districts, to be known and designated by number, shall be passed by the
city council. The resolution shall plainly define the boundaries of the several districts, or enumerate the streets, alleys and public places or any part
thereof constituting the different districts. (1975 Code § 12.24.020)
B. Changes: When once defined, sprinkling districts shall not be changed during the same calendar year, but may be changed by resolution the following
year or any year thereafter. (1975 Code § 12.24.030)
9-5-3: ASSESSMENT TO PAY FOR WORK:
The sprinkling in districts so established may be done by contract or by forces employed by the city, or by both, in such manner as the council may elect. It
shall be the duty of the council to estimate, as near as practicable, the cost of sprinkling in such districts so established for the season, and before the first
Monday in November in each year, they shall pass and finally adopt a resolution levying and assessing all the property within the several districts with an
amount equal to not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the entire cost of the work, exclusive of the cost of sprinkling parks and public places. (1975
Code § 12.24.040)
9-5-4: METHOD OF ASSESSMENT:
The assessment for the cost and expense of sprinkling streets shall be made against all of the property embraced within each sprinkling district by one of
the three (3) following methods:
A. Frontage Basis: Each lot or parcel of land within such district, abutting upon some street upon which sprinkling is done, shall be assessed for that part
of the whole cost which its street frontage bears to the street frontage of the entire district.
B. Area Basis: Each lot or parcel of land within such district shall be assessed for that part of the whole cost which its area bears to the area of the entire
district, exclusive of streets, alleys, avenues and public places.
C. Combination Of Frontage And Area Basis: A portion of the total cost to be assessed in each sprinkling district may be assessed against the several lots
of land within the district on a frontage basis per subsection A of this section, and the remainder of such cost on an area basis per subsection B of this
section. The proportion to be assessed in each district by each such method shall be determined and fixed by the city council. (1975 Code § 12.24.050)
9-5-5: METHOD OF LEVY OF ASSESSMENT:
A. Resolution Levying Assessment; Notice: The resolution levying the assessment to defray the cost of sprinkling shall contain a list in which shall be
described the lot or parcel of land assessed, with the name of the owner thereof, if known, and the same amount levied thereon opposite; such
resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city finance officer, and a notice signed by the city finance officer stating that the resolution levying
special assessment to defray the cost of sprinkling in the several districts is on file in his or her office and subject to inspection for a period of five (5)
days, shall be published at least once in a newspaper published in the city.
B. Objections; Hearing: Such notice shall state the time and place at which objections to the final adoption of such resolution will be heard by the council,
and the time for such hearing shall be not less than five (5) days after the publication of such notice. At the time so set, the council shall meet at their
regular place of meeting and hear all objections which may be made to such assessment, or any part thereof, and may adjourn from time to time for
that purpose, and may, by resolution, modify such assessment in whole or in part. (1975 Code § 12.24.060)
C. Placement On Tax Roll: A copy of such resolution certified by the city finance officer must be delivered to the county treasurer on or before the first
Monday in October, and such assessment shall be placed upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner as other taxes. (1975 Code § 12.24.060;
amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 6
OVERNIGHT CAMPING1
9-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 88/242
This chapter shall apply to Andy Anderson park, Aronow park, Big Sky park, City Hall park, Cleveland park, Johnson park, Lake Sheloole park, Lincoln
park, Roosevelt park and Williamson park. (Ord. 690, 5-17-1993)
9-6-2: PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No overnight camping shall be allowed in any municipal park of the city without prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 690, 5-17-1993)
9-6-3: DESIGNATED CAMPING AREAS:
This chapter does not apply to designated camping areas at Lake Sheloole park2 and Williamson park3, provided that camping fees have been paid and
all other camping regulations at said parks are strictly adhered to. (Ord. 690, 5-17-1993)
9-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person, partnership or corporation found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to misdemeanor provisions and penalties pursuant to the
general municipal ordinance governing misdemeanor offenses. (Ord. 690, 5-17-1993)
Chapter 7
TREES
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which
the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on public rights of way lying between property lines on either side of all streets,
avenues, or ways within the city. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Comprehensive Plan: It shall be the responsibility of the city council to study, investigate, counsel, develop and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will
be reviewed annually by the city council and upon approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan.
B. Tree Inventory: The city council shall promote and supervise the establishment of a tree inventory for street and park trees. The inventory shall be
updated with the results of ground inspections every three (3) years. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-3: TREE SPECIES:
The city council develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three (3) size classes based on mature height: small (under 20
feet), medium (20 feet to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). Efforts shall be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree species. Lists of trees not suitable
for planting will also be created by the city council. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-4: SPACING:
A. From Other Trees: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in section 9-7-3 of this chapter, and no
trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, fifteen feet (15'); medium trees, twenty five feet (25'); and large trees, thirty five
feet (35'); except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
B. Curbs And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3) species size
classes listed in section 9-7-3 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer than two feet (2') for small trees and three feet (3') for medium or
large trees to any curb or sidewalk.
C. Street Corners: No street tree shall be planted within thirty five feet (35') of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curb lines.
D. Fireplug: No street tree shall be planted within ten feet (10') of any fireplug.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 89/242
E. Utilities: No street trees other than those species accepted as small trees by the city council may be planted under, or within ten feet (10') of any
overhead utility wire. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-5: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
A. Public Safety; Symmetry And Beauty: The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds.
B. Power Of City To Remove: The city council may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any
injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection
and location of said trees is in accordance with sections 9-7-3 and 9-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-6: PRUNING STANDARDS:
All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the ANSI A300 standards for tree care operations. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-7: TREE TOPPING:
A. Definition: "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
B. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property.
C. Crown Reduction: Crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted, where appropriate.
D. Exemptions: Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices
are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city council. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-8: PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE:
A. Pruning Required: Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall
not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of thirteen
feet (13') above street surface or eight feet (8') above the sidewalk surface.
B. Removal Required: Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public.
C. City's Right To Prune: The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections.
D. Utility Tree Trimming: Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility
company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility company and city
council prior to any trimming by the utility company. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-9: DEAD OR DISEASED TREES:
A. City's Right To Cause Removal: The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city,
when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease, which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city.
B. Notice To Owner: The city council will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within
sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice.
C. Failure To Comply: In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge
the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-10: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 90/242
9-7-11: PROTECTION OF TREES:
A. Maintenance Of Overall Forest: In order to maintain the overall forest, reasonable efforts shall be made to replace trees that are removed and to protect
quality trees that are endangered.
B. Removal By Action Of Council Or Natural Causes: Trees removed by decision of the city council or by natural causes shall be replaced somewhere in
the forest on a one for one basis within one year. The location and species of any replacement tree shall be determined by the city council.
C. Protection From Damage During Construction, Sidewalk Repair, Utility Work: Trees of desirable species and good health shall be protected as much as
possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair, utilities work above and below ground, and other similar activities. The zone of protection
shall include the ground beneath the canopy of the tree. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-12: INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city council, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 749, 8-
21-2000)
9-7-13: APPEAL:
Any person may appeal any ruling or order concerning trees to the city council, who may hear the matter and make final decisions. (Ord. 749, 8-21-2000)
9-7-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 749, 8-21-2000; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 8
LAKE SHELOOLE WATERSHED AND RECREATION AREA1
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area, which belongs to the city, but is located
approximately one-half (1/2) mile north of the city limits of the city; and to provide for the protection of city property and the fishery and natural habitat of
Lake Sheloole. (1975 Code § 8.44.010)
9-8-2: LITTERING:
There shall be no littering in the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area. (1975 Code § 8.44.020)
9-8-3: SWIMMING:
Swimming is allowed at the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area. (1975 Code § 8.44.030; amd. 2008 Code)
9-8-4: BOATING:
Nonmotorized boating is allowed at the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area. (Ord. 756, 7-2-2001; amd. 2008 Code)
9-8-5: FIRES:
There shall be no fires in the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area, except in fireplaces and grills in the designated campground. (1975 Code
§ 8.44.050)
9-8-6: CAMPING2:
There shall be no camping in the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area, except in the designated campground. (1975 Code § 8.44.060)
9-8-7: FIREARMS; ARCHERY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 91/242
There shall be no firearms or air rifles in the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area, and no archery except in the designated area during
supervised classes. (1975 Code § 8.44.070)
9-8-8: FISHING:
All state fishing regulations shall apply. (1975 Code § 8.44.080)
9-8-9: SPEED LIMITS:
A. Maximum Speed: All motor vehicles shall not exceed the speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour within the boundaries of Lake Sheloole watershed
and recreation area.
B. Speed In Parking Areas: A maximum speed of five (5) miles per hour is allowed in the parking areas.
C. Use Of Designated Roads And Parking Areas: All motor vehicles shall be driven only on designated roads and parked only in designated areas. (1975
Code § 8.44.090)
9-8-10: VANDALISM:
Removal of topsoil, cutting or damaging of trees, boughs, shrubs or any natural or manmade features is prohibited. (1975 Code § 8.44.100)
9-8-11: HOURS:
There shall be no public use of the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area after posted hours. (1975 Code § 8.44.110)
9-8-12: POLICIES:
The city council has the power to set policies concerning public use, maintenance and development at the Lake Sheloole watershed and recreation area.
(1975 Code § 8.44.120)
9-8-13: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of section 9-8-2 of this chapter shall be punished as provided by the laws of the state. Any person convicted of a
violation of section 9-8-8 of this chapter shall be punished as provided by the laws of the state and by the rules and regulations of the state department of
fish and game. Any person convicted of a violation of the remaining terms and conditions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 8.44.130; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 9
WILLIAMSON PARK1
9-9-1: HOURS OF USE RESTRICTED:
A. Fee Users: Only those individuals who have paid the required fee for camping at Williamson park may be within the confines of Williamson park
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
B. Nonfee Users: All nonfee users shall be excluded from the confines of Williamson park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and shall, therefore, vacate the park by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and shall not return prior to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 714, 11-6-1996)
9-9-2: SIGN WITH RESTRICTIONS POSTED:
The city shall cause a sign to be constructed setting forth the above restriction on hours and the amount of the fine for violation of such restriction, and
post the same in a conspicuous place at the entrance of Williamson park for the general information of the traveling public. (Ord. 714, 11-6-1996)
9-9-3: POWER TO REFUSE FEE; EXCLUSION FROM PARK:
A. Fee Refused: The park attendant shall refuse to accept the required camping fee from any individual or group of individuals who exhibit a propensity to
engage in, or who are engaging in, fights, riots, loud noises, disorderly conduct, obscenity, and acts or conduct calculated to disturb the public peace or
which are offensive to public morals.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 92/242
B. Subject To Exclusion: Any individual or group of individuals, whether or not they have paid the required fee, who engage in, or who exhibit a propensity
to engage in, fights, riots, loud noises, disorderly conduct, obscenity, and acts or conduct calculated to disturb the public peace or which are offensive
to public morals shall be subject to exclusion from the confines of Williamson park at any time and it shall constitute a misdemeanor to refuse to vacate
the park after being requested to do so by the park attendant or a law enforcement officer.
C. Other Statutes: This chapter shall in no way be construed to be a restriction on law enforcement from enforcing other statutes related to disturbing the
peace, public nuisance and/or disorderly conduct. (Ord. 714, 11-6-1996)
9-9-4: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 714, 11-6-1996;
amd. 2008 Code)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES
10-1-1: ADOPTION OF MODEL BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES BY ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION:
A. The current editions of the building, mechanical and related codes and all accompanying appendices, amendments and modifications adopted by the
bureau of building and measurement standards, Montana department of labor and industry (or its successor), as set out in the administrative rules of
Montana, as amended from time to time by the department of labor and industry, shall be adopted by reference through administrative action of the
building inspector, as authorized by section 50-60-301(1)(b), Montana Code Annotated, excluding any exceptions noted in title 50, chapter 60 or any
regulations not applicable to local government jurisdictions. These codes are applicable to all buildings within the building code enforcement area of the
city, including, but not limited to, residential buildings containing less than five (5) dwelling units or their attached-to structures, any farm or ranch
building, and any private garage or private storage structure used only for the owner's own use, as provided by section 50-60-102(1)(a), Montana Code
Annotated.
B. Any adopted building code shall regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures within the city, and shall provide for issuance of permits,
collection of fees and penalties.
C. Any adopted mechanical code shall regulate and control the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, erection, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances within the city, and shall provide for issuance of permits, collection of fees and penalties.
D. Any adopted plumbing code shall regulate and control the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, erection, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, operation, and maintenance or use of any plumbing system within the city, and shall provide for issuance of
permits, collection of fees and penalties.
E. Any adopted electrical code shall regulate and control the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, erection, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, operation, and maintenance or use of any electrical system within the city, and shall provide for the issuance of
permits, collection of fees and penalties.
F. One copy of each building or technical code adopted by the city shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.
G. Any codes or amendments adopted by the department of labor and industry which apply to local government jurisdictions, including the adoption of the
latest editions of the model technical codes or applicable administrative rules of Montana, and which are adopted by administrative order of the
operations manager, shall become effective on the date set forth in the administrative order, but in no event more than ninety (90) days after the date
that the department of labor and industry notifies the city of said amendments. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-2: BUILDING PLAN REVIEW:
A. The building official shall be responsible for plan review coordination and for issuance of building permits.
B. Upon application by any person for a building permit, the building official shall review the plans for compliance with the applicable building or technical
codes. The building official shall submit the plans to any other affected city department for review and approval by the department before issuance of a
permit.
C. Building plan review shall be completed by the building official within thirty (30) working days of submittal by the applicant.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 93/242
D. The building official may, in proper cases, request the aid of the building codes bureau (or its successor), other state agencies, or professional
consultants to aid in coordination of review. In such cases, the building official may lengthen the completion time for review as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-3: INSPECTIONS:
Inspections shall be conducted by the building official or other appropriately qualified and authorized personnel. Where other departments require
inspection, the building official shall ensure that they are conducted within the time allowed in section 10-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-4: INSPECTOR QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES:
A. The building official is the building inspector. He or she shall be a person with at least three (3) years of experience in the building trades. The building
inspector's duties shall include those set forth in title 50, chapter 60, Montana Code Annotated, as now or hereafter amended.
B. The building department staff shall consist of the building official and such deputies or representatives as he or she may from time to time appoint, with
the approval of the city council. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-5: FACTORY BUILT BUILDINGS:
Factory built buildings which are approved by the Montana building codes bureau (or its successor) shall be subject to local government inspection and
fees for only zoning, utility connections and foundations. Applications to the building official for erection and utility connection shall be in accordance with
sections 10-1-2 and 10-1-3 of this chapter and the applicable building codes. The fees for permits for factory built buildings shall be in accordance with
applicable building codes. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-6: BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS PROCESS:
A. Board Of Appeals: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of the applicable building codes, the city council shall act as board of appeals. All code interpretation questions shall be submitted to the
department of labor and industry, building codes division, for an opinion, which will be used by the board as a basis for its ruling. The board shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings, in writing, to the building official with
duplicate copies to the appellant and the building codes division.
B. Limitations Of Authority: The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the applicable building
code, nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the applicable building code. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-7: PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
See section 1-12-13 of this code. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-8: JURISDICTIONAL AREA OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
The jurisdictional area of the building department shall be the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
10-1-9: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Remodeling:
1. Definition: "Remodeling" specifically includes siding, reroofing and replacing of cupboards, counters and countertops, as well as repairing or
replacing inside walls. Windows and doors are included as remodeling so long as the original opening is utilized and not enlarged.
2. No Fee Or Permit Required: No fee and no permit shall be required for any remodeling of any single-family dwelling so long as said remodeling does
not in any way effect the structural integrity of said single-family dwelling.
B. Structural Changes: Structural changes shall require a building permit and the payment of the appropriate fee and shall include any building on any
single-family dwelling that increases or decreases the size of said structure. The building of any fence shall be considered a structural change and shall
require a zoning permit and the payment of the appropriate fee. The question of whether or not any contemplated work on any single-family dwelling
constitutes a structural change shall be presented to the building inspector for his determination. (Ord. 803, 9-20-2010)
Chapter 2
SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 94/242
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DWELLING: The common definition of dwelling and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the placement of new or used trailers or new or used modular
homes or new or used buildings, whether requiring construction or not, within the municipal limits of the city of Shelby.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: The date of expiration of the building permit and any extensions thereof. (Ord. 719, 4-16-1997)
10-2-2: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the substantial completion of all new construction, and/or the substantial completion of the placement of any new
dwelling and/or the substantial completion of any new mobile home park as defined by section 12-2-2 of this code, whether commercial or residential,
within the municipal limits, the owner or owners of said property shall install sidewalk, curb and gutter according to the specifications as provided them by
the city superintendent. (Ord. 799, 5-3-2010)
10-2-3: FRONTAGES WHERE REQUIRED:
For the purpose of this chapter the frontages upon which curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be placed or repaired shall be those frontages of lots common to
and described in a single deed which is of record at the office of the clerk and recorder of Toole County, Montana. (Ord. 719, 4-16-1997)
10-2-4: NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Notice Of Noncompliance: In the event of noncompliance with this chapter in the one hundred eighty (180) days stated above, the city council shall
instruct the city attorney to give notice to said owner or owners of said noncompliance, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service
from the sheriff's office, or by publication in the event such owner or owners cannot be personally located, ordering said installation of sidewalk, curb
and gutter within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice.
B. Installation By City; Lien: If noncompliance exists at the end of the thirty (30) days hereinabove mentioned, the city shall have the right to install said
sidewalk, curb and gutter and shall bill the owner or owners of said property the actual cost of said installation as set forth in Montana Code Annotated
subsection 7-14-4109(4). If said installation is not paid for in full within thirty (30) days of billing, the city shall have the right to place a lien upon the
property for which the installation was provided in an amount equal to the cost of the installation, plus filing fees, plus any interest allowable by law. The
city reserves the right to foreclose on said lien pursuant to Montana statute pertaining to the foreclosure of liens. (Ord. 719, 4-16-1997)
10-2-5: ADJUSTMENTS IN TIME SCHEDULE:
A. Adverse Weather Conditions: The city council may adjust the time schedule hereinabove set in order to accommodate adverse weather conditions.
B. Extension For Corner Lots: In addition, the owner or owners of corner lots who are required by this chapter to install sidewalk, curb and gutter may, at
their option, complete all sidewalk, curb and gutter within the timetable set forth herein, or request the city council to allow them an extension of time to
complete a portion of the installation, and the city council, in its sole discretion, may extend the time to complete such portion of the installation by up to
three hundred sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 719, 4-16-1997)
10-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from this chapter:
A. New construction and/or dwellings in areas zoned rural residential and/or in areas zoned industrial. (Ord. 799, 5-3-2010)
B. New construction of one-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. (Ord. 818, 12-15-2014)
C. Open decks (no walls or roofs).
D. Fences. (Ord. 799, 5-3-2010)
Chapter 3
HOUSE NUMBERS1
10-3-1: REQUIRED:
All houses and places of business having an entrance from any street or avenue of this city shall be numbered in front within convenient view, by the
owner or agent of the property, within thirty (30) days after notice to do so by the city finance officer or other officer authorized by the city council. (1975
Code § 15.20.010)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 95/242
10-3-2: SYSTEM DESIGNATED:
The initial point for numbering shall be Main Street and Second Avenue, and all even numbers shall be on the south side of the streets running east and
west, and upon the east side of the streets running north and south, and odd numbers shall be on the opposite sides of the streets. All streets south of
Main Street that run north and south shall be known by their names with the prefix/suffix "South" and all streets north of Main Street that run north and
south shall be known by their names with the prefix/suffix "North". All streets west of Second Avenue that run east and west shall be known by their names
with the prefix/suffix "West", and all streets east of Second Avenue that run east and west shall be known by their names with the prefix/suffix "East".
(1975 Code § 15.20.020; amd. 2008 Code)
10-3-3: OFFICIAL MAP:
To each block shall be assigned the numbers marked on the same on the map of the city now on file in the office of the city finance officer, entitled "map
showing the official house numbers of the city of Shelby". (1975 Code § 15.20.030)
10-3-4: SEPARATE NUMBERS FOR EACH RESIDENCE:
To each space of fifteen (15) linear feet on any street shall be assigned one house number, the same to have the prefix of the hundred assigned to the
block, as shown on the official map referred to in section 10-3-3 of this chapter. Each entrance used for a residence or place of business shall have a
separate number; when necessary, one-half (1/2) or one-fourth (1/4) numbers, as 2061/2, may be used. (1975 Code § 15.20.040)
10-3-5: NUMBER SPECIFICATIONS:
All numbers shall be not less than three inches (3") tall and shall be placed in a conspicuous place, where the same can be easily seen from the middle of
the street upon which they are located. The numbers shall be of metal, or painted or worked into stained glass, or otherwise placed upon a building so as
to be durable and conspicuous. (1975 Code § 15.20.050)
10-3-6: ORDER TO PLACE OR CHANGE NUMBERS:
Any owner or agent of any building who is ordered, in writing, by the city finance officer or any officer authorized by the city council to perform such duty, to
place a number on his building or to change any number which the building may have, shall do the same within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such
notice. (1975 Code § 15.20.060)
10-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 15.20.070; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
10-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall move, remove or relocate any building or structure within or into the city without first having obtained a moving permit from the city. (1975
Code § 15.24.010)
10-4-2: APPLICATION:
A. Form; Required Information: Every application for a permit to move, remove or relocate any building or structure in the city shall be made to the building
inspector, in writing, upon forms furnished by the municipality and shall set forth the following information:
1. Address of present location of the structure;
2. Address of new location;
3. Type of construction (frame, masonry, veneer, etc.);
4. Length, width and height of building or structure;
5. Specific route over which building or structure is to be moved;
6. Type of occupancy (dwelling, garage, office, etc.) for both old and new locations;
7. Proposed moving date and time of day. (Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 96/242
B. Additional Information: The city may require any additional information which it finds necessary to make a fair determination of whether the permit
should be issued. (1975 Code § 15.24.020)
10-4-3: PERMIT FEE1:
The city council shall establish by resolution a fee schedule pertaining to this chapter. (1975 Code § 15.24.030)
10-4-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE:
The following restrictions and conditions shall be observed before the issuance of a permit as required by this chapter:
A. Zoning And Building Requirements: No permit shall be issued to any person to move or relocate any building or structure upon another building or
structure site unless such use, building or proposed conversion thereof conforms to zoning and building requirements of the city.
B. Dangerous Or Unsafe Building Or Structure: No permit shall be issued to any person to move, remove or locate any building or structure which is so
constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous or unsafe, or which is infested with pests or is unsanitary or which, if it is a dwelling for habitation,
is unfit for human habitation, or which is so dilapidated, defective or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed
site would create a safety or health hazard or would cause substantial damage or material detriment to the property in the immediate vicinity of the
proposed site.
C. Written Consents: Every such application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the chiefs of the fire and law enforcement departments, who
shall be notified of the route to be taken and when the removal or relocation shall be made. (1975 Code § 15.24.040)
D. Route: The city superintendent shall specify in the permit the route to be taken in the moving of a building, such means to be used to prevent the street
pavement from being subjected to abnormal stresses, and the limit of time which such building or structure shall be upon the streets, avenues or alleys.
(Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
E. Occupation While In Transit: No building or structure which is being moved upon or over any street, alley, avenue or property of the city shall be
occupied as living quarters while such building or structure is in transit.
F. Adequate Equipment: No permit, as required by this chapter, shall be issued unless the applicant shows that he has adequate machinery, appliances
and equipment to safely complete the proposed moving. (1975 Code § 15.24.040)
G. Building Codes: Any building moved to a location in the city of Shelby shall comply with the current adopted Montana building, mechanical, electrical,
energy, plumbing and related codes. If such building does not comply with the current Montana adopted codes the applicant must provide the building
inspector a plan demonstrating how the building will be brought up to current codes before a building permit is issued. (Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
10-4-5: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under this chapter shall:
A. Use Of Designated Streets: Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit; (1975 Code § 15.24.050)
B. Change In Moving Date And Hours: Notify the building inspector, in writing, of a desired change in the moving date and hours as proposed in the
application;
C. Damage To City Property: Notify the city superintendent, in writing, of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within twenty four (24)
hours after the damage or injury has occurred; (Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
D. Warning Lights; Barricades: Cause warning lights to be displayed during the hours of darkness on every side of the building, while standing on a street,
in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to
protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the moving or removal of the building;
E. Removal From City Streets: Remove the building from the city streets after four (4) days of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the city;
F. Removal Of Rubbish And Materials; Fill Excavations: Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building
site, if in the city, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition;
G. Utilities: Properly disconnect all utilities, plug the sanitary sewer with a concrete plug, and have the proper city officials disconnect the water service.
(1975 Code § 15.24.050)
10-4-6: REVOCATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 97/242
The building inspector of the city or the law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit granted under the terms of this chapter,
if it becomes known to him that the permittee is, in any manner, failing to comply with the terms of the permit or this chapter, or, when in the opinion of the
official, public convenience and safety requires such revocation. (1975 Code § 15.24.060)
Chapter 5
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
10-5-1: DEFINITION:
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings":
A. Plumb Line: Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle one-third (1/3) of its base;
B. Damage Or Deterioration Of Supporting Members: Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty three percent (33%) or more of damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls
or covering;
C. Improperly Distributed Loads: Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floor or roof or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
D. Damage By Fire, Wind Or Other Causes: Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life,
safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city;
E. Dilapidated, Decayed, Unsafe, Or Unsanitary: Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to
provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury
to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein;
F. Inadequate Light, Air And Sanitation Facilities: Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety
or general welfare of human beings who may live therein; (1975 Code § 15.28.010)
G. Inadequate Egress: Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes
or other means of escape; (1975 Code § 15.28.010; amd. 2008 Code)
H. Attached Parts That May Fall: Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property;
I. Dangerous: Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of this city;
J. In Violation Of Building Code: Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building code of the city, or any provision of the fire prevention
code, or other ordinances of this city. (1975 Code § 15.28.010)
10-5-2: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
A. Repaired: If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired.
B. Vacated: If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall
be ordered to be vacated.
C. Demolished: In any case where a dangerous building is fifty percent (50%) damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it
shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any ordinance of this
city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. (1975 Code § 15.28.020)
10-5-3: NUISANCES:
All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 10-5-1 of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished
as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. (1975 Code § 15.28.030)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 98/242
10-5-4: DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector shall:
A. Inspect Complaints: Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure
is or may be existing in violation of this chapter;
B. Inspect Probable Violations: Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the fire or law enforcement agencies of the
city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this chapter;
C. Notify Owner: Notifying, in writing, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building or any building
found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in section 10-5-1 of this chapter, that:
1. The owner must vacate, repair or demolish the building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this chapter,
2. The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession,
3. The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in the building may at his own risk repair, vacate, or demolish the building or have such
work or act done; provided, that any person notified under this section to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time
not exceeding thirty (30) days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for herein;
D. Contents Of Notice: Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection C of this section, a description of the building, or structure deemed unsafe, a
statement of particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to
comply with the terms of this chapter within such length of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, as is reasonable.
E. Report Noncompliance: Report to the city council any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections C and D of this section.
F. Post Notice: Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows:
This building has been found to be dangerous building by the building inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated,
or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other
persons having an interest in said building. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with.
(1975 Code § 15.28.040)
10-5-5: DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall:
A. Notice To Show Cause: Upon receipt of a report of the building inspector as hereinabove provided for, give written notice to the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building to appear before the city council on the date specified in the notice to
show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the
statement of particulars set forth in the building inspector's notice provided for in subsection 10-5-4C of this chapter;
B. Hearing: Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building inspector or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an
interest in the building shall offer relative to the dangerous building;
C. Determination Of Fact: Make a determination of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection B of this section as to whether or not the building
in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 10-5-1 of this chapter;
D. Issue Order: Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection C of this section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee,
lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the building to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within
the terms of this chapter and provided that any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing the
dangerous building; or any person not the owner of the dangerous building but having an interest in the building may demolish the dangerous building
at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which the dangerous building stands by the city as provided in subsection E of
this section;
E. Failure To Comply; Lien: If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection D of this section within ten
(10) days, the city council shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards
hereinbefore provided for in section 10-5-2 of this chapter, and shall, with the assistance of the city attorney, cause the costs of such repairs, vacation
or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building exists as a lien upon the property or cause such costs to be added to the taxes upon
the property as an assessment, or be recovered in a suit at law against the owner; provided that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any
delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare the people of the city, the city council shall notify the city
attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all the necessary repairs or demolish the building;
F. Report Names To City Attorney: Report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with the orders provided for in this chapter. (1975
Code § 15.28.050)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 99/242
10-5-6: DISREGARDING NOTICES OR ORDERS; PENALTY:
A. Owner: The owner of any dangerous building who fails to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish the building given by any person
authorized by this chapter to give such notice or order is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Occupant Or Lessee: The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building in
accordance with any notice given as provided for in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 15.28.060; amd. 2008 Code)
10-5-7: DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY:
The city attorney shall:
A. Prosecute Violations: Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices and orders provided for in this chapter;
B. Appear At Hearings: Appear at all hearings before the city council in regard to dangerous buildings;
C. Bring Suit To Collect: Bring suit to collect all liens, assessments or costs incurred by the city in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished
dangerous buildings;
D. Take Other Legal Action: Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (1975 Code § 15.28.070)
10-5-8: EMERGENCY CASES:
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a "dangerous building" as defined herein is
immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the city council and the city council shall cause the
immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The cost of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building
shall be collected in the same manner as provided above. (1975 Code § 15.28.080)
10-5-9: OWNER ABSENT FROM CITY:
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein shall
be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in the building to the last known address of
each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be
deemed adequate service. (1975 Code § 15.28.090)
10-5-10: LIABILITY:
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings therein. (1975 Code § 15.28.100)
10-5-11: DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The employees of the fire department shall make a report, in writing, to the city council of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to
be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter. (1975 Code § 15.28.110)
10-5-12: DUTIES OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY:
All employees of the law enforcement agency shall make a report, in writing, to the city council of any buildings or structures which are, may be, or are
suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter. (1975 Code § 15.28.120)
Title 11
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM1
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 100/242
11-1-1: MANAGEMENT:
The governing body of the city shall have the control and management of the water system and supply of the city and of everything pertaining thereto and
shall do all things that are necessary for the prudent and efficient operation and maintenance of the same. (1975 Code § 13.04.010)
11-1-2: EMPLOYEES:
A. Employees: There shall be employed in connection with the operation and maintenance of the system a water registrar, water superintendent and such
other employees as may be necessary for the proper and efficient operation and maintenance of the water system and supply.
B. Terms And Conditions Of Employment: Each of the employees shall be employed by the governing body of the city for such time, at such salary or
wages and upon such terms and conditions generally as the governing body may determine and agree upon.
C. Entire Time And Attention To Office: Such employees shall not be interested directly or indirectly in any job, contract or any piece of work, but they shall
give their entire time and attention to the duties of their offices.
D. Bonds: They shall each give such bonds as may be prescribed by the governing body for the faithful performance of their duties. (1975 Code
§ 13.04.020)
11-1-3: WATER SUPERINTENDENT, DUTIES:
The water superintendent shall:
A. Have supervision of all contracts and see that they are faithfully executed. The water superintendent shall recommend to the governing body the
ordering of all water mains, their location and size, the location of all valves, special castings and hydrants. He shall have charge of the erection or
changing of all buildings, engines, pumps, fixtures, boilers, filters, galleries, basins, tunnels, reservoirs and grounds.
B. Keep a correct record of all mains laid, special castings, valves and hydrants located in the lines of the waterworks, the record to be kept in a suitably
bound book, and upon the termination of his office it shall be his duty to surrender the same to the city finance officer.
C. Keep a record of all taps, services and their size and location.
D. Have general supervision of the mains, gates, hydrants, taps, reservoirs, pumps, buildings and grounds.
E. Subject to the guidance of the governing body, have the immediate charge and supervision of the work of the reservoir caretakers and of any pump
men who may be employed, and laborers and employees in and about the repair and construction and operation of the waterworks.
F. Take charge of the men employed on the works, other than the office force, and of all work, and see that the same is done in a workmanlike manner and
in accordance with the instructions of the governing body.
G. Have charge of all vehicles used in the operation of the water distribution system, and see that the pipes, valves, hydrants and other materials are
accounted for and stored, and shall file with the city finance officer an inventory on the first Monday in May of each year of all personal property
belonging to the water department.
H. Be held responsible for all tools and material and shall keep a daily record of the receipt of tools and materials, also the time of the men under him, and
shall issue certified time checks for all labor performed showing when and for what purpose the class of work was performed, and shall report to the
governing body at the first meeting of each month, giving a detailed statement of the cost of all labor performed and the material purchased for the
preceding month.
I. See that all gates and hydrants are restored to their proper condition after use by the fire department, and report to the governing body immediately all
breaks, defective hydrants and taps, and repair the same under their direction and report the same to the governing body each month.
J. Make all taps for service and examine the service pipes and see that they are properly laid and stopcocks placed in proper position, and perform such
other duties as he may be directed to do.
K. Report the location and at least two (2) measurements taken from two (2) separate permanent points for each tap and stop box made in the water
mains and service pipes, said report to be made to the water registrar of the waterworks not later than the day following the making of every such tap.
He shall not remove or change the location of any fire hydrant, valve, water pipe, tap, stop box or any other permanent improvement without first
having an order therefor from the governing body. He shall report all changes made on orders made not later than the succeeding day from that on
which the work was done, and shall perform such other duties as the governing body designates.
L. Have charge of inspecting the premises entered by service pipes and of examining into the condition of all meters and other water fixtures; and shall be
vigilant to detect and warn against abuses whether from waste or from other improper use of water, and report at once all infringements of the rules
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 101/242
and regulations. (1975 Code § 13.04.030)
11-1-4: WATER REGISTRAR, DUTIES:
The city finance officer shall act as the water registrar. The water registrar shall: (1975 Code § 13.04.040; amd. 2008 Code)
A. Be the financial receiving clerk of the waterworks.
B. Keep a complete set of books, which shall at all times show the distribution of accounts of the water department. The books shall be open to inspection
at all times by the public or any officer of the city during the hours the office is open for business.
C. Have the care and safekeeping of all books and papers belonging to the water department, except those pertaining to the water superintendent.
D. Keep a correct account of all receipts and make out all bills for water rents or materials furnished to consumers, collect the same and deposit the money
so collected with the city finance officer daily, to the credit of the water system fund of the city and in accordance with the laws of the city.
E. Issue all permits for tapping mains. When tappings are made leading off on streets where there are no mains, such applications shall be offered to the
governing body for their approval.
F. Make monthly reports to the governing body showing all receipts, deposits and balances for the current month and shall certify to their correctness and
submit the same at the governing body's first regular meeting in the month.
G. Give such bonds as may be prescribed by the governing body for the faithful performance of his duties. (1975 Code § 13.04.040)
11-1-5: APPLICATION FOR USE:
A. Application: Application for the use of water must be made at the office of the water registrar on a printed form furnished for that purpose. Service will be
furnished to any consumer who fully and truly sets forth all the purposes for which water may be required and who agrees to and conforms with all
rules and regulations governing the service; provided the purposes set forth comply with all the governing body's rules and that the system of mains
and pipes extends to the point where service is desired, and is adequate to supply the service applied for.
B. Use Restricted: No person supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to use it for any other purpose than those stated in the application, or
to supply in any way other persons or families.
C. Signature Required: An application for the introduction of water service to any premises must be signed by the owner of the premises and must be
made on the regular form furnished by the governing body for that purpose.
D. Responsibility For Costs And Expenses: When such an application has been granted, the governing body, at the applicant's expense, will tap the main
and furnish corporation cock, clamp, when necessary, and any other material used or labor furnished in connection with the tapping of the main, said
items included in the tapping fee. All expense of laying and maintaining the service pipes from the mains to the consumer's premises must be borne by
the consumer. The service pipe must be laid below street grade and on the consumer's premises, at a standard depth designated by the governing
body, to prevent freezing. A curb cock of approved pattern with a cast iron curb box must be installed by the consumer at a point designated by the
governing body.
E. Service Pipes; Curb Stop: Service pipes are to be laid below expected frost line. The curb stop must be set on or near the property line. The curb stop
shall be quarter-turn Minneapolis design with a two (2) piece curb box and sidewalk top, the lower section to screw onto the curb stop. Service pipes
shall be type K copper pipe from the main to the curb stop and said pipe shall be possessed of flared couplings. (1975 Code § 13.04.050)
11-1-6: RULES GOVERNING DISTRIBUTION AND SUPPLY:
The rules and regulations in relation to water shall be as follows:
Rule 1: All applications for the use of water must be made at the office of the water registrar on a printed form furnished for that purpose. Every such
application for the introduction of water service to any premises must be signed by the owner of the premises and must be made on the regular form
furnished by the governing body for that purpose.
Rule 2: Service will be furnished to any consumer who fully and truly sets forth all the purposes for which water may be required and who agrees to and
conforms with all rules and regulations governing the service; provided the purposes set forth comply with all the governing body's rules, and that the
system of mains and pipes extends to the point where service is desired and is adequate to supply the service applied for.
Rule 3: When such application has been granted, the governing body, at the applicant's expense, will tap the main and furnish corporation cock, clamp,
when necessary, and any other material used or labor furnished in connection with the tapping of the main, said items included in the tapping fee.
Rule 4: All expense of laying and maintaining the service pipes from the mains to the consumer's premises must be borne by the consumer.
Rule 5: The service pipe must be laid below street grade and on the consumer's premises, at a standard depth designated by the governing body, to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 102/242
prevent freezing.
Rule 6: Within the property line, a stopcock, protected from frost, must, in all cases, be placed. The water registrar shall refuse to turn on the water until
provisions of this rule are complied with.
Rule 7: A curb cock of approved pattern with a cast iron curb box must be installed by the consumer at a point designated by the governing body.
Rule 8: No persons supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to use it for any purpose other than those stated in the application, or to supply
in any way other persons or families.
Rule 9: Should the applicant desire an additional service or fixtures, or to apply the water for a purpose not stated in the original application, a new
application must be made and a permit obtained from the water registrar.
When additional fixtures are added and not reported, the same shall be chargeable at double rate for such times such fixtures are in use, in addition to a
fine of five dollars ($5.00).
Rule 10: At some convenient point inside of the building and so located that it cannot freeze, a stop and waste cock must be placed so that the water can
be readily shut off from the building and the water pipes drained to prevent freezing.
Rule 11: Waste of water is prohibited, and consumers must keep their fixtures and service lines in good order at their own expense and all waterways
closed when not in use. Leaky fixtures must be repaired at once without waiting for notice from the water superintendent, and if not repaired after
reasonable notice is given, the water will be shut off by the governing body.
Rule 12: Should it be desired to discontinue the use of water for any special purpose, whether for closets, bathrooms, street sprinklers, irrigation, hose
connections, or other fixtures, the faucet must be removed, the branch pipe of the service supply and the fixture plugged and notice given, in writing, at the
office of the water registrar before any reduction rates will be made.
Rule 13: No plumber or other person will be allowed to make connection with any conduit, pipe or other fixture connecting therewith or to connect pipes
when they have been disconnected, or to turn water off or on, on any premises without permission from the water superintendent.
Rule 14: If any person allows any faucet or pipe to run open, thus wasting water, a charge of two dollars ($2.00) shall be imposed for each offense which
shall be taxed against the person supplied through such service, and the water shall be turned off from the premises. In no case shall the water be turned
on again until the charge has been paid.
Rule 15: The city shall not be responsible for pipes and fixtures. All owners at their own expense must keep service pipes from city mains and all their
apparatus in good working order and properly protected from frost or other dangers. No claim shall be made against the city on account of the breaking of
any service pipes or apparatus, or for accidental failure in the supply of water. No reduction from the regular rates shall be made for any time that service
pipes or fixtures may be frozen. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
Rule 16: Service pipes shall be so arranged that the supply of each separate building, house, or premises may be controlled by a separate curb cock,
placed within or near the line of the street curb, under rules established by the governing body or civil authorities. This curb cock and box must be kept in
repair and easily accessible by the owner of the premises. In the event that said curb cock or box does not exist or becomes dysfunctional for any reason,
the landowner shall install, repair or replace said nonexistent or dysfunctional curb cock or box, at his expense, within thirty (30) days from receiving notice
from city hall of said nonexistent or dysfunctional curb cock or box. The time period for installation, repair or replacement of said nonexistent or
dysfunctional curb cock or box may be extended by the city council depending on the circumstances that exist at the time which include, but are not limited
to, weather conditions. In the event that the landowner does not install, repair or replace the nonexistent or dysfunctional curb cock or box within the
prescribed period, after receiving written notice to do so, the city shall hire a licensed plumber to make the required installation, repair or replacement, and
a tax lien shall be placed upon the property on which the installation, repair or replacement was performed. Said tax lien shall be recorded pursuant to
Montana code and shall remain thereon until paid in full, including any accrued interest and penalty that may be added on. The city, at its discretion, may
foreclose on said tax lien in accordance with applicable laws of the state of Montana. (Ord. 646, 5-21-1991)
Rule 17: Should the consumer desire to discontinue the use of water temporarily, or should the premises become vacant, the water superintendent, when
notified to do so, in writing, will shut off the water at the curb, and allowance will be made on the bill for such time as the water is not in use.
Rule 18: Notice will be given, whenever practicable, prior to shutting off water. The consumers are warned that owing to unavoidable accidents or
emergencies, their water supply may be shut off at any time.
All persons having boilers on their premises, depending on connected pressure with the water mains, are cautioned against collapse of their boilers. As
soon as water is turned off, the hot water faucet should be opened and be left open until the water is again turned on. A check valve must always be
placed between the boiler and the governing body's mains to prevent draining the boiler. The city will not be responsible for the safety of the boilers or the
premises of any water consumer. Consumers are cautioned to never leave the premises with any faucets open and water turned off.
Rule 19: None but competent and licensed plumbers shall be allowed to do any work in connection with the city service where water may be drawn from
the city mains, and all plumbers must make, in writing, an accurate return of the work done within twenty four (24) hours after completion, and before water
will be turned on, he must describe the position of the service pipes, ferrules, stopcocks and other fixtures outside of buildings, by reference to street and
lot corners, on blank forms to be furnished by the water registrar. All work and material shall meet regulations as set forth in the Montana state plumbing
code chapter 10.
Rule 20: Plumbers failing to perform their work according to the established rules and regulations, or executing it unskillfully, or to the damage of the city
water supply and distribution system, may be debarred from making connection with the city mains by a majority vote of the governing body.
Rule 21: The governing body's agents or other authorized persons shall have access at reasonable hours to any premises where water is used for the
purpose of making inspection or investigation.
Rule 22: The water rates shall be charged against the property on which it is furnished and against the owner thereof, and if, for any cause, any sums
owing therefor become delinquent, the water shall be shut off from the property and in no case turned on again until all such delinquencies have been paid
in full. No change in ownership shall affect the application of this rule. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
Rule 23: All accounts for water shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property and not in the name of any tenant, and the owner only, or his legally
authorized agent, shall be held responsible for the bill. (1975 Code § 13.04.060; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 103/242
Rule 24: For violation of any of these rules or for nonpayment of water rent, for either domestic, sprinkling or other purposes, the governing body has the
right to turn off the water without further notice. After it has been turned off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment or violation of rules, the same
shall not be turned on again until back rents are paid, together with the actual cost incurred thereby, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00). If any water
account is voluntarily turned off, and then turned on again, a fee shall be charged in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00). In the event the city installs and/or
turns on a fire hydrant meter, a fee shall be charged in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 700, 8-15-1994)
Rule 25: Should the occupant of the premises turn on the water, or cause it to be turned on after it has been shut off at the curb cock, it will be turned off at
the main and a charge will be made for the expense of turning it off and on, said charge to be relative to the actual cost to the city for turning off said water.
Rule 26: The city reserves the right in case of shortage of water, or for any other cause, to make any other order forbidding or suspending the use of water
for irrigation or sprinkling, and the city may, in its discretion, at any time make such orders by giving notice to the official newspaper. Any person violating
such order shall be subject to a charge against the person and premises supplied, and the water shall be turned off therefor. In no case shall the water be
turned on until such charge has been paid.
Rule 27: No person shall use any water for irrigation or sprinkling during the process of any fire in the city, and all irrigation and sprinkling shall be
immediately stopped when an alarm of fire is sounded in any part of the city and shall not be begun again until the fire has been extinguished. For any
violation of this rule, a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each offense shall be imposed and taxed against the premises and the person supplied, and the
water shall be turned off therefor. In no case shall the water be turned onto the same premises until such penalty has been paid.
Rule 28: Any temporary failure on the part of the governing body to supply service by reason of accident or otherwise shall not render the governing body
liable beyond a pro rata abatement of service charges during such interruption. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
Rule 29: The inside diameter of hose used for sprinkling purposes must not be more than three-fourths inch (3/4") and the inside diameter of the orifice to
the nozzle of the same must not be more than one-fourth inch (1/4"). The use of a hose without a nozzle is prohibited. Any person violating this rule shall
be subject to a fine, and the water shall be shut off and in no case turned on until the fine has been paid. (1975 Code § 13.04.060; amd. 2008 Code)
Rule 30: The following acts are prohibited:
A. Use For Purpose Not In Permit: To use the city water or permit it to be used for any other purpose than that for which the party pays water rates;
B. Leaky Pipes Or Fixtures: To permit water pipes or fixtures to remain in a leaky condition;
C. Allowing Fixtures To Run: To allow water fixtures to be run when not in use for the purpose intended;
D. Fire Hydrants: To open, close, turn on or interfere with, or to attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop valve or stopcock belonging to the
governing body;
E. Disturb Or Damage Property Of Department: To disturb or damage any pipe, machinery, tools or other property of the water department;
F. Throw Matter In Reservoirs: To throw any deleterious matter into any of the reservoirs;
G. Deface Or Injure Department Improvements: To deface or injure any buildings or other improvements of the water department;
H. Place Foreign Things On Grounds Of Department: To place any foreign thing upon the grounds of the water department or such portion of the
grounds and streets as may be under its control;
I. Disturb Or Injure Vegetation Of Department: To disturb or injure any lawn, grass, plot, flowers, vines, bushes or trees belonging to the water
department.
Rule 31: Meter rates will apply to all water services provided by the city, except where impractical or impossible.
Rule 32: All meters shall be and remain the property of the city, and may be removed whenever the water superintendent may so elect, subject to the
approval of the governing body. In the event of a meter getting out of order and failing to register, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily
consumption as shown by the meter during the last three (3) months that the same was in good order.
Rule 33: A stop and waste valve must be installed on intake sides of meters.
Rule 34: In all cases where a meter is installed, the consumer must furnish proper protection from frost or other damage. The meter must be located where
it is easily accessible for reading purposes and repairs. The consumer will be charged for cost of repair and labor for replacing any meter that has been
frozen or damaged. Where necessary for protection, a standard form of meter box shall be placed by the governing body. The actual cost of the same
shall be paid by the consumer. After such receptacle is placed, the governing body will furnish and connect the meter, and maintain the same in good
condition. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
Rule 35: The city reserves the right to set meters and charge the cost of installation to the consumer and charge meter rates whenever there is any doubt
as to the quantity of the water used or wasted; parties accepting meter rates in preference to established rates will pay the cost of installing the same.
(1975 Code § 13.04.060; amd. 2008 Code)
Rule 36: When a meter is installed at the request of a consumer, its installation is to be permanent unless the consumer elects to have the same removed
and pays all expenses incident to the installation and removal of the same, or discontinues service entirely. Service on a meter for a shorter period than six
(6) months shall be considered temporary and in such cases the consumer will be required to reimburse the governing body for the actual cost of the labor
and connection with the installation and removal of the meter. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 104/242
Rule 37: When meters are is use for determining the amount of water used by consumers, the water bill shall be payable on or before the fifth day of every
month, and if not paid by the end of said month, said consumer shall be subject to the penalties provided in previous sections of this chapter. It is further
provided that if said water bill is not paid by the end of said month, then said water bill becomes delinquent, and in order for said water user to retain use of
municipal water, said water user must pay the total water bill, which includes all delinquent charges as well as the current water bill. (Ord. 634, 2-21-1989)
Rule 38: One meter only will be supplied for a single service, and in case a consumer desires one or more secondary meters for various tenants in a single
building, the consumer will be required to pay two dollars ($2.00) a month, for the installation and maintenance, including the monthly reading of such
secondary meters. The governing body will not make collections for any secondary meters, and all water rents of any single building must be paid by one
consumer when supplied by meter measurement from one service. The governing body, however, will enclose the reading of secondary meters with the
bill for the whole building.
Rule 39: The governing body may replace any meter at such time as it may see fit and shall be the judge of the size and make of any meter installed. In
the case of a dispute as to the accuracy of a meter, the consumer, upon depositing the estimated cost of making a test, may demand that the meter be
removed and tested as to accuracy in his presence. In case the meter is found to be registering correctly or in favor of the consumer, the cost of such
testing and replacing of the meter shall be borne by the consumer.
In case the meter is found to be recording incorrectly and against the consumer, the amount deposited by the consumer will be refunded and a reasonable
adjustment made for overcharges for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days previous to the demand of the consumer for a test to be made.
Rule 40: Water consumers are not permitted to interfere in any way with the meter after it is set in place. In case the meter seal is broken or the working
parts of the meter have been tampered with or the meter damaged, the governing body may render a bill for the current month, based on an average of
the last three (3) months, together with a full cost of such damage as has been done to the meter, and may refuse to furnish water until the account is paid
in full.
Rule 41: In no case will the governing body furnish water from one meter to two (2) or more houses, whether the same are owned by one person or not.
Rule 42: No person other than an authorized employee of the water department shall make any tap or connection with any main or distributing pipe of the
city.
Rule 43: All water service lines installed for consumers of the city water system must be placed at a minimum depth of six feet (6') from the surface of the
ground.
Rule 44: The right is reserved by the city to alter, amend or add to these rules and regulations from time to time as, in the judgment of the city, it shall be
expedient.
Rule 45: It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency, city officers, and employees to give vigilant aid to the water department in the enforcement of
its rules and regulations; and, to this end, they shall report all violations therefor which come to their knowledge to the water registrar or the water
superintendent. (1975 Code § 13.04.060)
11-1-7: TAPPING FEES:
A. Application: Any person desiring to make connection to the water mains and/or sewer lines must make application, in writing, and pay for the cost of
tapping in advance.
B. Corporation Stops And Tapping Bands: The city shall furnish all necessary corporation stops and tapping bands.
C. Tapping Fees2: Tapping fees shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.
D. Supervision By City: The city will supervise the tapping into municipal water and/or sewer lines.
E. Charges Additional: The costs hereinabove mentioned are additional to the charges specified in subsections 1-12-11B, C and D of this code, if
applicable. (Ord. 685, 8-3-1992; amd. 2008 Code)
11-1-8: APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION OF WATER MAIN:
A. Application: Any individual and/or business entity desiring to extend a water main to and/or through an area not now served by a city water main may
accomplish the same by making an application at the office of the water registrar on a printed form furnished for that purpose. Said application shall be
subject to review and approval by the city council. Additionally, said applicant shall comply with all other federal, state and local statutes, rules and
regulations pertaining to the extension of water mains.
B. Costs: All costs for extensions of the water main and/or mains must be borne by the applicant and/or owners of the property in the area that receives a
benefit from said water main extension. In the event the city extends the water main at the request of the applicant, then and in that event, payment for
said work done by the city may be made in cash prior to extension of the water main and/or mains and/or by special improvement district bonds.
C. Easements: It shall be the obligation of the applicant to obtain all easements, if any are necessary, in order to extend the water main or mains. (1975
Code § 13.04.080)
11-1-9: CONSTRUCTION; RECORDS:
A. Supervision: The construction of proposed mains and services shall be under the supervision and direction of the water superintendent.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 105/242
B. Costs Of Construction: The costs of such construction shall be the sole responsibility of the party or parties accomplishing the same.
C. Record: A record shall be kept, in a place provided by the governing body, of a map showing names, services and the length and size of mains or
pipes, together with supporting data and date of completion.
D. Ownership: The city shall own all mains of any extension and will maintain them. (1975 Code § 13.04.090)
11-1-10: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
A. Power To Furnish: The city council shall have power to furnish water from the city water supply system to any person or business located outside the
corporate limits of the city, at reasonable rates filed by the city council and approved by the public service commission if required by statute, provided
that delivery of water services by the city to or for the use of any person, factory or other industry located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be
made within, or at the boundary line of the corporate city limits, or from any existing water line of the city located outside of the corporate city limits,
except as hereinafter provided.
B. Power To Make Collections: The city council is empowered to make collections for furnishing water outside the corporate city limits in the same manner
as collections are made inside the corporate city limits.
C. Unlawful Use Of Water; Penalty: Any person or business residing outside of the corporate city limits who wilfully turns on the water after the same has
been shut off by or under the direction of the city for nonpayment of water charges, or who unlawfully takes water from the city water system or
unlawfully makes use of the water system is guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Annexation May Be Required: Any person or business receiving water outside of the corporate city limits may be required by the city, as a condition to
initiate such service, to consent to annexation of the tract of property served by the city. The consent to annexation is limited to that tract or parcel or
portion of tract or parcel that is clearly and immediately and not potentially being serviced by the water service.
E. Authority To Require Annexation: The city council has the authority to require annexation as a condition of continuing water service3. (Ord. 757, 3-18-
2002)
11-1-11: IRRIGATION:
A. Power And Authority To Make Regulations: The city council is empowered and authorized to make regulations from time to time to direct and control the
use of water for irrigation and other useful purposes within the city. (1975 Code § 13.08.010)
B. Notice Of Regulation; Publication: The city council will make such changes as it deems necessary, and shall cause notice to be made by publication in a
local newspaper for one edition, setting out in detail the regulation directing the use of water within the city limits of the city. (1975 Code § 13.08.020;
amd. 2008 Code)
C. Violation; Penalty: The violation of any such regulation as promulgated and published by the city council is a misdemeanor and anyone found guilty
thereof shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 13.08.030; amd. 2008 Code)
11-1-12: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Permission Required: It is unlawful for any individual, partnership or corporate entity to tap into and to take water from any fire hydrant connected to the
municipal water system of the city without first obtaining permission from the city council.
B. Exclusion: Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to include the Shelby volunteer fire department under the auspices of this chapter.
C. Violation; Penalty: Any individual, partnership or corporate entity which violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1975 Code § 13.04.120; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 2
WATER RATES AND CHARGES
11-2-1: RATES AND CHARGES1:
The rates, charges and rents for water use in the city shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and set forth in section 1-12-
10 of this code. (2008 Code)
11-2-2: PROPERTY OWNER LIABILITY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 106/242
All water rates shall be charged against the property on which it is furnished and against the owner thereof, and if, for any cause, any sums owing therefor
become delinquent, the water shall be turned off and in no case turned on to the same property until such delinquencies shall have been paid in full. No
change of ownership or occupation shall affect the application of this section. (1975 Code § 13.16.010)
11-2-3: BILLING PROCEDURE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city shall bill the owner of the real property for water supplied to that premises unless the owner
requests, in writing, that such bill be sent to the renter. (Ord. 782, 7-2-2007)
11-2-4: LATE FEE:
A. Assessed: A late fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council will be assessed to any municipal account which carries a
delinquent balance for water, sewer, and/or garbage in an amount exceeding ten dollars ($10.00). If the aggregate sum of the delinquent balance of
water, sewer and/or garbage or any combination thereof, exceeds ten dollars ($10.00), then the late charge will also be assessed. (Ord. 639, 10-16-
1989)
B. Date Deemed Delinquent; Fee Added: When a citizen of the city receives his monthly bill for city utilities, which includes water, sewer and garbage, and
has not paid the same by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the twentieth of the month, or five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the following working day if the twentieth
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the new bill will include a late charge, provided that the amount exceeds ten dollars ($10.00), as hereinabove
computed. Once a late charge has been assessed, then said late charge becomes part of the unpaid principal balance and is included in the bill for
purposes of determining whether or not the unpaid balance exceeds ten dollars ($10.00) and is, therefore, subject to another late charge the following
month. (Ord. 751, 11-20-2000)
C. Maximum Late Charge: The maximum amount of late charge that can be added to an account after the municipal services have been suspended is
computed by multiplying the monthly late fee times the number of months said account remains unpaid, up to a maximum of six (6) months. (Ord. 680,
6-15-1992; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 3
SEWER REGULATIONS
11-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
HEARING BOARD: That board that may be appointed to conduct hearings.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAY: Permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 107/242
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN/STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (1975 Code § 13.20.010)
11-3-2: SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent shall have general supervision over the sewage treatment and sewage system of the city. His duties shall be as follows:
A. Maintain And Operate Plant: Adequately maintain and operate treatment plant;
B. Tests: Perform the needed physical, chemical and bacteriological tests as recommended by the state board of health;
C. Records Of Operation: Maintain records of treatment plant operation;
D. Record Of Connections; Sectional Map: Keep an accurate and complete record of connections made to the sewer, and keep posted to date a sectional
map of wye branches furnished him for this purpose;
E. Maintenance: Keep the public sewers and appurtenances clean and in good working order;
F. Applications: Approve applications for permits for sewer connections;
G. Violations: Report violations of rules and regulations set forth in this chapter to the city council. (1975 Code § 13.20.020)
11-3-3: INSPECTORS:
A. Permitted Access: The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Inquiry Into Processes: The superintendent or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any process including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers to waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
C. Safety Rules; Liability: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections A and B of this section, the superintendent
or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the city
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this
chapter.
D. Access To Easements: The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (1975 Code § 13.20.070)
11-3-4: PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS:
A. Prohibited: After September 22, 1977, any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other individual means of sewage disposal within the city shall be
discontinued from use and removed, filled or covered as the situation so demands to prevent a nuisance or hazard.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 108/242
B. Connection To Public Sewer:
1. Required: The owners of all occupied buildings containing toilets and situated within the city boundaries are required, at their expense, to connect
their building sewer with the public sewer.
2. Exception: Exception to the above provision is when the building to be served is over three hundred feet (300') from the public sewer and a nuisance
is not being created. At such a time that the public sewer is extended to within three hundred feet (300') of the building, it shall then be connected.
(1975 Code § 13.20.030)
11-3-5: PERMIT REQUIRED1:
A. Required; Exhibition: It is unlawful for any plumber, property owner, agent, or other person or corporation, to begin the work of laying, repairing, altering
or of connecting with the public sewer, any drain within the limits of the city, without first having obtained a written permit to do so from the
superintendent, which permit must be on the ground the whole time the work is under progress and shall be exhibited to any public official of the city
upon demand.
B. Applications: All applications for permits must be made in writing and signed by the owner of the property to be drained, or his authorized agent, and
must be accompanied by a plan showing the whole course of the drain which it is desired to construct, together with the size of the same and the size
and location of any and all branches to be connected therewith; the plan or a copy thereof, to be left with the application in the city hall. Application and
permit blanks are to be furnished by the city.
C. Fee: The city shall have the authority to levy and collect, prior to the issuance of the aforementioned permit, a reasonable inspection fee. (1975 Code
§ 13.20.130)
11-3-6: GRADE, PIPE AND INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Minimum Size: The minimum size sewer from building to public sewer shall be four inches (4"), the minimum grade of this sewer shall be one-eighth
inch (1/8") per foot. The sewer shall be cast iron sewer pipe, vitrified clay sewer pipe, PVC sewer pipe or asbestos/cement sewer pipe. Joints shall be
watertight and rot proof.
B. Trench: When the character of the material will permit, the bottom of the trench shall be shaped to conform to the bottom of the sewer. Where the
bottom of the trench cannot be shaped or rocks and boulder are present, the contractor shall provide a minimum of three inches (3") of bedding
material below the service pipe and a minimum of six inches (6") of bedding material on the sides and the top of the service pipe. The bedding material
shall be crushed stone or pea gravel with not less than ninety five percent (95%) passing the three-fourths inch (3/4") screen and not less than ninety
five percent (95%) retained on the number four (4) screen. The bedding material is to be compacted by slicing with a shovel. Special care shall be
taken to bed the pipe firmly to exact line and grade. All pipe when joined in the trench shall form a true and uniform line of sewer. (1975 Code
§ 13.20.080)
11-3-7: INSPECTION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. No service pipe building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by the superintendent. The connection to the public
sewer shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent. (1975 Code § 13.20.090)
11-3-8: BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prohibited Connections: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
B. Piping: The piping in the building or home and to a point four feet (4') outside the building or home is to conform to the requirements of the plumbing
code of the state of Montana.
C. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city. The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
superintendent.
D. Costs And Expenses; Indemnification: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
E. Separate And Independent Building Sewer Required; Exception: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building,
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, and/or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. All easements and/or rights of way are to be secured by the owner. (1975 Code § 13.20.040)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 109/242
11-3-9: SEWER TAP REQUIREMENTS:
Connection to the public sewer will be made at the wyes provided in the public sewer. If wyes have not been provided near the point of desired connection,
then an approved saddle shall be installed for the connection. Where a saddle is used, a neat hole shall be first cut in the pipe so that the sewage can
pass into the public sewer without obstruction and the saddle can adequately cover the hole. The entry into the public sewer shall be made in a
downstream direction at an angle of about forty five degrees (45°). (1975 Code § 13.20.090)
11-3-10: EXTENSIONS AND ADDITIONS:
A. Running In A Parallel Line: Any person desiring to extend the public sewer, and who must run a line parallel to, and within the boundary of any street,
avenue or alley to accomplish the same, and upon making proper application therefor, and approval of the same, shall be required to install said public
sewer line extension to all federal, state and local rules, regulations and specifications.
B. Extending Public Sewer: Any person desirous of extending a public sewer must make application to the superintendent, and any application must be
accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a professional engineer and be approved by all federal, state and local agencies or regulatory
bodies.
C. Extension Becomes Property Of City: Any extension of the public sewer system shall become the property of the city and be dedicated for use as a
public sewer. Upon completion of the extension and upon final inspection and approval by the superintendent, the city will accept said extension and
thereafter perform normal maintenance and repairs thereto.
D. Larger Sewer Line Extension Required By City: Should the city require a larger public sewer line extension than would normally be necessary to serve
the property for which said application is made, the city will compensate the applicant for the difference in cost of larger pipe as opposed to
requirements of applicant.
E. Manholes: All manholes necessary in relation to a public sewer line extension shall be placed not to exceed three hundred fifty feet (350') apart, and/or
wherever there is a change of flow direction, grade, and/or pipe size. Said required manholes shall be cast concrete not less than four feet (4') in
diameter at the bottom, and no less than two feet (2') in diameter at the top opening.
F. Cleanout Risers: Cleanout risers in relation to this section brought to the surface of streets, avenues or alleys may be allowed where the public sewer
line extension is not more than three hundred feet (300') and/or does not meet any of the requirements in subsection E of this section.
G. Costs: All costs for extensions of the public sewer must be borne by the applicant and/or owners of property in the area that receives benefit from said
public sewer line extension. In the event the city extends the line at the request of the applicant, then and in that event, payment for said work done by
the city may be made in cash prior to construction and/or by special improvement district bonds. (1975 Code § 13.20.140)
11-3-11: BACKFILLING:
After the pipes have been laid and properly joined, the space between them and the sides of the trench and for one foot (1') over the top of the pipe shall
be carefully filled with fine sand, gravel or earth which shall be thoroughly tamped, care being taken not to loosen the joints or to disturb the alignment of
the pipes. The backfill may be completed by either tamping in layers of twelve inches (12") in thickness, or thoroughly soaking with water the entire depth
of the trench, or both, as the inspector may direct, the object being to have the least possible settlement after the work is completed. Material not needed
for backfilling shall be considered the property of the contractor and he shall be responsible for its disposal. (1975 Code § 13.20.110)
11-3-12: EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent.
Backfilling of the sewer trench will in general require compaction under public streets. (1975 Code § 13.20.120)
11-3-13: USE REGULATIONS:
A. Unpolluted Drainage: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
B. Use Of Combined Sewers Or Storm Sewers: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable Or Explosive: Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
2. Toxic Or Poisonous: Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 110/242
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2
mg/l) as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;
3. pH: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half (5.5), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
4. Solid Or Viscous Substances: Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. Harmful Materials/Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Temperature: Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C);
2. Oil, Fat Or Grease: Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C);
3. Improperly Shredded Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric), or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent;
4. Pickling Wastes Or Plating Solutions: Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not;
5. Objectionable Substances: Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials;
6. Taste Or Odor Producing Substances: Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations
exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements
of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
7. Radioactive: Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
8. pH: Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and one-half (9.5);
9. Certain Materials: Materials which exert or cause:
a. Inert Suspended Solids: Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residue)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate),
b. Discoloration: Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions),
c. Unusual BOD: Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works,
d. Slugs: Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs as defined in section 11-3-1 of this chapter;
10. Substances Not Amenable To Treatment: Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. Authority To Reject, Require Pretreatment Or Control Quantity: If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and which, in the judgment of
the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section 11-3-4 of this chapter.
If, the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
F. Interceptors Required: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 111/242
G. Maintenance At Owner's Expense: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (1975 Code § 13.20.050)
11-3-14: SEWERAGE SERVICE:
A. Charges: A charge based upon an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the water purchases of each water user shall be levied against each
user within and/or without the municipality as a sewerage charge for operation and maintenance of city sewer system, and that the same shall be billed
monthly with the current water bill. (1975 Code § 13.12.010)
B. Service Outside City Limits: Users of the city sewerage system who are located without the city limits shall pay the same rates as if the users' property
were located within the city limits. In addition, users residing without the city limits desiring to obtain city sewerage service shall bear all cost and
expenses incurred when tapping into the city sewerage system. No user whose property is situated without the city limits shall obtain service from said
sewerage system until granted permission or authorization to do so from the governing body of the city. The furnishing of sewer service to individuals or
property situated without the city limits is expressly authorized by this chapter. (1975 Code § 13.12.020)
C. Purchase From City Dispenser Station: The sewerage charge as set out in subsection A of this section shall not be levied against such water users as
may purchase water from the city dispenser station for transportation by vehicle for use without the city limits. (1975 Code § 13.12.030)
11-3-15: DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(1975 Code § 13.20.060)
11-3-16: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Sections 11-3-2 through 11-3-4, 11-3-8, 11-3-13 and 11-3-15 of this chapter:
1. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of sections 11-3-2 through 11-3-4, 11-3-8, 11-3-13 and 11-3-15 of this chapter
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Failure To Comply: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount provided in subsection B of this section.
3. Liability For Expense, Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 11-3-2 through 11-3-4, 11-3-8, 11-3-13, and 11-3-15 of
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (1975 Code
§ 13.20.150)
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 11-3-5 through 11-3-7 and sections 11-3-9 through 11-3-12 of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues is considered a
separate offense. (1975 Code § 13.20.160; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 4
WASTEWATER SYSTEM1
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater system.
Insofar as practicable, the costs shall be distributed equitably to all users of the wastewater system. (1975 Code § 13.24.010)
11-4-2: TOTAL ANNUAL COST OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The city council, or its designated agent, shall determine the total annual cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system. The total annual
cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications,
power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. (1975 Code § 13.24.020)
11-4-3: NONRESIDENTIAL USER WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERCENTAGE:
A. Volume: The city council, or its designated agent, shall determine each user's average daily volume of wastewater which has been discharged to the
wastewater system which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharge to the wastewater system to determine each
user's volume contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 112/242
B. Biochemical Oxygen Demand: The city council, or its designated agent, shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five (5) day twenty
degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall then be divided by the
average daily poundage of all five (5) day twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand discharged to the wastewater system to
determine each user's biochemical oxygen demand contribution percentage.
C. Suspended Solids: The city council, or its designated agent, shall determine each user's average suspended solids poundage which has been
discharged to the wastewater system which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids discharged to the wastewater
system, to determine the user's suspended solids contribution percentage.
D. Calculation: Each user's volume contribution percentage, biochemical oxygen demand contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution
percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow of the total five (5) day
twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand and of the total suspended solids, respectively. (1975 Code § 13.24.030)
11-4-4: EACH USER'S WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
A. Annual Wastewater Service Charge: Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contributions as determined by section 11-4-3 of this chapter
shall be added together to determine such user's annual wastewater service charge.
B. Equitable Service Charge: Residential users may be considered to be one class of user and an equitable service charge may be determined for each
user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user.
C. Classification Of Industrial And Commercial Establishments As Residential User: The governing body may classify industrial and commercial
establishments as a residential user, provided that it is determined that such user will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences. (1975 Code § 13.24.040)
11-4-5: MONTHLY USER SERVICE CHARGE:
The monthly user's service charge shall be as set forth in the title 1, chapter 12 of this code. (2008 Code)
11-4-6: PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE; PENALTY:
A. Monthly Statement; Late Fee: The city council, or its designated agent, shall submit a monthly statement to the user for the user's monthly wastewater
service charge, and the city council may add a penalty if the payment is not received by the city by the twentieth day of the following month.
B. Failure To Pay; Discontinuance Of Service: Should any user fail to pay the user wastewater charge and penalty within three (3) months of the due date,
the city council may stop water and wastewater service to the property, and in such case, require advance payment to help defray labor cost for
terminating and resuming such services. (1975 Code § 13.24.060; amd. 2008 Code)
11-4-7: RATES DEEMED EQUITABLE; COMPLAINT:
A. Deemed Equitable: The rates, charges and rentals specified in this chapter shall be deemed prima facie fair, reasonable and equitable.
B. Application; Investigation: In any case where any contention is made that the rates are unfair, inequitable or unreasonable, the party objecting thereto
shall apply to the city finance officer and recorder, stating the facts and grounds of complaint, and the finance officer and recorder shall investigate and
report with recommendations to the city council.
C. Recommendation As To Higher Rates: The finance officer and recorder may also report to the city council any cases where the amount or character or
the sewage from any plant, building or premises is such that collection and disposal thereof is substantially more expensive than average sewage, and
give recommendation as to higher rates to be imposed for the collection and disposal of sewage.
D. Report To Council Of Findings: The finance officer and recorder shall consider each and all of such complaints and reports, and communicate their
findings in respect thereto to the city council within one month after the filing of such complaint.
E. Hearing; Adjustment Of Rates Or Charges: The city council shall have the right to order public hearings as to any such matter, and, if convinced that an
adjustment of sewage rates or charges for such plant, building or premises is necessary to provide equality with those charged to others, it shall so
provide by law amendatory hereto. (1975 Code § 13.24.070)
11-4-8: REVIEW OF SERVICE CHARGE:
A. Biannual Review: The city council, or its designated agent, shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance as well as each user's
wastewater contribution percentage on a biannual basis to assure equity of the service charge system established in this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 113/242
B. Notice To User: Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to the wastewater treatment services.
C. In Plant Modifications: If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater
contribution percentage, the user can present at a regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body such factual information and the city council shall
then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city council shall notify the user of its findings as soon as
possible. (1975 Code § 13.24.080)
11-4-9: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. Control Manhole Required: When required by the city council, or its designated agent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city council, or its designated agent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. Measurements, Tests And Analysis: All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis
subject to approval by the city council, or its designated agent.
C. Special Agreement: No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
council, or its designated agent, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city
council, or its designated agent, for treatment. (1975 Code § 13.24.090)
11-4-10: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
A. Power To Furnish: The city council shall have power to furnish sewer service from the city sewer system to any person or business located outside the
corporate limits of the city, at reasonable rates filed by the city council and approved by the public service commission if required by statute.
B. Costs And Expenses Of Tapping: In addition, users residing outside the corporate city limits desiring to obtain city sewerage service shall bear all cost
and expenses incurred when tapping into the city sewerage system.
C. Power To Make Collections: The city council is empowered to make collections for furnishing sewer service outside the corporate city limits in the same
manner as collections are made inside the corporate city limits.
D. Annexation May Be Required: Any person or business receiving sewer service outside of the corporate city limits may be required by the city as a
condition to initiate such service to consent to annexation of the tract of property served by the city. The consent to annexation is limited to that tract or
parcel or portion of tract or parcel that is clearly and immediately and not potentially being serviced by the sewer service.
E. Authority To Require Annexation: The city council has the authority to require annexation as a condition of continuing sewer service2. (Ord. 757, 3-18-
2002)
11-4-11: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city council, or its designated agent.
B. Classes Of Permits; Application For Permit: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2)
for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the city council, or its designated agent. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city council, or its designated agent.
C. Fees3: A permit and inspection fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city council, or its designated
agent, at the time the application is filed.
D. Costs And Expenses Of Installation And Connection; Indemnification: All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building
sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city council or its designated agent from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
E. Separate Sewers Required; Exception: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer, but the city council, or its designated agent, does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 114/242
F. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city
council, or its designated agent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
G. Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city council, or its designated agent. In the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF manual of practice 9 shall apply.
H. Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means
and discharged to the building sewer.
I. Surface Runoff Or Ground Water: No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such
connection is approved by the city council, or its designated agent, for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
J. Connection: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city council, or its designated agent, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and
the WPCF manual of practice 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city council, or its designated agent, before installation.
K. Notice To City: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city council, or its designated agent, when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city council, or its designated
agent.
L. Excavations:
1. Barricades And Lights: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard.
2. Restoration: Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the city council, or its designated agent. (1975 Code § 13.24.110)
11-4-12: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Prohibited Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city council, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste4.
B. Prohibited Discharges: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city council, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city
council, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
C. Privy, Privy Vault, Septic Tank Or Cesspool: Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
D. Connection Required: The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes,
situated within the city council and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the city council, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so,
provided the city council, or its designated agent, determines that a service line can reasonably be connected to the public sewer. (1975 Code
§ 13.24.110)
11-4-13: DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT:
No person(s) shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(1975 Code § 13.24.120)
11-4-14: INSPECTORS, POWERS AND AUTHORITY:
A. Right Of Entry: The city council and other duly authorized employees of the city council, or its designated agent, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Obtain Information; Confidential Information: The city council or other duly authorized employees of the city council, or its designated agent, are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 115/242
collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the
information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
C. Rules And Regulations; Indemnification: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the city
council, or duly authorized employees of the city council, or its designated agent, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city council, or its designated agent, and the city council shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city council employees, or its designated agent, and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 11-4-9A of this chapter.
D. Access To Easements: The city council or other duly authorized employees of the city council, or its designated agent, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city council holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (1975 Code § 13.24.130)
Chapter 5
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
11-5-1: FINDINGS AND AUTHORITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is:
1. To decrease drainage related damage to public and private property;
2. To preserve and lessen the burden on and costs of improving and enlarging the sanitary sewer system;
3. To facilitate making land in the city developable;
4. To minimize adverse impacts on property owners adjacent to developing and developed land from increased runoff;
5. To preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the waters;
6. To maintain and protect valuable groundwater resources;
7. To minimize adverse effects of alterations on groundwater quantities, locations and flow patterns;
8. To ensure the safety of public roads and rights of way;
9. To promote sound development policies and construction procedures to preserve the historic, natural or constructed watercourses; and
10. To minimize water quality degradation and control the sedimentation of rivers, streams, ponds, lakes and other water bodies.
B. Necessity: The city presently owns and operates a sanitary sewer system for the collection and disposal of sewerage and into which storm and other
surface waters are being discharged (the "sanitary sewer system"). The sanitary sewer system is frequently infiltrated by storm and ground water,
which has caused significant stresses on the sanitary sewer system. In addition, storm and ground water has caused damage to public infrastructure
and facilities and created difficulties for businesses and residences, including health hazards. Owing in part to strain placed on the capacity and
treatment capabilities of the sanitary sewer system by water events, subdivision and development of property in the city has halted. This council has
caused various studies to be conducted and, based thereon and on an investigation of facts and circumstances relating to the sanitary sewer system
(including developing state and federal policies concerning the collection and disposal of sewage and storm and surface waters), has determined that it
is necessary and desirable to establish rules and regulations relating to stormwater and drainage and construct improvements for the collection and
disposal of storm and surface waters separate and distinct from the sanitary sewer system.
C. Authority: The city is authorized by title 7, chapters 7 and 13, parts 42, 43, and 44, Montana Code Annotated, to construct, better, improve and extend a
stormwater system and issue revenue bonds to finance in whole or part the costs thereof. The city is further authorized and required by title 7, chapter
7, parts 42 and 43 and title 69, chapter 7, part 1, Montana Code Annotated, to establish just and equitable rates, fees and charges and rentals for the
services and facilities provided by a stormwater system so as to make a stormwater drainage system self-supporting. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-
2016)
11-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions of terms shall apply unless the context clearly indicates another meaning or unless elsewhere expressly stated for specific
application:
DETENTION/RETENTION BASINS: A normally dry area designed to capture and hold stormwater. The stormwater may be captured and released at a
uniform rate after the storm peak flow has passed (detention) or the stormwater may be held for evaporation or infiltration into the ground and not released
at all (retention).
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan prepared by any developer of property in the city whose development qualifies as specified herein. The drainage plan consists
of drainage calculations and mitigation of stormwater drainage. The plan includes contour lines as necessary and explicitly describes the stormwater
drainage system, including any required detention areas. The plan and calculations shall use current hydraulic hydrology practices and shall conform with
the stormwater drainage master plan.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 116/242
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Caustic, poisonous, flammable or other material that may be dangerous to the public safety and welfare. Hazardous
materials shall be defined by the United States environmental protection agency (U.S. EPA) and the Montana department of environmental quality
("Montana DEQ").
IMPERVIOUS AREA: The area of a parcel calculated in square feet by adding the areas of the building roofs, concrete, decks, asphalt, and other
impervious surfaces situated on the property.
INITIAL STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS: The existing stormwater drainage network and improvements that are currently hooked into the sanitary
sewer system and which will be ultimately segregated from the sanitary sewer system and incorporated into the new and expanded stormwater drainage
system upon completion of construction thereof.
MANMADE OR OPEN FLOW DRAINAGEWAY: An open channel designed to carry stormwater.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY: A recognizable drainage which has historically carried storm or runoff water. The drainageway may still be in its native state
or may be partially or totally encroached upon. The limits of the drainageway are considered to be the outermost area of flow for the design storm and/or
the prescribed easement for the drainageway.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE EXPENSES: The current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance and minor repair of the system,
excluding principal of and interest on bonds and depreciation, as calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and shall
include, without limitation, administrative expenses of the city relating solely to the system, premiums for insurance on the properties thereof, labor and the
cost of materials and supplies used for current operation and for maintenance, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current
expenses which are not recurrent regularly but may reasonably be expected to be incurred.
STORM DRAINAGE MASTER PLAN: The plan described by the May 2012 "Preliminary Engineering Report - Shelby Storm Water Facilities" prepared by
Kadrmas, Lee & Jackson, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The plans are on file in the office of the city clerk.
The city may adopt additional drainage plan updates or modifications by reference. Modifications of the plans may be initiated by the mayor and submitted
to the city council for approval. Approved, modified or updated plans shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The cost of installing stormwater facilities in
the city limits shall be charged in whole or in part against the appropriate property in the city limits.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE: An overland flow of water as a result of rain, snow, hail storms or rapid snowmelt or other surface water event.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE CHARGE: The fee described in section 11-5-9 of this chapter.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE MANAGER: The city superintendent or, if other than the city superintendent, a city employee designated by the mayor. The
stormwater drainage manager shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, capital improvements, and all other functions of the stormwater utility.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The infrastructure system which regulates and transmits storm and surface water through the city. The system
includes curbs and gutters, drop inlets, culverts, open flow channels, detention/retention basins, natural drainageways, storm drain pipes, and related
appurtenances. The stormwater drainage system will initially consist of the initial stormwater improvements, which will ultimately be integrated into the
newly constructed stormwater drainage system.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM FUND: The fund established in subsection 11-5-3A of this chapter, into which the stormwater fees and charges
shall be deposited.
SYSTEM: The stormwater and drainage system owned, operated, and maintained by the city consisting initially of the initial stormwater improvements and
to consist of a newly constructed and expanded stormwater and drainage system, into which the initial stormwater improvements will ultimately be
integrated, to address the matters described in subsection 11-5-1A of this chapter, as such system shall exist from time to time.
SYSTEM PERMIT AND PLAN FEES: The fee or fees to be established by the city council pursuant to a resolution in an amount sufficient to cover costs of
the review of the drainage plans and the issuance of permits. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-3: CREATION OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM; STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM FUND:
A. Stormwater Drainage System; Stormwater Drainage System Fund: The city hereby creates and establishes the system. The city intends to construct
the system as required to implement the purpose of this chapter. The city hereby creates a stormwater drainage system fund to be used as provided
herein and into which the stormwater fees and charges, including, but not limited to, the stormwater drainage charge and system permit and plan fees,
shall be deposited (the "stormwater drainage system fund"). The stormwater drainage system fund will consist of various funds or accounts as
determined by subsequent resolution or resolutions of the city.
B. Stormwater "Service Area": The city limits as may be adjusted from time to time shall constitute the storm drain system service area (the "storm drain
system service area"). The city reserves the right to plan for drainage improvements outside the storm drain system service area and may also
construct storm drainage improvements outside the storm drain system service area when needed as an integral part of the storm drain facilities.
C. Cooperation With The County: The city shall, in all ways and within the limits of its powers, solicit the board of county commissioners of Toole County,
Montana, to cooperate in providing drainage facilities in stormwater basins, or parts thereof, extending outside the city and in general to carry out the
drainage plan developed therein. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-4: DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS TO PROTECT PROPERTY:
Stormwater runoff currently does and upon completion of expansion of the new system may exceed the capacity of the system. Neither the adoption of this
chapter nor the imposition of the stormwater fees and charges imply that property in the city will be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage. The
establishment of the system does not purport to reduce the need or the necessity for property owners to obtain flood insurance and protect their property
from storm or surface water. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-5: DRAINAGE PLANS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 117/242
A. Drainage Plan At Time Of Application: All persons or entities applying for any of the following permits and/or approvals shall submit to the city a
drainage plan prepared by a professional engineer with their application and/or request:
1. Major subdivision plat approval;
2. Minor subdivision plat approval;
3. Zone change applications to accommodate multi-family, business or industrial uses;
4. Conditional use permits;
5. Building permits where the permit relates to fifteen thousand (15,000) or more square feet of development coverage within the property, or where
development is in a critical area as determined by the city engineer; and
6. Planned unit development (PUD).
B. Approval Required To Commence Work: Commencement of construction work under any of the above permits or applications shall not begin until such
time as final approval of the drainage plan is obtained in accordance with this chapter.
C. Contents Of A Drainage Plan: Drainage calculation plans shall be prepared in accordance with current hydraulics and hydrology design standards and
shall be consistent with the storm drainage master plan. The same plan submitted during one permit/approval process may be subsequently submitted
with further required applications. The plan shall be supplemented with such additional information as may be requested by the stormwater drainage
manager.
D. Exception For Drainage Plan: A drainage plan will not be required if the person or entity can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the stormwater drainage
manager that the proposed development will:
1. Neither seriously nor adversely impact the water quality conditions of any affected receiving bodies of water;
2. Not alter the surface discharge location, alter the drainage pattern on adjoining properties, alter drainage patterns, increase the discharge, or cause
any other adverse effects in the drainage area; and
3. Not alter the subsurface drainage patterns, flow rates and discharge points, or result in any significant adverse effects to property or residents.
E. Review And Approval Of The Drainage Plan: All storm drainage plans prepared in connection with any of the permits and/or approvals listed in
subsection A of this section shall be submitted for review by and approval of the stormwater drainage manager. At the time of approval of a drainage
plan and the payment of any applicable system permit and plan fees, a schedule for inspection of construction and facilities will be established by the
stormwater drainage manager. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-6: APPLICABILITY TO GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES:
All governmental entities shall be required to submit a drainage plan and comply with the terms of this chapter when developing and/or improving land
including, but not limited to, road construction and reconstruction and other improvements that can affect stormwater runoff within the city. (Ord. 827, 8-22-
2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACCEPTED FACILITIES:
All storm drain facilities constructed, installed or provided hereunder shall, but only following acceptance by the city, become the property of the city and
thereafter the city shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facilities, unless the city determines otherwise. The city shall maintain all
accepted public stormwater facilities located within city owned land, city rights of way and city easements. The city has the option to maintain other
accepted public stormwater facilities located within or adjacent to the city. Such public facilities include, but are not limited to, open drainageways and
piped drainageways constructed expressly for use by the general public, drainageways constructed expressly for use by the general public and as a part
of the city stormwater facilities, bridges, roadside drainage ditches and gutters, flood control facilities, including detention and retention basins, dikes,
overflow channels, pump stations, etc., that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the public. Such public stormwater facilities exclude
facilities not accepted by the city as part of its system or for maintenance. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-8: RULES APPLICABLE TO CARE AND USE OF SYSTEM; SYSTEM PERMIT AND PLAN FEES:
A. Hazardous Substances: It shall be unlawful to introduce hazardous substances into any drainage system, including the system. The originators of any
hazardous substance spill or introduction shall be held responsible therefor and shall pay all applicable cleanup costs, including the cost of equipment,
materials, staff time with fringes and consultant charges.
B. Compliance With Federal And State Law Regarding Discharge Into System: All persons or entities shall comply with federal and state of Montana laws,
rules, and regulations regarding discharge of substances into the system. The originators of any discharge that is in violation of federal or state of
Montana law shall pay all applicable cleanup costs, including the cost of equipment, materials, staff time with fringes and consultant charges.
C. Cross Connections: It shall be unlawful to cross connect a sanitary sewer service with a storm drain. Any connection of sanitary sewer services to the
storm drainage system shall be disconnected and abandoned at the offender's expense plus reasonable fees or penalties the city may establish from
time to time. The sanitary sewer service shall be routed to the nearest sanitary sewer main at no cost to the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 118/242
D. Connection To System: Persons or entities who wish to connect roof drains or other site specific stormwater drainage facilities to the system shall install
the connection in accordance with city specifications. Permits shall be obtained from the director of building and safety upon payment of the system
permit and plan fees in an amount to be determined by the city council pursuant to a resolution shall be charged for each permit and inspection.
E. System Permit And Plan Fees: The city may establish and revise system permit and plan fees as may be required to cover costs by resolution duly
adopted by the city council. All monies received from the system permit and plan fees shall be deposited in the stormwater drainage system fund.
F. Open Flow Channels; Natural Drainageways:
1. It shall be unlawful to encroach upon natural or manmade drainageways with:
a. Temporary or permanent structures;
b. Fill material, construction debris, garbage, tree limbs or other undesirable material; and
c. Household items.
2. Natural or manmade drainageways may be altered under the supervision of, and upon application to, the stormwater drainage manager under the
following circumstances:
a. A roadway crossing, provided drainage is considered in the design and culverts are designed to handle proper flow as specified in the storm
drainage master plan and updates, or bridges are designed such that the opening is adequate;
b. Improvements such as detention basins; and
c. Slope improvements.
3. All improvements or changes to drainageways shall be designed by a registered professional engineer and submitted for approval to the stormwater
drainage manager. Approval must be obtained before any on site work commences.
G. Violations: To the full extent permitted by law, a violation of rules and regulations relating to the care and use of the system (except for delinquent
payments), including, without limitation, the requirements set forth in this section, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or jail time. (Ord. 827, 8-
22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-9: STORMWATER DRAINAGE CHARGE:
A. Imposition Of Stormwater Charges: As authorized by title 7, chapter 7, part 44, title 7, chapter 13, part 43, and/or title 69, chapter 7, part 1, Montana
Code Annotated, as amended, a stormwater drainage charge may be imposed following a public hearing and made applicable to all parcels touched or
affected in any way by stormwater drainage within the city limits or benefited by or that burden in any way the system. Each such parcel of property
whether developed or not benefits from and burdens the system.
B. Operation Cost Determination: The city finds that all real property in a drainage area, no matter its elevation or other characteristics, will benefit from
(and burden) the system. The city shall prepare an annual budget for the system. The budget shall include amounts necessary to pay the principal of
and interest on any debt payable from the stormwater drainage system fund, to pay costs of operation and maintenance expenses, and to establish
replacement and depreciation reserves as may be required.
C. Basis Of Charge: Once the annual budget is determined for the stormwater drainage system, the city finance officer shall determine the stormwater
drainage charge. This charge shall initially be based on whether the property benefited by (or that burdens) the system is classified as nonresidential
metered, residential metered, or nonresidential or residential nonmetered, which classifications correlate to property that is served by city water or
sewer and that is nonresidential, property that is served by city water or sewer and that is residential, or property that is not served by city water or
sewer and is either nonresidential or residential, respectively. The charge will recognize that, generally speaking, nonresidential property has or has the
potential to have more impervious area than residential property, and residential property has or has the potential to have more impervious area than
undeveloped property or property not served by water or sewer. Each year, when calculating the annual stormwater drainage charge, the city may take
into consideration new construction and other changes in property use and make adjustments to properties to increase or decrease the stormwater
drainage charge, taking into account relevant facts, including, without limitation, impervious area. The charge may be modified from time to time after
conducting a public hearing of which notice has been duly provided pursuant to title 69, chapter 7, part 1, Montana Code Annotated.
D. Deposit Of Collections: All stormwater drainage charges shall be collected as provided in this section and credited to a fund to be known as the
stormwater drainage system fund, which fund shall be at all times segregated and maintained by the city finance officer on the books of the city as a
separate and special fund. Upon adoption by the city council of a resolution authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds of the city payable from
stormwater charges or otherwise establishing a system of funds and accounts for such charges, all stormwater charges shall be applied and accounted
for in the manner provided in such resolution.
E. Billing And Collection: The stormwater drainage charge shall be billed as provided in the resolution approving the stormwater drainage charge, which
shall be adopted following a public hearing.
F. Late Fee; Delinquencies; Other Fees/Charges: The resolution approving the stormwater drainage charge adopted following a public hearing may
provide for determining when a bill is delinquent and late fees and any other pertinent fees or charges.
G. Procedures For Nonpayment: If the stormwater drainage charge remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days, the city may elect to have the delinquent
stormwater drainage charges and any late fees or other pertinent charges collected as a tax against the property by following the procedures in this
subsection G. If a charge for services and the establishment of the system, including late fees, is due and is not paid by the date that is sixty (60) days
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 119/242
after the date that it is due, the city finance officer shall, by certified mail, give notice to the owners of the property responsible for the stormwater
drainage charge. The notice must be in writing and: must specify the amount of charges owed, including any interest and penalty; must specify that the
amount due must be paid by the date that is fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice or it will be levied as a tax against the property; must state
that the city may institute suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover the amount due; and may be served on the owner personally or by letter
addressed to the post office address of the owner as recorded in the county assessor's office.
On September 1 of each year, the city finance officer shall certify and file with the county assessor a list of all property, including legal descriptions, on
which arrearages remain unpaid. The list must include the amount of each arrearage, including late fees. The county assessor shall assess the amount
owed as a tax against each lot or parcel with an arrearage. If the property on which arrearages remain unpaid contains a mobile home, the amount
owed must be assessed as a tax against the owner of the mobile home. If the mobile home for which arrearages remain unpaid is no longer on the
property, the amount owed must be assessed as a tax against the property.
H. Remedies For Nonpayment: In addition to the remedies set forth in subsections F and G of this section, the city may proceed in court to collect any
delinquent stormwater charges and any delinquencies and penalties and may pursue and exercise any other remedy available in law or in equity. (Ord.
827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or property is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the provision to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
11-5-11: MISCELLANEOUS:
A copy of the ordinances of the city and any contracts and applications applicable to the city shall be maintained for full inspection by the public. The
passage of this chapter shall not preclude the council from altering or amending it, in whole or in part, or from requiring other or additional service,
equipment, facility or standard, either upon complaint, upon its own motion, or otherwise.
Where this chapter is in conflict with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive requirements shall apply or those of a higher
authority shall prevail. (Ord. 827, 8-22-2016, eff. 9-21-2016)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title will be known and may be cited as the SHELBY CITY-COUNTY SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY1:
Authorization for this title is contained in the Montana subdivision and platting act (MSPA). (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-1-3: PURPOSE; INTENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating the subdivision of land; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to provide for adequate light, air, water supply, sewage disposal, parks and
recreation areas, ingress and egress, and other public requirements; to require development in harmony with the natural environment; to promote
preservation of open space; to promote cluster development approaches that minimize costs to city citizens and that promote effective and efficient
provision of public services; to protect the rights of property owners; and to require uniform monumentation of land subdivisions and transferring
interests in real property by reference to a plat or certificate of survey2.
B. Intent: This title is intended to comply with the Montana subdivision and platting act part 5, and is intended to promote:
1. The orderly development of the jurisdictional area.
2. The coordination of roads within subdivided land with other roads, both existing and planned.
3. The dedication of land for roadways and for public utility easements.
4. The improvement of roads.
5. The provision of proper physical and legal access, including obtaining necessary easements.
6. The provision of adequate open spaces for travel, light, air, and recreation.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 120/242
7. The provision of adequate transportation, water, drainage, and sanitary facilities.
8. The avoidance or minimizing of congestion.
9. The avoidance of subdivisions which would involve unnecessary environmental degradation.
10. The avoidance of danger or injury by reason of natural hazard or the lack of water, drainage, access, transportation, or other public improvements.
11. The avoidance of excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of public improvements and services.
12. The manner and form of making and filing of any plat for subdivided lands.
13. The administration of this title by defining the powers and duties of approving authorities, including procedures for the review and approval of all
plats of subdivisions covered by this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-1-4: JURISDICTION:
This title governs the subdivision of land within the jurisdictional area of the city-county planning board.
A. If a proposed subdivision lies within one mile of the city, the planning board must submit the preliminary plat to the city council or its designated agent
for review and comment. If a proposed subdivision lies partly within the incorporated city, the preliminary plat must be submitted to, and approved by,
both the city council and Toole County board of county commissioners.
B. If a proposed subdivision is located in a rural school district, the planning board shall provide a summary of the information contained in the subdivision
application and preliminary plat to that school district's trustees.
C. When a proposed subdivision is also proposed to be annexed to a municipality, the governing body of that municipality will combine public hearings and
otherwise coordinate the subdivision review process and annexation procedures whenever possible.
D. This title supplements all other regulations, and where they are at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements apply. Other regulations include, but are not limited to, zoning regulations, floodplain regulations, building codes, development codes, and
fire codes. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or other part of these regulations invalid, that judgment
will affect only the part held invalid. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF COMMONLY USED TERMS AND WORDS:
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; the singular, unless otherwise specifically defined in a particular
section, includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" indicates use of discretion in making
decisions. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-2-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or phrases appear in this title, they shall have the meaning assigned to them by this section:
ACCESS:
Legal Access: Each lot in a subdivision either abuts a public (city, county, state, or federal) street or road, or that the subdivider has obtained
adequate and appropriate easements across all necessary properties from a public road to each lot in the subdivision, whether or not a road has
been constructed on that property, and has dedicated the easement or private road for public use.
Physical Access: A street or road conforming to the subdivision design standards provides vehicular access to each lot in the subdivision, either from
a public street or road, from a road constructed to local road standards in the obtained easements which is dedicated to public use, or from a private
road improved to local road standards which has been dedicated to public use.
ADJOINING LANDOWNER (ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER): The owner of record of a parcel of land that is contiguous, at any point, or land that is
separated from the parcel by a road, watercourse or deeded right of way.
AGRICULTURAL WATER USER FACILITIES: Those facilities which provide water for irrigation or stock watering to agricultural lands for the production of
agricultural products. These facilities include, but are not limited to, ditches, headgates, pipes, and other water conveying facilities.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 121/242
AGRICULTURE: All aspects of farming or ranching including the cultivation or tilling of soil; dairying; the production, cultivation, growing, harvesting of
agricultural or horticultural commodities; raising of livestock, bees, furbearing animals or poultry; and any practices including forestry or lumbering
operations, including preparation for market or delivery to storage, to market, or to carriers for transportation to market.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and fixed boundaries.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY: A drawing of a field survey prepared by a professional land surveyor for the purpose of disclosing facts pertaining to
boundary locations.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT1: A subdivision with lots clustered in a group of five (5) or more lots that is designed to concentrate building sites on smaller
lots while allowing other lands to remain undeveloped.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, MASTER PLAN, OR GROWTH POLICY: A comprehensive development plan, master plan, or comprehensive plan that was
adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1, before October 1, 1999, or a policy that was adopted pursuant to Montana Code
Annotated title 76, chapter 1, on or after October 1, 1999.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of individual ownership with unrestricted right of disposal of one or more units in a multiple unit project, with the land and other
parts of the project held in common ownership or use with owners of the other units, pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 70, chapter 23.
COVENANT (RESTRICTIVE COVENANT): A limitation contained in a deed or other document that restricts or regulates the use of the real property.
DEQ: The Montana department of environmental quality.
DEDICATION2: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use, reserving to the landowner no rights that are incompatible
with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted.
DIVISION OF LAND3: The segregation of one or more parcels of land from a larger tract held in single or undivided ownership by transferring or
contracting to transfer title to or possession of a portion of the tract or properly filing a certificate of survey or subdivision plat establishing the identity of the
segregated parcels pursuant to the MSPA. The conveyance of a tract of record or an entire parcel of land that was created by a previous division of land is
not a division of land.
DWELLING UNIT: Any structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent and permanent living facilities for one household.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for another to use, or restriction on the right of the owner to use, all or a portion of the owner's property for
a specified purpose.
ENGINEER (PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER): A person licensed in conformance with the Montana engineers' and land surveyors' act4 to practice
engineering in the state of Montana.
FIRST MINOR SUBDIVISION: A proposed minor subdivision from a tract of record that has not been subdivided or created by a subdivision under the
MSPA, or has not resulted from a tract of record that has had more than five (5) parcels created from that tract of record under Montana Code Annotated
section 76-3-201 or 76-3-207, since July 1, 19735.
FLOOD6: The water of any watercourse or drainage which is above the bank or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse or drainage.
FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY7: A flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year, or is a flood magnitude
which is expected to recur on the average of once every one hundred (100) years.
FLOODPLAIN8: The area adjoining the watercourse or drainage that would be covered by the floodwater of a flood of 100-year frequency.
FLOODWAY9: The channel of a watercourse or drainage and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater of any watercourse or drainage.
GOVERNING BODY: The governing authority of a county, city, town, or consolidated local government organized pursuant to law10. Herein, the city
council and the Toole County board of county commissioners.
IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: A contractual agreement that may be required by the governing body to ensure the construction of such improvements as
required by local subdivision regulations. The improvement agreement may require collateral to secure the construction of such improvements, such as
the deposit of certified funds, irrevocable letters of credit, performance or property bonds, private or public escrow agreements, or similar financial
guarantees.
LANDOWNER: All individuals, groups, or parties with a title interest in the property. For purposes of Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-207, when a
parcel of land for which an exemption from subdivision review is claimed is being conveyed under a contract for deed, the terms "property owner",
"landowner", and "owner" mean the seller of the parcel under the contract for deed (ARM 24.183.1104). For all other purposes of this title, the terms
"property owner", "landowner", and "owner" mean both the seller and the purchaser under a contract for deed.
LOCAL SERVICES: Any and all services that local governments, public or private utilities are authorized to provide for the benefit of their citizens.
LOT: A parcel, plot, or other land area created by subdivision for sale, rent, or lease.
LOT MEASUREMENT:
Lot Area: The area of a lot determined exclusive of street, highway, alley, road, or other rights of way or access easements.
Lot Depth: The length of a line drawn perpendicularly to the front lot line and extending to the rear lot line.
Lot Frontage: The width of the front lot line.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 122/242
Lot Width: The average width of the lot.
LOT TYPES:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets.
Flag Lot: A lot of irregular shape, the bulk of which is normally situated to the rear of other lots, having as its frontage and access a drive connecting
it to a street.
Interior Lot: A lot with frontage on only one street.
Through Or Double Frontage Lot: A lot whose front and rear lines both abut on streets.
MSPA: Montana subdivision and platting act, Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 3.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision that creates six (6) or more lots.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision that creates five (5) or fewer lots.
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME: A detached residential dwelling unit, which may consist of two (2) or more sections, fabricated at a factory and
designed to be towed on its own chassis to a building site for occupation as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes, but is
not limited to, "trailer homes", "house trailers", and "manufactured homes" whether or not the unit has been constructed after July 1, 1976, in conformance
with federal manufactured home construction and safety standards. The term does not include "modular" or "factory built buildings" that are fabricated at a
factory in accordance with the international building code standards applicable to site built homes, and are transported to the site for final assembly on a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME PAD: That area of a mobile home space which has been prepared for the placement of a mobile home.
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME PARK: A tract of land that provides or will provide spaces for two (2) or more mobile homes.
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME SPACE: A designated portion of a parcel of land designed for the accommodation of one mobile home and its
accessory buildings or structures for the exclusive use of the occupants.
MONTANA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY MINIMUM STANDARDS: Minimum standards promulgated by the Montana department of
environmental quality, pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 4, part 1.
MONUMENT (PERMANENT MONUMENT): Any structure of masonry, metal, or other permanent, durable material placed in the ground, which is
exclusively identifiable as a monument to a survey point, expressly placed for surveying reference.
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT: The physical conditions which exist within a given area, including land, air, water, mineral, flora, fauna, sound, light and
objects of historic and aesthetic significance.
OPEN SPACE: Land or water areas retained for use as active or passive recreation areas or for resource protection in an essentially undeveloped state.
OVERALL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The plan of a subdivision design proposed to be subdivided in stages.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)11: A land development project consisting of residential clusters, industrial parks, shopping centers, or office
building parks that compose a planned mixture of land uses built in a prearranged relationship to each other and having open space and community
facilities in common ownership or use.
PLANNING BOARD: A planning board formed pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1.
PLAT: A graphical representation of a subdivision showing the division of land into lots, parcels, blocks, streets, alleys, and other divisions and dedications.
Amended Plat: The final drawing of any change to a filed platted subdivision, or any lots within a filed platted subdivision.
Final Plat12: The final drawing of the subdivision and dedication required to be prepared for filing for record with the county clerk and recorder
containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and the MSPA.
Preliminary Plat: A neat and scaled drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the layout of streets, alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a
subdivision that furnish a basis for review by a governing body as more specifically set forth in this title and the MSPA.
Vacated Plat: A plat which has been voided under the provisions of Montana Code Annotated sections 7-5-2501, 7-5-2502, 7-14-1617, 7-14-3115,
76-3-305 and subsections 7-14-2616(1) and/or (2), 7-14-4114(1) and/or (2).
PREAPPLICATION SKETCH (OR DRAWING): A legible drawing showing approximate boundaries, dimensions, areas, distances and other pertinent
information of a proposed subdivision, all as more particularly set forth in subsection 12-3-4B of this title.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT: Private improvements are the same types of improvements as defined under public improvements, except the structure or
facility has not been dedicated to the public or otherwise acquired by a government entity for public use.
PRIVATE ROAD: A road is private if its right of way has neither been dedicated nor acquired for public use. A private road may be open to use by the
general public or public access may be restricted.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY: The prevailing healthful, sanitary condition of well being for the community at large. Conditions that relate to public health
and safety include, but are not limited to, disease control and prevention; emergency services; environmental health; flooding, fire or wildfire hazards,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 123/242
rockfalls or landslides, unstable soils, steep slopes, and other natural hazards; high voltage lines or high pressure gas lines; and air or vehicular traffic
safety hazards.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any structure or facility constructed to serve more than one lot in a subdivision which is dedicated to the public or otherwise
acquired by a government entity for public use. Examples of typical public improvements include parks, streets or roads, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and
street lighting, utilities, and systems for water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, or fire protection.
PUBLIC ROAD OR STREET: A road or street is public if its right of way has been dedicated or acquired for public use.
RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use that
either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A tract of land available to and principally used by the public for camping, where persons can park recreational
vehicles for camping and sleeping purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE: A designated portion of a recreational vehicle park designed for the placement of a single recreational vehicle and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY: The DEQ or local board of health or sanitarian as authorized under Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 4.
RIGHTS OF WAY: A linear public way established or dedicated for public purposes by a duly recorded plat, deed, easement, grant, prescription,
condemnation, governmental authority or by operation of law, intended to be occupied by a street, nonmotorized vehicle path, railroad, electric
transmission line, water line, sanitary sewer line, storm sewer line, or other similar use.
STATE: The state of Montana.
STREET TYPES: Street types are defined as follows:
Alley: A public or private way reserved as a secondary means of access to the rear or side of lots which abut on and are served by public roads.
Arterial: A street or road having the primary function of moving traffic with emphasis on a high level of mobility for through movement and the
secondary function of providing access to adjacent land. Arterials generally carry relatively large volumes of traffic. Arterials have two (2) to four (4)
lanes of moving traffic and should provide only limited access to abutting property.
Collector: A street or road having the equally important functions of moving traffic and providing access to adjacent land. Collector streets have two
(2) moving traffic lanes and up to two (2) parking lanes.
Cul-De-Sac: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminating in a turnaround area.
Frontage Access (Service Road): A local or collector street, usually parallel and adjacent to an arterial or major collector, which provides access to
abutting properties and controls traffic access to arterials or collectors.
Half Street: A portion of the width of a street, usually located along the perimeter of a subdivision, the remaining portion of which street must be
located on adjacent property if the street is to be fully constructed.
Local Streets: A street or road having the primary function of serving abutting properties, and the secondary function of moving traffic. Local streets
have two (2) moving lanes of traffic, up to two (2) parking lanes, and provide access to abutting properties.
Loop: A local street which begins and ends on the same street, generally used for access to properties.
SUBDIVIDER13: Any person, firm or corporation, or other entity which causes land to be subdivided or which proposes a subdivision of land. When used
in this title, the term "subdivider" may also include the property purchaser on a contract for deed or its agent, or the landowner's agent, if the landowner
has provided the subdivision administrator written notification that the landowner's agent is authorized to act on the landowner's behalf and to receive
notices regarding local government decisions concerning the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION14: A division of land or land so divided which creates one or more parcels containing less than one hundred sixty (160) acres that cannot
be described as a one quarter aliquot part of a United States government section, exclusive of public roadways, in order that the title to or possession of
the parcels may be sold, rented, leased, or otherwise conveyed and includes any resubdivision and further includes a condominium or area, regardless of
its size, that provides or will provide multiple space for recreational camping vehicles or mobile homes.
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR: The person or persons authorized by the governing body to perform the duties of review and administration set forth in
this title.
SUBSEQUENT MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision of five (5) or fewer parcels that is not a first minor subdivision.
SURVEYOR (EXAMINING LAND SURVEYOR): A professional land surveyor duly appointed by the governing body to review surveys and plats submitted
for filing.
SURVEYOR (PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR)15: A person licensed in conformance with the Montana engineers' and land surveyors' act to practice
surveying in the state of Montana.
SWALE: A drainage channel or depression designed to direct surface water flow.
TITLE REPORT (ABSTRACT OF TITLE, SUBDIVISION GUARANTEE, OR PLATTING REPORT): A report from a title service company on the condition
of title to the property proposed for subdivision, which identifies the owners of record of the property, lien holders, encumbrances, easements and
restrictions of record, and all other conditions of title of public record, and accompanied by a guarantee of the accuracy of the report from the title
insurance agent or its underwriter.
TOPOGRAPHY: General term to include characteristics of the ground surface such as plains, hills, mountains, slopes, and other physiographic features.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 124/242
TOWNHOUSE LOT: Arrangement under which units share a common wall, and individuals own their own units and hold separate title to the land beneath
the unit.
TRACT OF RECORD16: An individual parcel of land, irrespective of ownership, that can be identified by legal description, independent of any other parcel
of land, using documents on file in the records of the county clerk and recorder's office.
VICINITY SKETCH: A map at a scale suitable to locate a proposed subdivision, showing the boundary lines of all adjacent properties and streets and
other information necessary to determine the general location of the proposed subdivision.
WILDLIFE: Those animals that are not domesticated or tamed, or as may be defined in a growth policy.
WILDLIFE HABITAT: The place or area where wildlife naturally lives or travels through. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROCEDURES; PRELIMINARY PLATS
12-3-1: CONSTRUCTION TIMING:
Construction work shall not occur on a proposed subdivision until the planning board and governing body have given conditional approval of the
preliminary plat. Construction work undertaken or done prior to obtaining proper approval may be ordered removed or modified, at the
developer/subdivider's expense. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-3-2: TRANSFERS OF TITLE:
Except as noted in this section, a final subdivision plat must be filed for record with the Toole County clerk and recorder before title to the subdivided land
can be sold or transferred in any manner. After the preliminary plat of a subdivision has been approved or conditionally approved, the subdivider may enter
into contracts to sell lots in the proposed subdivision if all of the following conditions1 are met:
A. Payments To An Escrow Agent: Under the terms of the contracts the purchasers of lots in the proposed subdivision make any payments to an escrow
agent, which must be a bank or savings and loan association chartered to do business in the state of Montana;
B. Distribution Of Escrow Funds: Under the terms of the contracts and the escrow agreement the payments made by purchasers of lots in the proposed
subdivision may not be distributed by the escrow agent to the subdivider until the final plat of the subdivision is filed with the Toole County clerk and
recorder;
C. Refund Of Escrow Funds: The contracts and the escrow agreement provide that if the final plat of the proposed subdivision is not filed with the Toole
County clerk and recorder within two (2) years of the preliminary plat approval, the escrow agent shall immediately refund to each purchaser any
payments made under the contract;
D. Required Language In Contracts: The contracts contain the following language conspicuously set out therein:
The real property which is the subject hereof has not been finally platted, and until a final plat identifying the property has been filed with the Toole
County clerk and recorder, title to the property cannot be transferred in any manner.
E. Real Property Taxes And Special Assessments: The Toole County treasurer has certified that all real property taxes and special assessments assessed
and levied on the land to be divided have been paid; and
F. Copies Provided Subdivision Administrator: A copy of the contracts and escrow agreement described above must be submitted to the subdivision
administrator. The name of the purchaser and purchase price may be blacked out. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-3-3: PERMISSION TO ENTER:
The governing body or their designated agent(s) or affected agencies identified during the preapplication meeting may investigate, examine, and evaluate
the site of the proposed subdivision to verify information provided by the subdivider and to subsequently monitor compliance with any conditions if the
preliminary plat is approved conditionally. The submission of a subdivision application constitutes a grant of permission by the subdivider for the governing
body, its agents, and affected agencies to enter the subject property. This consent applies to members of the public attending a noticed public meeting for
a site visit. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-3-4: PREAPPLICATION PROCESS:
A. Request For Preapplication Meeting: Prior to submittal of a subdivision application, the subdivider shall request a preapplication meeting with the
subdivision administrator. The meeting shall occur within thirty (30) days after the subdivider submits a written request for the meeting to the
subdivision administrator.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 125/242
B. Sketch Of Proposed Subdivision: At the time of the preapplication meeting request, the subdivider shall provide to the subdivision administrator, a
sketch of the proposed subdivision showing the layout of the proposed features in relation to existing site conditions.
1. The sketch may be a freehand sketch drawn directly on a print of a topographic map of the area proposed for division at a scale of one inch to four
hundred feet (1" = 400'), or larger, that is adequate to show the property and must include the following:
a. Information on the current status of the site, including:
(1) Location;
(2) Approximate tract and lot boundaries of existing tracts of record;
(3) Description of general terrain;
(4) Natural features on the land, including water bodies, floodplains, geologic hazards, and soil types;
(5) Existing structures and improvements;
(6) Existing utility lines and facilities serving the area to be subdivided;
(7) Existing easements and rights of way;
(8) Existing zoning or development regulation standards;
(9) Existing conservation easements;
(10) Existing covenants or deed restrictions.
b. Documentation on the current status of the site, including:
(1) Ownership information, such as a deed, option to buy or buy-sell agreement, including permission to subdivide;
(2) Location of agricultural water facilities;
(3) Inclusion of any or all of the subdivision in any special improvement districts; and
(4) Weed districts and weed control regulations applicable to the property.
2. Information on the proposed subdivision, including:
a. Tract and proposed lot boundaries;
b. Proposed public and private improvements;
c. Existing and proposed location of utility lines and facilities;
d. Existing and proposed easements and rights of way; and
e. Parks and open space and any proposed conservation easements.
C. Duties Of Subdivision Administrator: At the preapplication meeting:
1. The subdivision administrator shall identify, for informational purposes, the state laws, local regulations and growth policy provisions that may apply
to the subdivision review process including, but not limited to, zoning regulations, floodplain regulations, building codes and fire codes;
2. The subdivision administrator shall provide the subdivider with a list of public utilities, local, state and federal agencies, and any other entities that
have an interest in the proposed subdivision and that may be contacted for comment by the subdivision administrator or planning board on the
subdivision application. The subdivision administrator shall also identify the time frames that the public utilities, agencies, and other entities are given
to respond; and
3. The subdivision administrator shall identify particular additional information he anticipates will be required for review of the subdivision application.
This does not limit the ability of the subdivision administrator to request additional information at a later time.
D. Deadline For Submitting Subdivision Application: Unless the subdivider submits a subdivision application within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
preapplication meeting, the subdivider must request a new preapplication meeting prior to submitting the subdivision application. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-3-5: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL:
The subdivider shall submit to the planning board or to the agent or agency designated by the governing body, a subdivision application addressing these
topics and containing the following materials:
A. A completed and signed subdivision application form;
B. The required review fee;
C. A preliminary plat;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 126/242
D. A vicinity sketch;
E. A topographic map; (Note: subsection D of this section and this subsection E may be combined.)
F. A grading and drainage plan;
G. Engineering plans for all public and private improvements;
H. Overall development plan if development is in phases;
I. Abstract of title or title report;
J. Lien holders' acknowledgment of subdivision;
K. Documentation of legal and physical access;
L. Documentation of existing easements, including those for agricultural water user facilities;
M. Existing covenants and deed restrictions;
N. Existing water rights;
O. Names and addresses of all adjoining property owners;
P. Proposed road plans and profiles;
Q. Encroachment permits from Montana department of transportation or the local jurisdiction;
R. Proposed easements;
S. Proposed disposition of water rights;
T. Proposed disposition of mineral rights;
U. Park land dedication calculations;
V. Environmental assessment and/or summary of probable impacts;
W. Transportation impact analysis or transportation plan;
X. Fire risk rating analysis and fire prevention plan;
Y. Weed management plan and revegetation plan;
Z. Property owners' association documents, including draft articles of incorporation, declaration and bylaws;
AA. FIRM or FEMA panel map and letter identifying floodplain status;
BB. Required water and sanitation information;
CC. A form of subdivision improvements agreement, if proposed;
DD. Letter to the Shelby commissioners requesting a revocation of existing agricultural covenants;
EE. Letter indicating locations of cultural or historic resources;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 127/242
FF. Variance request or approval;
GG. Rezoning application or approval;
HH. Flood hazard evaluation;
II. Letter identifying and proposing mitigation for potential hazards or other adverse impacts as identified in the preapplication meeting and not covered by
any of the above required materials; and
JJ. Such additional relevant and reasonable information as identified by the subdivision administrator during the preapplication meeting that is pertinent to
the required elements of this section. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-3-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
For both minor and major subdivisions, the initial review process is as follows:
A. Element Review: Within five (5) working days of receipt of a subdivision application and fee, the subdivision administrator shall determine whether the
application contains all of the applicable materials required by section 12-3-5 of this chapter and shall give written notice to the subdivider of his
determination.
1. If the subdivision administrator determines that elements are missing from the application, he shall return the application and identify those elements
in the notification, and no further action shall be taken on the application by the subdivision administrator until the application is resubmitted.
2. The subdivider may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application.
3. If the subdivider corrects the deficiencies and resubmits the application, the subdivision administrator shall have five (5) working days to notify the
subdivider whether the resubmitted application contains all the materials required by section 12-3-5 of this chapter, as applicable.
4. This process shall be repeated until the subdivider submits an application containing all the materials required by section 12-3-5 of this chapter, or
the application is withdrawn.
B. Sufficiency Review:
1. Within fifteen (15) working days after the subdivision administrator notifies the subdivider that the application contains all of the required elements as
provided above, the subdivision administrator shall determine whether the application and required elements contain detailed, supporting information
that is sufficient to allow for the review of the proposed subdivision under this title and shall give written notification to the subdivider of his
determination.
a. If the subdivision administrator determines that the information in the application is not sufficient to allow for review of the proposed subdivision, he
shall identify specific required information in his notification and return the application to the subdivider, and no further action shall be taken on the
application by the subdivision administrator until the material is resubmitted.
b. The subdivider may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application or withdraw the application.
c. If the subdivider corrects the deficiencies and resubmits the application in accordance with subsection B1b of this section, the subdivision
administrator shall have fifteen (15) working days to notify the subdivider whether the resubmitted application and required elements contain
detailed, supporting information that is sufficient to allow for review of the proposed subdivision under this title.
d. This process shall be repeated until the subdivider submits an application that contains detailed, supporting information that is sufficient for review
of the proposed subdivision under the provisions of this title, or the application is withdrawn by the subdivider.
2. A determination that an application contains sufficient information for review does not ensure that the proposed subdivision will be approved or
conditionally approved by the governing body and does not limit the ability of the subdivision administrator, planning board, or the governing body to
request additional information during the review process.
3. A determination of sufficiency by the subdivision administrator pursuant to this subsection does not limit the DEQ from requiring additional water and
sanitation information as part of the DEQ review of water and sanitation information.
C. Applicable Regulations: Subdivision review and approval, conditional approval or denial shall be based on those regulations in effect at the time a
subdivision application and preliminary plat is deemed to contain sufficient information for review. If regulations change during the element or
sufficiency review, the determination of whether the application contains the required elements and sufficient information, and the subdivision review,
shall be based on the new regulations. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 4
FINAL PLATS
12-4-1: CONTENTS:
The final plat submitted for approval must conform to the preliminary plat as previously reviewed and approved by the planning board and the governing
body and must incorporate all required modifications and comply with all conditions imposed at the time of subdivision application and preliminary plat
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 128/242
approval. The final plat and accompanying documents must comply with the Montana uniform standards for final subdivision plats, ARM 24.183.1107.
Final plats of subdivisions approved for phased development shall be filed sequentially in accordance with the approval. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-2: INITIAL REVIEW:
A. Final Plat Submittal: The final plat approval application form and all supplementary documents must be submitted to the subdivision administrator at
least thirty (30) working days prior to the expiration of preliminary plat approval. The submittal shall include, as applicable:
1. The final plat application;
2. The final plat review fee;
3. A statement from the project surveyor or engineer outlining how each condition of approval has been satisfied;
4. A title report or updated abstract dated no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submittal;
5. The DEQ or local environmental health department approval;
6. The final grading and drainage plan, including all road plans and profiles, state or local encroachment permits, and the traffic impact analysis (if
required);
7. All engineering plans;
8. Any homeowner association documents, including bylaws, covenants, and/or declarations;
9. One eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") or larger copy of the final plat, completed in accordance with the uniform standards for final
subdivisions plats.
B. Review By Planning Board And Subdivision Administrator:
1. The subdivision administrator shall review the final plat to ascertain that all conditions and requirements for final plat approval have been met. The
subdivision administrator will not accept, begin processing, nor schedule any actions on a final plat submittal until a complete application and fee,
and copies of the final plat have been received. Final plat applications will not be considered complete by the subdivision administrator until all
conditions of preliminary approval have been satisfied.
2. If the subdivision administrator determines that the final plat differs from the approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat, the applicant shall
be required to submit an amended application pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 16-07-400.
3. The subdivision administrator may require that final subdivision plats be reviewed for errors and omissions in calculation or drafting by an examining
land surveyor before recording with the clerk and recorder. When the survey data shown on the plat meets the conditions pursuant to this title, the
examining surveyor shall certify the compliance in a printed or stamped signed certificate on the plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-3: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS:
A. Plat Approval Covenants: The governing body may require that some or all restrictive covenants governing the use of land within the subdivision,
whether proposed by the subdivider or required by the planning board, be set forth in a separate heading identifying them as plat approval covenants,
and indicating:
These covenant(s) may not be repealed or amended without prior written consent of the governing body.
B. Required Language: The governing body may require that all restrictive covenants it has required as a condition of plat approval contain the following
language:
The governing body is a party to this restrictive covenant and may enforce its terms.
C. Common Property Deeded To Property Owners' Association: If common property is to be deeded to a property owners' association, the covenants and
bylaws which govern the association must, at a minimum, provide for the:
1. Formation of a property owners' association concurrently with the filing of the final subdivision plat. Articles of incorporation shall be filed with the
secretary of state's office and a copy of the filed articles provided to the county;
2. Mandatory membership for each property owner. Purchasers of property may also be required to sign a waiver of right to protest the formation of a
maintenance district to maintain improvements;
3. Perpetual reservation of the common property when required under Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-621(6)(a);
4. Payment of liability insurance premiums, local taxes, and the cost of maintaining recreational or other facilities;
5. Placement of liens on the property of lot owners who are delinquent in the payment of association fees and assessments;
6. Adjustment of assessments to meet changing needs;
7. Means of enforcing the covenants, and of receiving and processing complaints;
8. Transition of control of the association from the declarant to the homeowners;
9. Dissolution of the association and modification of the covenants and restrictions after obtaining governing body approval of the change; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 129/242
10. Regular maintenance of roads, parks, buildings, drainage facilities, and other facilities controlled by the association. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-4: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT; GUARANTEE:
A. Required: As a condition of approval of the final plat, the subdivider must have installed all required improvements or have entered into a subdivision
improvements agreement guaranteeing the construction, installation, and maintenance of all required improvements1. No construction or placement of
structures on the lots may occur until improvements related to public health and safety, such as roads or firefighting facilities, have been installed and
engineering plans have been filed. A model subdivision improvements agreement and alternative methods of guaranteeing public improvements, the
procedures and requirements for securing an agreement, and suggested conditions for maintenance are provided in sections 12-14-8 and 12-14-9 of
this title.
B. Guarantee: If the subdivider chooses to enter into a subdivision improvements agreement, guaranteeing the public improvements through a bond or
letter of credit, three (3) bids for the cost of installation of the public improvements shall be obtained by the subdivider. The amount of the guarantee
shall be calculated by multiplying one hundred twenty five percent (125%) by the highest bid. As the public improvements are installed, the subdivider
shall provide a letter to the governing body indicating such and including a copy of the engineered plans. The county engineer or consulting engineer
designated by the governing body shall review and certify that all public improvements have been installed in conformance with the plans and
specifications. Prior to the release of the guarantee, a copy of the plans, stamped by the project surveyor or engineer in accordance with their licensing
provisions, shall be filed in the clerk and recorder's office with reference to the final subdivision plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-5: AMENDING APPROVED PRELIMINARY PLATS BEFORE FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
A. Submittal Of Proposed Changes: If the subdivider proposes to change the preliminary plat after the preliminary plat approval but before the final plat
approval, the subdivider shall submit the proposed changes to the subdivision administrator for review.
1. Within five (5) working days of receiving the proposed changes, the subdivision administrator shall determine whether the changes to the preliminary
plat are material pursuant to subsection B of this section.
2. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are material, the subdivision administrator shall require the subdivider to begin the
subdivision review process again, starting with the preapplication meeting and require payment of a new application fee.
3. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are not material, the subdivision administrator shall accept the changes and notify the
subdivider and the governing body of that decision.
B. Material Changes: The following changes, although not an exhaustive list, may be considered material:
1. Configuration or number of lots;
2. Road layout;
3. Water and/or septic proposals;
4. Configuration of park land and/or open spaces;
5. Easement provisions;
6. Designated access;
7. Changes to proposed covenants; or
8. Changes to conditions of approval.
C. Appeal: A subdivider whose proposed changes to the preliminary plat have been deemed material by the subdivision administrator may appeal the
subdivision administrator's decision to the governing body by written notice within ten (10) working days. The subdivider may request a hearing, and
may submit additional evidence to show that the changes to the preliminary plat are not material.
D. Condition Illegal Or Impossible To Comply With: If the subdivider and subdivision administrator determine that a condition of approval is illegal or
impossible to comply with, due to circumstances outside the subdivider's control, economic hardship notwithstanding, the condition may be reviewed
by the governing body through a properly noticed public hearing in order to determine if the condition may be waived or amended. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-6: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
A. Approval By Governing Body: The governing body shall examine every final subdivision plat and shall approve it if it conforms to the conditions of
preliminary plat approval and to the terms of the MSPA and this title, or deny it pursuant to subsection A2 of this section.
1. If the final plat is approved, the governing body shall certify its approval on the face of the final plat. When applicable, a certificate of the governing
body expressly accepting any dedicated land, easements, or improvements will be filed with the final plat.
2. If the final plat is denied, the governing body shall write a letter stating the reason for denial and forward a copy to the subdivider. The board will
return the final plat to the subdivider within ten (10) working days of the action. The subdivider may then make any necessary corrections and
resubmit the final plat for approval.
B. Inaccurate/Incomplete Information: The governing body may withdraw approval of a final plat if it determines that material information by the subdivider
is inaccurate or incomplete. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 130/242
12-4-7: FINAL PLAT FILING:
A. Filing: After it is approved, the final plat may not be altered in any manner except as provided in section 12-4-8 of this chapter. The county clerk and
recorder may not accept any plat for filing that does not bear the approval of the governing body in proper form or that has been altered. The clerk and
recorder may file an approved plat only if it is accompanied by the documents specified in the Montana uniform standards for monumentation, and final
subdivision plats, ARM 24.183.1101 through ARM 24.183.1107.
B. Required Copies: Notwithstanding the requirements of the Montana uniform standards, the governing body requires that all plat filings must include two
(2) signed copies on three (3) mil or heavier matte stable-base polyester film or equivalent and two (2) paper copies. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-4-8: AMENDING FILED FINAL PLATS:
A. Amending Plat: Changes that materially alter any portion of a filed plat, its land divisions or improvements, or that will modify the approved use of land
within the subdivision, must be made by filing an amended plat showing all alterations. Any alteration which increases the number of lots or modifies six
(6) or more lots, or abandons or alters a public road right of way or park land dedication must be reviewed and approved by the governing body.
B. Procedures For Review: An amended plat is subject to the procedures for reviewing major or minor subdivisions, as appropriate. The governing body
may not approve an amended filed final plat without the written consent of the owners and lien holders of all lots which will be modified by the proposed
amendment.
C. Nonconformance With Standards: The governing body may not approve an amendment that will place a lot in nonconformance with the standards
contained in this title or with local zoning regulations unless the governing body holds a public hearing on the amendment and issues a written variance
from the standards pursuant to section 12-13-2, “Variances”, of this title.
D. Compliance Required: The amended filed final plat submitted for approval must comply with the requirements for final subdivision plats under the
uniform standards for filing final plats. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 5
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS1
Footnote 1: MCA § 73-6-109.
Footnote 2: See section 12-13-2 of this title.
Footnote 3: MCA § 76-3-608(5)(b).
Footnote 4: MCA § 76-3-320.
Footnote 5: MCA § 76-3-625.
Chapter 6
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS1
12-6-1: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
A. Subdivisions that qualify for major subdivision review are those divisions of land containing six (6) or more lots, or subdivisions of five (5) or fewer lots
that do not otherwise qualify for review as first minor subdivisions under Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-609 and this title.
B. The preapplication process and initial review process set forth in chapter 3 of this title apply to this chapter. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-2: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL:
A. Application: The subdivider shall submit to the governing body or to the agent or agency designated by the governing body, a subdivision application
containing the materials identified in section 12-3-5 of this title and in the preapplication meeting.
B. Environmental Assessment: The requirement for preparing an environmental assessment, does not apply, pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 76-3-210 when:
1. The proposed subdivision is totally within an area covered by a growth policy adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated sections 76-1-601
through 76-1-606; and
2. The governing body has adopted zoning regulations pursuant to Montana Code Annotated sections 76-2-301 through 76-2-328, (municipal zoning);
or Montana Code Annotated sections 76-2-201 through 76-2-228 (county zoning pursuant to a growth policy); and
3. The governing body has adopted a strategy for development, maintenance, and replacement of public infrastructure pursuant to Montana Code
Annotated subsection 76-1-601(3)(e).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 131/242
C. Power Of Board To Waive Portion Of Environmental Assessment: The planning board may waive the requirement for preparing any portion of the
environmental assessment when the proposed subdivision is in an area covered by a growth policy adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
sections 76-1-601 through 76-1-606, and the proposed subdivision will be in compliance with the policy.
D. Exemption: When an exemption from preparing any portion of the environmental assessment is sought, the applicant shall meet with the planning
board, explain why the exemption is appropriate, and, if granted, the planning board shall prepare and certify a written statement of the reasons for
granting the exemption. A copy of this statement must accompany the preliminary plat of the subdivision when it is submitted for review and shall be
filed with the final plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-3: TIME PERIOD FOR APPROVAL, CONDITIONAL APPROVAL, OR DENIAL:
A. Governing Body: Within sixty (60) working days, the governing body shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the proposed subdivision, unless the
subdivider and the subdivision administrator agree to an extension or suspension of the review period, or a subsequent public hearing is held pursuant
to section 12-6-8 of this chapter. A subdivision application is deemed submitted for review and the sixty (60) working day period begins when the
subdivision administrator notifies the subdivider or the subdivider's agent, in writing, that the application contains sufficient information to conduct the
review.
B. Public Agency And Utility Review: Review and comment by public agencies or utilities may not delay governing body action on the subdivision
application beyond the sixty (60) working day review period. The governing body will make these comments available to the subdivider and to the
general public upon request. If, during the review of the application, the subdivision administrator or the planning board contacts a public utility, agency,
or other entity that was not included on the list provided during the preapplication meeting, the subdivision administrator shall notify the subdivider of
the contact and the time frame for response. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-4: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND NOTICES GENERALLY:
A. Hearings: The planning board and the governing body shall each hold a public hearing on the subdivision application when a hearing is required by this
title.
B. Notice:
1. Publication: The planning board and governing body shall give notice of the times, dates and locations of the hearings by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the county not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the dates of the hearings.
2. Mail: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the dates of the hearings, the planning board and the governing body shall give notices of the hearings by mail
to the subdivider, each adjoining landowner to the land included in the preliminary plat, and each purchaser under contract for deed of property
immediately adjoining the land included in the preliminary plat.
3. Posting: The planning board or governing body may require that notices be posted at conspicuous places on the site of the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-5: PLANNING BOARD HEARING; CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATION:
A. Hearing: After the subdivision application is deemed to have all the required elements and contain detailed, supporting information that is sufficient to
allow for review, and the subdivision administrator has prepared a staff report, the planning board shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the
subdivision application.
B. Recommendation:
1. Consideration, Standards: In recommending approval, conditional approval or denial of the subdivision application and preliminary plat, the planning
board shall base their recommendation on compliance of the subdivision application with the following:
a. This title, including, but not limited to, the standards set forth in chapter 8 of this title;
b. Applicable zoning regulations;
c. The MSPA, including, but not limited to, Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-608(3), as delineated in section 12-5-8 of this title; and
d. All other applicable regulations.
2. Consideration, Evidence: In recommending approval, conditional approval or denial of the subdivision application and preliminary plat, the planning
board may consider, without limitation, the following (as applicable):
a. The subdivision application and preliminary plat;
b. The environmental assessment;
c. The summary of probable impacts and mitigation;
d. An officially adopted growth policy;
e. Information provided at public hearing(s);
f. The administrator's staff report and recommendation; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 132/242
g. Any additional information authorized by law.
3. Written Recommendation: Within ten (10) working days after the public hearing, the planning board shall submit the following, in writing, to the
subdivider and the governing body:
a. Recommended findings of fact based on the evidence in subsection B2 of this section that discuss and consider the subdivision's compliance with
and impact on the items listed in subsection B1 of this section;
b. A recommendation for approval, conditional approval (including any recommended conditions and/or mitigation measures), or denial of the
subdivision application and preliminary plat; and
c. A recommendation for approval or denial of any requested variances2.
C. Water And Sanitation Information: The planning board shall collect public comment regarding the water and sanitation information required by the
MSPA and this title. The planning board shall forward all comments regarding water and sanitation to the governing body. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-6: SUBDIVIDER'S PREFERENCE FOR MITIGATION3:
No later than two (2) working days before the meeting or hearing at which the governing body is to consider the subdivision application and preliminary
plat, the subdivider is encouraged to submit, in writing, to the subdivision administrator, the subdivider's comments on and responses to the planning
board's recommendations as well as any proposed mitigation measures not already discussed with the planning board. The governing body will consult
with the subdivider and will give due weight and consideration to the subdivider's expressed preference regarding mitigation. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-7: GOVERNING BODY HEARING:
A. Hearing Required: After the planning board makes its recommendation, the governing body shall hold a public hearing on the subdivision application.
B. Public Comments And Documents: All comments and documents regarding the subdivision shall be submitted to the subdivision administrator, rather
than to the governing body directly, to be forwarded by the subdivision administrator to the governing body;
C. Consideration Of Public Comments Or Documents: The governing body shall determine whether public comments or documents presented for
consideration at the public hearing constitute either:
1. Information or analysis of information that was presented at the planning board hearing on the subdivision application that the public has had a
reasonable opportunity to examine and on which the public has had a reasonable opportunity to comment, in which case, the governing body may
proceed to its decision whether to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed subdivision; or
2. New information or analysis of information that has never been submitted as evidence or considered by the planning board at a hearing on the
subdivision application, in which case the governing body shall proceed as set forth in subsection D of this section.
D. Relevancy And Credibility: If the governing body determines that public comments or documents presented at the hearing constitute new information or
an analysis of information regarding the subdivision application that has never been submitted as evidence or considered by the planning board at the
public hearing on the subdivision application, the governing body shall determine whether the public comments or documents are relevant and credible
with regard to their decision, pursuant to subsections E and F of this section.
1. If the governing body determines the information or analysis of information is either not relevant or not credible, then the governing body shall
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed subdivision without basing its decision on the new information or analysis of information; or
2. If the governing body determines the new information or analysis of information is relevant and credible, then they shall schedule or direct the
planning board to schedule a subsequent public hearing pursuant to section 12-6-8 of this chapter.
3. At the subsequent hearing, the planning board or governing body shall consider only the new information or analysis of information that may have an
impact on the findings and conclusions that the governing body will rely upon in making its decision on the proposed subdivision.
E. Relevant: New information or analysis of information is considered to be relevant if it may have an impact on the findings and conclusions that the
governing body will rely upon in making their decision on the proposed subdivision.
F. Credible: New information or analysis of information is considered to be credible if it is based on one or more of the following:
1. Physical facts or evidence;
2. Corroborated personal observations;
3. Evidence provided by a person with professional competency in the subject matter; or
4. Scientific data. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-8: SUBSEQUENT PUBLIC HEARING:
A. Time Limitation: If a subsequent public hearing is held pursuant to section 12-6-7 of this chapter, it must be held within forty five (45) days of the
governing body's determination to schedule a subsequent hearing. The planning board or governing body shall consider only the new information or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 133/242
analysis of information that may have an impact on the findings and conclusions that the governing body will rely upon in making their decision on the
proposed subdivision.
1. Publication: Notice of the time, date and location of the subsequent hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the subsequent hearing.
2. Mail: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the subsequent hearing, notice of the subsequent hearing shall be given by mail to the subdivider,
each adjoining landowner to the land included in the preliminary plat, and each purchaser under contract for deed of property immediately adjoining
the land included in the preliminary plat.
3. Posting: The governing body shall require that notice be posted at a conspicuous place on the site of the proposed subdivision.
B. Review Period: If a subsequent public hearing is held, the sixty (60) working day review period is suspended as of the date of the governing body's
decision to schedule a subsequent hearing. The sixty (60) working day review period resumes on the date of the governing body's next scheduled
public meeting for which proper notice for the public meeting on the subdivision application can be provided. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-9: GOVERNING BODY DECISION AND DOCUMENTATION:
A. Prerequisites To Approval: The governing body may not approve or conditionally approve a subdivision application and preliminary plat unless the
proposed subdivision:
1. Provides easements for the location and installation of any planned utilities;
2. Provides legal and physical access to each parcel within the subdivision and the notation of that access on the applicable plat and any instrument
transferring the parcel;
3. Assures that all required public or private improvements will be installed before final plat approval, or that their installation after final plat approval will
be guaranteed as provided by section 12-4-4 of this title;
4. Assures that the requirements of Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-504(1)(j), regarding the disclosure and disposition of water rights as set
forth in section 12-8-16 of this title have been considered and will be accomplished before the final plat is submitted;
5. Assures that the requirements of Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-504(1)(k) regarding watercourse and irrigation easements as set forth in
section 12-8-15 of this title have been considered and will be accomplished before the final plat is submitted; and
6. Provides for the appropriate park dedication or cash in lieu of park dedication, if required.
B. Consideration, Standards: In approving, conditionally approving, or denying a subdivision application and preliminary plat, the governing body shall
consider subsection A of this section, and whether the proposed subdivision complies with:
1. These regulations, including, but not limited to, the standards set forth in chapter 8 of this title;
2. Applicable zoning regulations;
3. Other applicable regulations;
4. The MSPA, including, but not limited to, the following impacts:
a. Impact on agriculture, including weed control;
b. Impact on agricultural water user facilities;
c. Impact on local services;
d. Impact on the natural environment;
e. Impact on wildlife and wildlife habitat;
f. Impact on public health and safety; and
5. Proposed mitigation.
C. Consideration, Evidence: In making its decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a proposed subdivision, the governing body may consider
and weigh the following, as applicable:
1. The subdivision application and preliminary plat;
2. The environmental assessment;
3. The summary of probable impacts and mitigation;
4. Any officially adopted growth policy, which may be considered as a single, determinative factor;
5. Comments, evidence and discussions at the public hearing(s);
6. Subdivision administrator's staff report and recommendations;
7. Planning board recommendation; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 134/242
8. Any additional information authorized by law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing body may not consider any information regarding the subdivision application that is presented after the
final public hearing (which may include a subsequent hearing, if any) when making their decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
proposed subdivision.
D. Water And Sanitation, Special Rules:
1. Water and sanitation information provided in the application and public comment given about this information during the review process may be used
as a basis for a conditional approval or denial of a subdivision only if the governing body finds that information provided in the application or
submitted during public comment indicates the proposal does not comply with previously adopted subdivision, zoning, floodplain or other regulations.
2. For a proposed subdivision that will create one or more parcels containing less than twenty (20) acres, the governing body shall require approval by
the Montana department of environmental quality as a condition of approval of the final plat. This approval applies to the development of lots at the
time of the approval and is no guarantee that a source of water or a location for a septic system or drain fields will be available when the lots are
actually developed.
3. For a proposed subdivision that will create one or more parcels containing twenty (20) acres or more, the governing body shall condition approval of
the final plat upon the subdivider demonstrating that there is an adequate water source and at least one area for a septic system and a replacement
drain field for each lot. This demonstration to the local planning board is to evaluate the ability to develop lots at the platting stage and is no
guarantee that a source of water or a location for a septic system or drain fields will be available when the lots are actually developed.
4. The governing body shall collect public comments submitted regarding water and sanitation information and shall make any comments submitted or
a summary of the comments submitted available to the subdivider within thirty (30) days after conditional approval or approval of the subdivision
application and preliminary plat.
5. The subdivider shall, as part of the subdivider's application for sanitation approval, forward the comments or the summary provided by the governing
body to the:
a. Reviewing authority provided in Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 4, for subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing less
than twenty (20) acres; and
b. Local health department or board of health for proposed subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing twenty (20) acres or more,
and less than one hundred sixty (160) acres.
E. Documentation Of Decision Of Governing Body:
1. In rendering its decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed subdivision, the governing body shall issue written findings of fact
that discuss and weigh the proposed subdivision's compliance with the preceding subsections.
2. When the governing body approves, denies, or conditionally approves the proposed subdivision, they shall send the subdivider a letter, with the
appropriate signature, and make the letter available to the public. The letter shall:
a. Contain information regarding the appeal process for the denial or imposition of conditions;
b. Identify the regulations and statutes that were used in reaching the decision to approve, deny, or impose conditions and explain how they apply to
the decision;
c. Provide the facts and conclusions that the governing body relied upon in making its decision and reference documents, testimony, or other
materials that form the basis of the decision;
d. Provide the conditions that apply to the preliminary plat approval and that must be satisfied before the final plat may be approved; and
e. Set forth the time limit for approval, pursuant to subsection F of this section.
F. Subdivision Application And Preliminary Plat Approval Period:
1. Upon approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the governing body shall provide the subdivider with a dated and signed statement of
approval. The approval shall be in force for no more than three (3) calendar years.
a. At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval, the governing body may, at their discretion and at the written request
of the subdivider, extend their approval for a period of one additional year.
b. The governing body may extend the approval for more than one year if a longer approval period is included as a specific condition of a written
subdivision improvements agreement between the governing body and the subdivider.
2. After the application and preliminary plat are approved, the governing body may not impose any additional conditions as a prerequisite to final plat
approval unless the preliminary plat approval expires, at which time a new application shall be required.
3. The governing body may withdraw approval or conditional approval of an application and preliminary plat if they determine that information provided
by the subdivider, and upon which the approval or conditional approval was based, is inaccurate, misleading or incomplete. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-10: AMENDED APPLICATIONS:
A. Changes After Subdivision Administrator Determination: If the subdivider changes the subdivision application or preliminary plat after the subdivision
administrator makes a determination of sufficiency pursuant to section 12-3-6 of this title, but before the planning board hearing, the subdivider shall
submit the amended application to the subdivision administrator for review.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 135/242
1. Within five (5) working days of receiving the amended application or preliminary plat, the subdivision administrator shall determine whether the
changes to the subdivision application or preliminary plat are material, pursuant to subsection D of this section.
2. The sixty (60) working day review period is suspended while the subdivision administrator considers whether the changes to the subdivision
application or preliminary plat are material.
3. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are not material, the sixty (60) working day review period resumes when he mails notice of
the decision to the subdivider.
4. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are material, the subdivision administrator shall either require the subdivider to schedule a
new preapplication meeting and resubmit the application as a new subdivision application or proceed with the sixty (60) working day review period
upon certification from the subdivision administrator that the application is sufficient for review.
B. Changes After Planning Board Hearing: If the subdivider changes the subdivision application or preliminary plat after the planning board hearing but
before the governing body hearing, the subdivider shall submit the amended application or preliminary plat to the subdivision administrator for review.
1. Within five (5) working days of receiving the amended application or preliminary plat, the subdivision administrator shall determine whether the
changes to the subdivision application or preliminary plat are material pursuant to subsection D of this section.
2. The sixty (60) working day review period is suspended while the subdivision administrator considers whether the changes to the subdivision
application or preliminary plat are material.
3. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are not material, the sixty (60) working day review period resumes when the subdivision
administrator mails notice of the decision to the subdivider.
4. If the subdivision administrator determines the changes are material, he shall either:
a. Require the subdivider to begin the subdivision review process again, starting with the preapplication meeting, and require payment of a new
application fee; or
b. Schedule a new planning board hearing to take comment on the amended application or preliminary plat. Notice of the subdivision administrator's
determination to schedule a new planning board hearing shall be provided as set forth in section 12-6-5 of this chapter. A supplemental staff report
shall be prepared to address the changes to the original application.
5. If a new planning board hearing is held pursuant to subsection B4b of this section, the sixty (60) working day review period is suspended for the time
period between notice of the subdivision administrator's determination and ten (10) working days after the date of the second planning board
hearing.
C. Consent To Suspension Of Review Period: By making changes to a pending subdivision application or preliminary plat, the subdivider consents to
suspension of the review period as provided in subsections A2 and B2 of this section.
D. Material Changes: The following changes, although not an exhaustive list may be considered material:
1. Configuration or number of lots;
2. Road layout;
3. Water and/or septic proposals;
4. Configuration of park land and/or open spaces;
5. Easement provisions; and
6. Designated access.
E. Appeal: A subdivider whose subdivision application or preliminary plat has been deemed materially changed by the subdivision administrator may
appeal the decision to the governing body by written notice within ten (10) working days. The subdivider may request a hearing, and may submit
additional evidence to show that the changes to the preliminary plat are not material.
1. The sixty (60) working day review period is suspended until the governing body's decision on the appeal is made.
2. If the governing body concludes the evidence and information demonstrates the changes to the subdivision application or preliminary plat are
material, they shall determine whether the subdivision application should be resubmitted or scheduled for rehearing in front of the planning board
pursuant to subsection B4a or B4b of this section.
3. If the governing body concludes that the evidence and information demonstrates that the changes to the subdivision application or preliminary plat
are not material, the sixty (60) working day review period resumes as of the date of the decision.
4. By appealing the decision of the subdivision administrator, the subdivider agrees to suspension of the sixty (60) working day review period provided
in subsection E1 of this section. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-6-11: MAJOR FINAL PLATS:
The final plat must have the contents, and be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the appropriate requirements contained in chapter 4 of this title.
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 136/242
Chapter 7
DIVISIONS OF LAND EXEMPT FROM SUBDIVISION REVIEW
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The MSPA provides that certain divisions of land, which would otherwise constitute subdivisions, are exempt from local subdivision review and approval,
unless the use of the exemption is an attempt to evade the MSPA. The exemptions are found in Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 3, part 2. This
title addresses the more commonly used exemptions. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-2: GENERAL CRITERIA TO DETERMINE WHETHER PROPOSAL AN ATTEMPT TO EVADE MSPA:
The governing body and their agents, when determining whether an exemption is claimed for the purpose of evading the MSPA, shall consider all of the
surrounding circumstances. These circumstances include the nature of the claimant's business, the prior history of the particular tract in question, the
proposed configuration of the tracts if the proposed exempt transaction is completed, and any pattern of exempt transactions that will result in the
equivalent of a subdivision without local government review. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-3: DIVISIONS OF LAND ENTIRELY EXEMPT1:
The governing body or their agents will examine the divisions of land set forth in this section to determine whether or not the requirements of the MSPA
and this title apply to the division. The fee for this examination is set forth in section 12-13-1 of this title. The requirements of these regulations and the
MSPA do not apply unless the method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading these regulations or the MSPA, or as otherwise specifically
provided, when:
A. Created By Court Order: A division of land is created by order of any court of record in this state or by operation of law or that, in the absence of
agreement between the parties to the sale, could be created by an order of any court in the state pursuant to the law of eminent domain, Montana
Code Annotated title 70, chapter 30. Before a court of record orders a division of land, the court shall notify the governing body of the pending division
and allow the governing body to present written comments on the division of land.
B. Provided To Create Security: A division of land is created to provide security for mortgages, liens, or trust indentures for the purpose of construction,
improvements to the land being divided, or refinancing purposes.
1. Applicability: This exemption applies:
a. To a division of land of any size.
b. If the land that is divided is only conveyed to the financial or lending institution to which the mortgage, lien, or trust indenture was given, or to a
purchaser upon foreclosure of the mortgage, lien, or trust indenture. A transfer of the divided land, by the owner of the property at the time the land
was divided, to any party other than those identified in the preceding sentence subjects the division of land to the requirements of the MSPA and
this title.
c. To a parcel that is created to provide security under this subsection. The remainder of the tract of land, if applicable, is subject to the provisions of
the MSPA and this title.
2. Statement Of Intent: Under policies by many lending institutions and federal home loan guaranty programs, a landowner who is buying a tract with
financing or through a contract for deed is required to hold title to the specific site on which the residence will be built. The intended purpose of this
exemption is to allow a person who is buying a tract using financing or contract for deed to segregate a smaller parcel from the tract for security for
financing construction of a home on the property.
3. Use Of Exemption: This exemption is not available to simply create a parcel without review by claiming that the parcel will be used for security to
finance construction of a home or other structure on the proposed lot. This exemption may not be properly invoked unless: a) the claimant is
purchasing a larger tract through financing or a contract for deed (and thus does not hold title) and b) a lending institution requires the landowner to
hold title to a small parcel of the tract because the smaller tract is required as security for a building construction loan.
4. Required Materials: When this exemption is to be used, the landowner must submit to the subdivision administrator:
a. A statement of how many interests within the original tract will be created by use of the exemption;
b. The deed, trust indenture or mortgage for the exempted interest (which states that the interest is being created only to secure a construction
mortgage, lien or trust indenture);
c. A statement explaining who will have title to and possession of the balance of the original parcel after title to the exempted interest is conveyed;
and
d. A signed statement from a lending institution that the creation of the interest is necessary to secure a loan.
5. Rebuttable Presumptions: The use of this exemption is presumed to have been adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA if:
a. It will create more than one new building site;
b. The financing is not for construction or improvements on the exempted parcel, or for refinancing;
c. The person named in the "statement explaining who would have possession of the remainder parcel if title to the exempted parcel is conveyed" is
anyone other than the borrower of funds for construction;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 137/242
d. Title to the exempted interest will not be initially obtained by the lending institution if foreclosure occurs;
e. There exists a prior agreement to default or a prior agreement to purchase only a portion of the original tract;
f. It appears that the principal reason the interest is being created is to create a building site and using the interest to secure a loan is a secondary
purpose; or
g. The division of land is created for the purpose of conveyance to any entity other than the financial or lending institution to which the mortgage, lien
or trust indenture was given or to a purchaser upon foreclosure of the mortgage, lien or trust indenture.
C. Interest In Oil, Gas, Minerals Or Water: A division of land creates an interest in oil, gas, minerals, or water that is severed from the surface ownership of
real property.
D. Cemetery Lots: A division of land creates cemetery lots.
E. Life Estate: A division of land is created by the reservation of a life estate.
F. Farming And Agricultural Purposes: A division of land is created by lease or rental for farming and agricultural purposes.
G. Not Under State Jurisdiction: A division of land is in a location over which the state does not have jurisdiction.
H. Public Right Of Way Or Public Utility Sites: A division of land is created for public rights of way or public utility sites. A subsequent change in the use of
the land to a residential, commercial, or industrial use is subject to the requirements of the MSPA and this title.
I. Remainder Parcel: A division of land created as a remainder parcel from a tract of record or designated parcel as the result of the identification and
subdivision of a parcel pursuant to these rules. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-4: DIVISIONS OF LAND EXEMPT FROM REVIEW AND SURVEY:
A. Condominiums: Generally condominiums are subject to review as subdivisions, but under certain circumstances they may be exempt from review,
provided they are constructed on land divided in compliance with this title and the MSPA, and:
1. The approval of the original division of land expressly contemplated the construction of the condominiums and Montana Code Annotated section 76-
3-621 is complied with; or
2. The condominium proposal is in conformance with applicable zoning regulations.
B. Subdivisions Created By Rent Or Lease: Generally, subdivisions created by rent or lease are exempt from the surveying and filing requirements of the
MSPA and this title, but must be submitted for review and approved by the governing body before portions may be rented or leased.
1. When the land upon which an improvement is situated has been subdivided in compliance with the MSPA, the sale, rent, lease or other conveyance
of one or more parts of a building, structure, or other improvement situated on one or more parcels of land is not a division of land and is not subject
to the MSPA or this title;
2. The sale, rent, lease, or other conveyance of one or more parts of a building, structure or other improvement, whether existing or proposed, is not a
division of land and is not subject to the requirements of the MSPA or this title.
C. Created By Lease Or Rental Of Airport Related Land: A division of land created by lease or rental of contiguous airport related land owned by a city,
county, the state, or a municipal or regional airport authority is not subject to the MSPA or this title, provided that the lease or rental is for on site
weather or air navigation facilities, the manufacture, maintenance, and storage of aircraft, or air carrier related activities.
D. Division Of State Owned Land: A division of state owned land is not subject to the MSPA or this title unless the division creates a second or subsequent
parcel from a single tract for sale, rent, or lease for residential purposes after July 1, 1974.
E. Prior To July 1, 1974: The MSPA and this title do not apply to deeds, contracts, leases, or other conveyances which were executed prior to July 1, 1974.
F. Acquired For State Highways: Instruments of transfer of land which is acquired for state highways may refer by parcel and project number to state
highway plans which have been recorded in compliance with Montana Code Annotated section 60-2-209, and are exempted from the surveying and
platting requirements of the MSPA and this title. A survey or plat for the recordation of an instrument transferring title to a remainder that was created
when the state obtained property for a highway right of way is not required2. If such parcels are not shown on highway plans of record, instruments of
transfer of such parcels shall be accompanied by and refer to appropriate certificates of survey and plats when presented for recording. (Ord. 784, 8-6-
2007)
12-7-5: DIVISIONS OF LAND EXEMPT FROM REVIEW BUT SUBJECT TO SURVEY REQUIREMENTS AND ZONING
REGULATIONS:
Unless the method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading this title or the MSPA, the following divisions of land are not subdivisions under
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 138/242
these regulations and the MSPA, but are subject to the surveying requirements of Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-401, and zoning regulations
adopted under Montana Code Annotated title 76 chapter 2 or 3. A division of land may not be made under this section unless the county treasurer has
certified that all real property taxes and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be divided have been paid. The clerk and recorder shall
notify the subdivision administrator if a land division described in this section or Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-207(1), is submitted to the clerk
and recorder prior to the survey being submitted to the subdivision administrator for evasion review. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-6: RELOCATION OF COMMON BOUNDARY3:
A. Statement Of Intent: The intended purpose of this exemption is to allow a change in the location or the elimination of a boundary line between adjoining
properties outside of a platted subdivision and to allow a one time transfer of a tract to effect that relocation or elimination without subdivision review.
B. Required Information: Certificates of survey claiming this exemption must clearly distinguish between the existing boundary locations and, in case of
relocation, the new boundary. This must be accomplished by representing the existing boundary with a dashed line and the new boundary, if
applicable, with a solid line. The appropriate certification set forth in ARM 24.183.1104 (1)(f) (appendix A) must be included on the certificate of survey.
Certificates of survey showing the relocation of common boundary lines must be accompanied by a quitclaim or warranty deed or recordable
agreement from adjoining property owners for the entire newly described parcel(s) or that portion of the tract(s) that is being affected.
C. Use Of Exemption: The proper use of the exemption for relocating common boundary lines is to establish a new boundary between adjoining parcels of
land outside of a platted subdivision, without creating an additional parcel. The exemption may not be used if the division of land would result in the
permanent creation of one or more additional parcels of land.
D. Rebuttable Presumptions: The use of this exemption is presumed to have been adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA if:
1. The reviewing agent determines that the documentation submitted according to this section does not support the stated reason for relocation; or
2. The proposed relocation creates a parcel of less than one hundred sixty (160) acres which, prior to the relocation included more than one hundred
sixty (160) acres. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-7: GIFT OR SALE TO MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY4:
A. Statement Of Intent: The intent of this exemption is to allow a landowner to convey one parcel outside of a platted subdivision to each member of his or
her immediate family, without local subdivision review. A single parcel may be conveyed to each member of the immediate family under this exemption
in each county where the landowner owns property. The term "immediate family" means the spouse, children (by blood or adoption), or parents of the
grantor5. This exemption may be used only by grantors who are natural persons and not by noncorporal legal entities such as corporations,
partnerships, and trusts.
B. Required Information: A certificate of survey (or recording of an instrument of conveyance) that uses this exemption to create a parcel for conveyance to
a family member must show the name of the grantee, relationship to the landowner, and the parcel to be conveyed under this exemption, and the
landowner's certification of compliance (ARM 24.183.1104(1)(f)) found in appendix A. Also, the certificate of survey or instrument of conveyance must
be accompanied by a deed or other conveying document.
C. Use Of Exemption: One conveyance of a parcel to each member of the landowner's immediate family is eligible for exemption from subdivision review
under the MSPA and this title. However, the use of the exemption may not create more than one new parcel per eligible family member.
D. Rebuttable Presumptions:
1. Any proposed use of the family gift or sale exemption to divide a tract that was previously created through the use of an exemption will be presumed
to be adopted for purposes of evading the MSPA.
2. The use of the family gift or sale exemption to divide tracts that were created as part of an overall development plan with such characteristics as
common roads, utility easements, restrictive covenants, open space or common marketing or promotional plan raises a rebuttable presumption that
the use of the exemption is adopted for purposes of evading the MSPA.
3. A transfer of a parcel of land by one family member to another, followed by an attempted use of this exemption will result in the presumption the
method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA and this title.
4. The use of the exemption to create more than one additional or remaining parcel of less than one hundred sixty (160) acres in size is presumed to
be adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA and this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-8: DIVISIONS OF LAND PROPOSED FOR AGRICULTURAL USE ONLY6:
A. Statement Of Intent: This exemption is intended to allow a landowner to create a parcel for gift, sale, or agreement to buy and sell, outside a platted
subdivision, without local review if the parcel will be used only for the production of livestock or agricultural crops and no residential, commercial or
industrial buildings, which require water or sewer, will be built on it.
B. Required Information: A certificate of survey that uses this exemption to create a parcel for agricultural use only requires a covenant running with the
land in accordance with Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-207(1)(c), and a signed and acknowledged recitation of the covenant on the face of
the survey (ARM 24.183.1104(f)(iii) in the appendix). The certificate of survey must be accompanied by a separate, recordable, document reciting the
covenant.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 139/242
C. Use Of Exemption:
1. "Agricultural purpose", for purposes of these evasion criteria, means the use of land for raising crops, livestock, or timber, and specifically excludes
residential structures and facilities for commercially processing agricultural products. Agricultural lands are exempt from review by the DEQ, provided
the applicable exemption under the sanitation in subdivisions act is properly invoked by the property owner.
2. Any change in use of the land for anything other than agricultural purposes subjects the parcel to review as a minor subdivision.
3. Residential, commercial, or industrial structures, including facilities for commercial processing of agricultural products, may not be utilized,
constructed or erected on parcels created under this exemption unless the covenant is revoked.
D. Rebuttable Presumptions: The following conditions must be met or the use of the exemption will be presumed to have been adopted for the purpose of
evading the MSPA:
1. The parties to the transaction must enter into a covenant running with the land and revocable only by mutual consent of the governing body and the
property owner, that the divided land will be used exclusively for agricultural purposes. The covenant must be signed by the property owner, the
buyer, and the members of the governing body.
2. The landowner must demonstrate that the planned use of the exempted parcel is for agricultural purposes and that no residential, commercial, or
industrial buildings have been or will be built on it.
3. The parcel must meet the criteria for an agricultural designation under Montana Code Annotated section 15-7-202. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-9: RELOCATION OF COMMON BOUNDARIES INVOLVING PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS7:
A. Statement Of Intent:
1. The MSPA allows certain revisions to subdivisions platted since July 1, 1973, which include relocation of common boundaries and the aggregation of
lots for five (5) or fewer lots within a platted subdivision or the relocation of a common boundary between a single lot in a platted subdivision and
adjoining land outside a platted subdivision (but a restriction or requirement on either continues to apply) without review.
2. If a change is made to a platted subdivision which results in an increase in the number of lots or redesigns or rearranges six (6) or more lots, the
governing body must review and approve the amended plat and an amended plat must be filed with the clerk and recorder.
B. Use Of Exemption: Relocation of a common boundary between a single lot in a platted subdivision and adjoining land outside a platted subdivision8 is
allowed, because no additional parcels are created. Subdivision review is not necessary because the relocation does not create any additional division
of land.
C. Rebuttable Presumption:
1. If the resulting lots are inconsistent with the approved subdivision and the uses in it, the use of the exemption will be presumed to have been
adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA.
2. If the resulting lots do not comply with existing zoning, covenants, and/or deed restrictions, the use of the exemption will be presumed to have been
adopted for the purpose of evading the MSPA. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-7-10: PROCEDURES AND REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION EXEMPTIONS:
A. Submittal: Any person seeking exemption from the requirements of the MSPA shall submit to the subdivision administrator: 1) a certificate of survey or,
if a survey is not required, an instrument of conveyance; and 2) evidence of, and an affidavit affirming, entitlement to the claimed exemption. For
purposes of Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-207, when a parcel of land for which an exemption from subdivision review is claimed is being
conveyed under a contract for deed, the terms "property owner", "landowner", and "owner" mean the seller of the parcel under the contract for deed9.
B. Review: When a division of land for which an exemption is claimed is submitted, the subdivision administrator shall cause the documents to be
reviewed by the designated agents of the governing body such as, but not limited to, the county attorney, sanitarian, treasurer, and clerk and recorder.
The subdivision administrator and the governing body's agents, staff and employees shall review the claimed exemption to verify that it is the proper
use of the claimed exemption and complies with the requirements set forth in the MSPA, the Montana sanitation in subdivisions act, and this title.
1. Landowners or their agents are encouraged to meet with the subdivision administrator to discuss whether a proposed land division or use of an
exemption is in compliance with the criteria in this chapter.
2. The subdivision administrator shall make a written determination of whether the use of the exemption is intended to evade the purposes of the
MSPA, explaining the reasons for the determination.
3. If the subdivision administrator finds that the proposed use of the exemption complies with the statutes and the criteria set forth in this chapter, the
subdivision administrator shall notify the governing body and advise the clerk and recorder to file the certificate of survey or record the instrument of
conveyance and accompanying documents. If the subdivision administrator finds that the proposed use of the exemption does not comply with the
statutes and the criteria in this section, the subdivision administrator shall advise the clerk and recorder not to file or record the documents, and the
materials will be returned to the landowner.
4. The subdivision administrator shall consider all of the surrounding circumstances when determining whether an exemption is claimed for the purpose
of evading the MSPA. These circumstances may include, but are not limited to: the nature of the claimant's business, the prior history of the
particular tract in question, the proposed configuration of the tracts if the proposed exempt transaction is completed, and any pattern of exempt
transactions that will result in the equivalent of a subdivision without local government review.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 140/242
C. Appeals:
1. Any person whose proposed use of an exemption has been denied by the subdivision administrator because the proposed division of land has been
deemed an attempt to evade the MSPA and this title, may appeal the subdivision administrator's decision to the governing body. The person may
request a hearing, and may submit additional evidence to show that the use of the exemption in question is not intended to evade the MSPA or this
title, and, thereby rebut a presumption.
2. If the governing body concludes the evidence and information overcome the presumption that the exemption is being invoked to evade the MSPA or
this title, they may authorize the use of the exemption, in writing. A certificate of survey claiming an exemption from subdivision review, which
otherwise is in proper form, and which the governing body has determined not to be an attempt to evade the MSPA or this title, may be filed (or an
instrument of conveyance recorded) if it is accompanied by written authorization of the governing body.
3. If the person proposing to use an exemption chooses not to rebut a presumption when the subdivision administrator deems the use of the exemption
an attempt to evade the MSPA and this title, or if the governing body determines that the proposed use of an exemption was for the purpose of
evading the MSPA or this title, the landowner proposing to use the exemption may submit a subdivision application for the proposed land division.
D. Remainders:
1. Occasionally, parcels of land are created after the rest of the land has been subdivided or after an exemption is used to divide the land. The term
"remainder" is commonly used to refer to that portion of an original tract which is not itself created for transfer but which is left after other parcels are
segregated for transfer.
2. To qualify as a remainder, a parcel must not have been created for the purpose of transfer and must be retained by the owner. The subdivision
administrator or designee shall determine during the preapplication process whether or not a proposed remainder meets this qualification, that it is
not being created for the purpose of transfer. The determination shall be based upon demonstration by the subdivider that one or more of the
following criteria are met: a) the remainder parcel is one hundred sixty (160) acres or more in size; b) the remainder is part of a phased development
in which the phasing plan has been approved by the governing body; c) the remainder has minimal relation to the subdivision lots in regard to size,
parcel, configuration, road access, common facilities or covenants. The subdivider may submit an appeal of the determination by the subdivision
administrator or designee with the preliminary plat application. If an appeal is submitted, the governing body shall make the final determination as to
whether or not a proposed remainder is being created for the purpose of transfer, giving consideration to the criteria noted above and all other
surrounding circumstances.
3. A remainder does not meet the definition of a subdivision; therefore, it is only subject to survey if it cannot be described as a one thirty-second (1/32)
or larger aliquot part of a U.S. government section or U.S. government lot10.
4. Prior to the transfer of an unsurveyed remainder parcel to another party, it shall be surveyed and the survey filed with the clerk and recorder, unless
it can be described as a one thirty-second (1/32) or larger aliquot part of a U.S. government section or a U.S. government lot11.
5. Neither a subdivision nor the use of an exemption can create more than one remainder, nor can a remainder be used in conjunction with a five (5) lot
minor subdivision.
6. A landowner claiming that a parcel is a "remainder" shall present evidence that the parcel is in fact intended to be retained and not to be transferred.
Examples of such evidence include the existence of the landowner's residence on the parcel or building plans for a structure to be built by or for the
landowner.
E. Identification Codes: To assist in the implementation of this review process and to monitor those parcels by exemption the clerk and recorder may cause
the following identification codes to be added to the numbering of recorded certificates of survey filed after the effective date hereof:
CO Court order12
ME Mortgage exemption13
LE Life estate14
RB Relocation of common boundary15
FC Family conveyance16
AE Agricultural exemption17
OS Occasional sale (used prior to April 6, 1993)
AL Aggregation of lots18
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 8
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
12-8-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All subdivisions approved by the governing body must comply with the provisions of this chapter, except where granted a variance pursuant to section 12-
13-2 of this title. The governing body may not grant variances from the provisions of section 12-8-5 of this chapter. For subdivisions created by rent or
lease, planned unit developments, and condominiums, refer to chapters 9, 10 and 11 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 141/242
12-8-2: CONFORMANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
The design and development of a subdivision must conform to any applicable zoning or other regulations. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-3: NATURAL ENVIRONMENT:
The design and development of subdivisions must provide satisfactory building sites, which are properly related to topography, and should, to the extent
possible, preserve the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil, trees and other existing vegetation. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-4: LANDS UNSUITABLE FOR SUBDIVISION:
Land that the governing body determines is unsuitable for subdivision because of natural or human caused hazards may not be subdivided for building or
residential purposes unless the hazards are eliminated or will be overcome by approved design and construction techniques. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-5: FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS:
Land located in the floodway of a 100-year flood event as defined by Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 5, or other land designated by the
governing body to be subject to flooding may not be subdivided for building or residential purposes or other uses that may increase or aggravate flood
hazards to life, health or welfare, or that may be prohibited by state or local floodplain or floodway regulations.
A. Flood Hazard Evaluation Required: If any portion of a proposed subdivision is within two thousand (2,000) horizontal feet and twenty (20) vertical feet of
a live stream draining an area of twenty five (25) square miles or more, and no official floodway delineation or floodway studies of the stream have
been made, the subdivider shall provide in detail to the floodplain management section of the water resources division of the Montana department of
natural resources and conservation (DNRC), a flood hazard evaluation, including the calculated 100-year frequency water surface elevations and the
100-year floodplain boundaries. This detailed evaluation must be performed by a licensed professional engineer experienced in this field of work. The
evaluation must follow the "guidelines for obtaining 100-year flood elevations in approximate zone A or unmapped areas" which may be found at the
following website: www.mtfloods.org.
B. Submittal Of DNRC Report: The subdivider shall be responsible for assuring the DNRC submits its report to the subdivision administrator prior to the
hearing or meeting on the subdivision application.
C. Requirement Waived: The above requirement is waived if the subdivider contacts the water resources division and that agency states, in writing, that
available data indicate that the proposed subdivision is not in a flood hazard area. However, the DNRC may require additional information following the
above guidelines to ensure there are no flood hazards. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-6: IMPROVEMENT DESIGN:
Engineering and survey plans, specifications, and reports required in connection with public improvements and other elements of the subdivision required
by the governing body must be prepared by a professional engineer or a professional land surveyor as their respective licensing laws allow in accordance
with the MSPA and these regulations. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-7: LOTS:
Each lot must contain a satisfactory building site and conform to health department regulations, applicable zoning regulations and these regulations.
A. No lot may be divided by a municipal or county boundary line.
B. No lot may be divided by a public road, alley or utility right of way or easement.
C. Each lot must abut and have access to a public or private street or road. Alleys may not be used to provide the primary access to a lot.
D. Corner lots must have driveway access to the same street or road that provides access to interior lots.
E. Corner lots must be designed to provide acceptable sight distances for safe vehicular movement.
F. No lot may have an average depth greater than three (3) times its average width.
G. Side lot lines must be at substantially right angles to street or road lines and radial to curved street or road lines.
H. Through lots are prohibited except when they are essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography or orientation. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 142/242
12-8-8: BLOCKS:
A. Design: Blocks must be designed to assure traffic safety and ease of traffic control and circulation, to accommodate the special needs of the use
contemplated, and to take advantage of the limitations and opportunities of the topography.
B. Length: Unless impractical, block length must not be more than one thousand six hundred feet (1,600').
C. Width: Blocks must be wide enough to allow for two (2) tiers of lots unless a narrower configuration is essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, or unless the governing body approves a
design consisting of irregularly shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sacs.
D. Rights Of Way: Rights of way for adequate and safe pedestrian access, at least ten feet (10') wide, must be provided where deemed essential to
provide circulation to schools, playgrounds, shopping, transportation, and other community facilities. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-9: STREETS AND ROADS:
A. Design: The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and the proposed uses of the land to be served by them.
1. Design Specifications: Roads must meet the design specifications in table 1 of this section.
2. Termination Of Street: Where streets terminate, either a cul-de-sac or "T" turnaround must be provided at the terminus. Cul-de-sacs and "T"
turnarounds must conform to the design specifications in table 1 of this section.
3. Public Or Private Streets: All streets must either be dedicated to the public or be private streets to be owned and maintained by an approved
property owners' association.
4. Residential Driveways: Residential driveways must not have direct access to primary highways. Any vehicular access onto a state highway must be
approved by the Montana department of transportation.
5. Local Streets: Local streets must be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
6. Frontage Roads: Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway or major thoroughfare, the governing body may
require frontage roads or other treatment as may be necessary to adequately protect residential properties and to separate arterial and local traffic.
7. Half Streets: Half streets are prohibited except when they are essential to the development of the subdivision and when the governing body is
satisfied that the other half of the street will be dedicated to the public when the adjoining property is subdivided. When an existing half street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street must be platted within the new subdivision.
8. Alignment: The alignment of all streets and roads must provide adequate sight distances.
9. Intersections: The following requirements apply to intersections:
a. Streets must intersect at ninety degree (90o) angles except when topography prohibits this alignment. In no case may the angle of an intersection
be less than sixty degrees (60o) to the centerline of the roadway being intersected.
b. Two (2) streets meeting a third street from opposite sides must be offset at least one hundred twenty five feet (125') for local roads and three
hundred feet (300') for arterials or collectors.
c. No more than two (2) streets may intersect at one point.
d. Intersections of local streets with major arterials or highways must be avoided.
e. Intersections must be designed to provide adequate visibility for traffic safety based on the designed operating speeds of the intersecting
roadways.
f. Hilltop intersections are prohibited, unless no alternatives exist. Intersections on local roads within one hundred feet (100') of a hilltop are
prohibited. Intersections on arterial and collector roads within two hundred feet (200') of a hilltop are prohibited. If no alternative to a hilltop
intersection exists, additional traffic control devices will be required.
g. The grade of approaches to major highways may not exceed five percent (5%).
10. Names: Names of new streets or roads aligned with existing streets must be the same as those of the existing streets. Proposed street names may
not duplicate or cause confusion with existing street names.
11. Proposed Road Plans And Profiles: Proposed road plans and profiles as required by section 12-3-5 of this title are subject to approval by the public
works director or road department superintendent.
B. Improvements:
1. Specifications And Standards: All roadway improvements including pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and drainage must be constructed in
accordance with the specifications and standards prescribed in this title using materials approved by the governing body in consultation with and
upon the advice of the public works director or road department superintendent.
2. Roadway Subgrades: Roadway subgrades must be free of topsoil, sod, vegetation or organic matter, soft clay, and other substandard materials.
Subgrades must be properly rolled, shaped, and compacted, and must be approved by the public works director or road department superintendent
and governing body.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 143/242
3. Design: Streets and roads must be designed to ensure proper drainage. This may require surface crowning, culverts, curbs and gutters, drainage
swales and storm drains.
4. Access From Public Road To Subdivision: Where access from a public road to the subdivision will cross properties not owned by the subdivider, the
subdivider must obtain proper easements of sufficient width to satisfy the requirements of table 1 of this section.
a. Easements must be granted by each property owner in a signed and notarized document1.
b. The location of any road easement must be shown on the plat or on a supplemental map. The existence of easements must be noted on the face
of the final plat and on any deeds or other instruments conveying lots within the subdivision.
5. Trees And Vegetation: Existing trees and other vegetation must be preserved whenever possible. Plantings may be required for buffering, screening,
or prevention of soil erosion and are subject to approval by the governing body.
6. Streetlights: Streetlights will be required in subdivisions proposed within or adjacent to areas with existing street lighting. Street lighting may be
required in other areas when necessary to protect public safety.
7. Street Or Road Signs And Traffic Control Devices: Street or road signs and traffic control devices of the size, shape, and height approved by the
governing body must be placed at all intersections. Traffic control devices must conform to the standards contained in the manual on uniform control
devices available from the Montana department of transportation.
8. Mail Delivery: When required by the United States postal service, the developer must provide an off street area for mail delivery.
C. Table 1, Road Design Standards For Subdivisions:
TABLE 1
ROAD DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
Minimum Design Standards Minor Collector Local Road
Minimum right of way width
Level terrain
Hilly terrain
60 feet
50 feet
60 feet
Minimum roadway width1 26 feet 24 feet
Minimum curb radius or edge of pavement at intersections 25 feet 15 feet
Maximum grades 8 percent 10 percent
Approaches onto public roads
Minimum sight distance
Minimum width
Maximum grade for 20 feet
200 feet
135 feet
5 percent
150 feet
30 feet
5 percent
Curvature2
Design speed
Maximum curve
Minimum radius
30 mph
23
249 feet
20 mph
53.5
107 feet
Cul-de-sacs/Turnarounds
Maximum road length
Cul-de-sac: minimum outside right of way radius
Cul-de-sac: minimum outside
roadway radius
"T" turnaround: backup lengths
(2 required)
--
--
--
--
1,000 feet
40 feet
35 feet
30 feet each
New bridges3
Curb to curb widths
Design load capacity
Vertical clearance
26 feet
20 tons
14.5 feet
24 feet
206 tons
14.5 feet
Notes:
1.Where parking will be permitted add 8 feet on each side. If guardrail installation is required or a shoulder is desired, add 2 feet to each side of roadway.
2.Curvature is based on a super elevation of .08/ft.
3.Width of the bridge roadway surface should match the width of the roadway system it joins.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 144/242
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 145/242
12-8-10: DRAINAGE FACILITIES:
A. Approval Required: The drainage system and facilities required for any surface runoff affecting the subdivision are subject to approval by the governing
body. Subdivisions containing lots less than twenty (20) acres in size must also be reviewed and approved under Montana Code Annotated title 76,
chapter 4, by the DEQ.
B. Grading And Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan as required by subsection 12-3-5F of this title is subject to approval by the public works
director or road department superintendent.
C. Curbs And Gutters Or Swales: Curbs and gutters or swales will be required based on the character of the area, density of development, and nature of
adjoining properties. Curbs and gutters of adjoining properties must be extended in conformance with current specifications of local and state
authorities.
D. Culverts And Bridges: Culverts and bridges of adequate size must be provided and installed by the subdivider where drainage channels intersect any
street or road right of way or easement. All culverts and bridges must be constructed and installed according to applicable local and state standards.
Culverts and other drainage facilities must be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from upstream drainage areas.
E. Suitable Drainage Facilities: The subdivider must provide suitable drainage facilities for any surface runoff affecting the subdivision. These facilities
must be located in street rights of way or in perpetual easements of appropriate widths.
F. Discharge Into Sanitary Sewer Prohibited: Drainage systems must not discharge into any sanitary sewer facility.
G. Certification By Professional Engineer: Drainage systems must be designed and certified by a professional engineer.
H. Easements: The governing body may require the subdivider to grant easements to prevent encroachment or disruption of drainageways or facilities.
Drainage easements must be shown on the plat and a signed statement granting the easements must appear on the plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-11: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
A. DEQ Standards: For subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing less than twenty (20) acres, the proposed method of supplying
domestic water to each lot in the subdivision must comply with the design standards adopted by the Montana DEQ and contained in the administrative
rules of Montana (ARM) 17.36.301, 17.36.302, 17.36.303, and 17.36.305. By this reference these DEQ standards are incorporated into and made a
part of this title. Unless defined elsewhere in these regulations, the terms used in these standards will have the meanings assigned to them in ARM
17.36.101 and future amendments and additions thereto.
B. DEQ Approval: The governing body may not approve the final plat of a subdivision containing lots of less than twenty (20) acres in size, unless the
subdivision has been approved by DEQ or other authorized reviewing authority under the sanitation in subdivisions act, Montana Code Annotated
sections 76-4-101 et seq.
C. Fire Protection: Any central water supply system must provide adequate and accessible water for fire protection. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-12: SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS:
A. DEQ Standards: For subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing less than twenty (20) acres, the proposed method of disposing of
sewage from each lot in the subdivision must comply with the design standards adopted by the DEQ and contained in the administrative rules of
Montana (ARM 17.36.301, 17.36.302, 17.36.312, and 17.36.320 through 17.36.326). By this reference these DEQ standards are incorporated into and
made a part of these regulations. Unless defined elsewhere in these regulations, the terms used in these standards will have the meanings assigned to
them in ARM 17.36.101.
B. Less Than Twenty Acres: For subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing less than twenty (20) acres, the subdivision must have been
approved by DEQ or other authorized reviewing authority under the sanitation in subdivisions act, Montana Code Annotated sections 76-4-101 et seq.,
before the governing body can approve the final plat.
C. Twenty Acres Or More: For subdivisions containing parcels containing twenty (20) acres or more, the subdivider shall have demonstrated that there is
an adequate water source and at least one area for a septic system and a replacement drain field for each lot before the governing body may approve
the final plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-13: SOLID WASTE:
A. DEQ Standards: For subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing less than twenty (20) acres, the proposed method of disposing of solid
waste must comply with the standards adopted by the DEQ and contained in the administrative rules of Montana, ARM 17.36.309. By this reference
this DEQ standard is incorporated into and made a part of these regulations. Unless defined elsewhere in these regulations, the terms used in these
standards will have the meanings assigned to them in ARM 17.36.101.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 146/242
B. Less Than Twenty Acres: Before the governing body approves the final plat of a subdivision containing lots of less than twenty (20) acres in size, the
subdivision must have been approved by the DEQ or other authorized reviewing authority under the sanitation in subdivisions act sections Montana
Code Annotated section 76-4-101 et seq.
C. Twenty Acres Or More: For subdivisions that will create one or more parcels containing twenty (20) acres or more and less than one hundred sixty (160)
acres, the proposed method of storing and disposing of solid waste generated within the subdivision in the subdivision must comply with the local
environmental health department regulations. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-14: UTILITIES:
The subdivider must provide adequate and appropriate easements for the construction and maintenance of utilities within the subdivision. The subdivider
must obtain any easements necessary to extend utilities to the subdivision.
A. Utility Lines: Where practical, overhead utility lines must be located at the rear property line. If possible and practicable, utilities shall be placed
underground.
B. Utility Facilities: Utility facilities must be designed by utility firms in cooperation with the subdivider. These facilities are subject to all applicable laws,
rules, and regulations of any appropriate regulatory authorities.
C. Easements:
1. Location: Utility easements located between adjoining lots must be centered on lot lines. If easements are placed in the street, they must be located
between the roadway and the right of way line.
2. Width: Utility easements must be fifteen feet (15') wide unless otherwise specified by a utility company or governing body.
D. Notice Of Utility Occupancy: When a utility is to be located in an existing, dedicated right of way, a notice of utility occupancy must be obtained from the
governing body or state highway department.
E. Language Required On Final Plat: In addition to showing the location of utility easements on the plat with dashed lines, the following statement must
appear on the final plat:
The undersigned hereby grants unto each and every person, firm, or corporation, whether public or private, providing or offering to provide
telephone, telegraph, electric power, gas, cable television, internet, water or sewer service to the public, the right to the joint use of an easement for the
construction, maintenance, repair and removal of their lines and other facilities, in, over, under and across each area designated on this plat as "Utility
Easement" to have and to hold forever.
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-15: WATERCOURSE AND IRRIGATION EASEMENTS:
A. Ditch Easements: Except as noted in subsection B of this section, the subdivider shall establish within the subdivision ditch easements that:
1. Are in locations of appropriate topographic characteristics and sufficient width to allow the physical placement and unobstructed maintenance of
open ditches or belowground pipelines for the delivery of water for irrigation to persons and land legally entitled to the water under an appropriated
water right or permit of an irrigation district or other private or public entity formed to provide for the use of the water right on the subdivision lots;
2. Are a sufficient distance from the centerline of the ditch to allow for construction, repair, maintenance, and inspection of the ditch; and
3. Prohibit the placement of structures or the planting of vegetation other than grass within the ditch easement without the written permission of the
ditch owner.
B. Irrigation Easements: The subdivider need not establish irrigation easements as provided above if:
1. The average lot size in the proposed subdivision will be one acre or less and the subdivider provides for disclosure, in a manner acceptable to the
governing body, notifying potential buyers that lots within the subdivision are classified as irrigated land and may continue to be assessed for
irrigation water delivery even though the water may not be deliverable to the lots; or
2. The water rights have been removed from the land within the subdivision or the process has been initiated to remove the water rights from the
subdivided land; and
3. The fact the water rights have been or will be removed from the land within the subdivision is denoted on the preliminary plat. If the removal of water
rights has not been completed at the time the final plat is filed, the subdivider shall provide written notification to prospective buyers of the
subdivider's intention to remove the water right and shall document that intent, when applicable, in agreements and legal documents for related sales
transactions.
C. Information Included On Plats: The subdivider shall, unless otherwise provided under separate written agreement or filed easement, show on the
preliminary and final plat, and file and record with the county clerk and recorder, ditch easements for the unobstructed use and maintenance of existing
water delivery ditches, pipelines, and facilities in the proposed subdivision that are necessary to convey water through the subdivision to lands adjacent
to or beyond the subdivision boundaries in quantities and in a manner that is consistent with historic and legal rights. A minimum width of ten feet (10')
is required on each side of irrigation canals and ditches for maintenance purposes. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 147/242
12-8-16: DISPOSITION OF WATER RIGHTS:
If a subdivision will create lots averaging less than five (5) acres in size, the subdivider shall submit evidence with the final plat that the subdivider has:
A. Reserved all or a portion of the appropriation water rights owned by the owner of the land to be subdivided and transfer these water rights to a single
entity for use by landowners within the subdivision who have a legal right to the water and reserved and severed any remaining surface water rights
from the land;
B. If the land to be subdivided is subject to a contract or interest in a public or private entity formed to provide for the use of a water right on the subdivision
lots, established a landowner's water use agreement administered through a single entity. This agreement must specify how the water rights will be
administered and describe the rights and responsibilities of landowners within the subdivision who have a legal right and access to the water; or
C. Reserved and severed all surface water rights from the land proposed for subdivision. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-17: PARK LAND DEDICATION; CASH IN LIEU:
A. Cash Or Land Donation: Except as provided below, the final plat of a residential subdivision must show that the subdivider has dedicated to the
governing body a cash or land donation equal to:
1. Eleven percent (11%) of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided into parcels of one-half (1/2) acre or smaller;
2. Seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided into parcels larger than one-half (1/2) acre and not larger than
one acre;
3. Five percent (5%) of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided into parcels larger than one acre and not larger than three (3) acres; and
4. Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided into parcels larger than three (3) acres and not larger than five (5)
acres.
B. Park Dedication Not Required: A park dedication is not required for:
1. Minor subdivisions;
2. Subdivision lots larger than five (5) acres;
3. Nonresidential subdivision lots;
4. Subdivisions in which parcels of land will not be created, other than subdivisions that will provide permanent multiple spaces for recreational
camping vehicles, mobile homes, or condominiums; or
5. Subdivisions which will create only one additional parcel.
C. Location Of Parks And Playgrounds: The governing body in consultation with the subdivider and the planning board or park board that has jurisdiction,
may determine suitable locations for parks and playgrounds and, giving due weight and consideration to the expressed preference of the subdivider,
may determine whether the park dedication must be a land donation, cash donation, or a combination of both. When a combination of land donation
and cash donation is required, the cash donation may not exceed the proportional amount not covered by the land donation. The land dedicated for
park use may be inside or outside the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
D. Criteria For Waiver Or Park Dedication Requirement: The governing body will waive the park dedication requirement if it determines that:
1. Land Set Aside For Park And Recreational Purposes:
a. The preliminary plat provides for a planned unit development or other development with land permanently set aside for park and recreational uses
sufficient to meet the needs of the persons who will ultimately reside in the development; and
b. The area of the land and any improvements set aside for park and recreational purposes equals or exceeds the area of the dedication required
under this section.
2. Long Term Protection:
a. The proposed subdivision will provide for the long term protection of critical wildlife habitat; cultural, historical, or natural resources; agricultural
interests; or aesthetic values; and
b. The provision of this long term protection will result in the reduction of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided by an amount equal to or
exceeding the area that would have had to be dedicated under subsections A through D of this section.
3. Reduction In Amount Required: The area of the land proposed to be subdivided, by virtue of a combination of the provisions of subsections D1 and
D2 of this section, is reduced by an amount equal to or exceeding the area of the dedication required under subsection A of this section or:
a. The subdivider provides for land outside of the subdivision to be set aside for park and recreational uses sufficient to meet the needs of the
persons who will ultimately reside in the subdivision; and
b. The area of the land and any improvements set aside for park and recreational uses equals or exceeds the area of dedication required under
subsections A through D of this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 148/242
4. Land Outside Subdivision Provided: The local governing body may waive the park dedication requirement if:
a. The subdivider provides land outside the subdivision that affords long term protections of critical wildlife habitat, cultural, historical, or natural
resources, agricultural interests, or aesthetic values; and
b. The area of land to be subject to long term protection, as provided in subsection D2 of this section, equals or exceeds the area of dedication
required under subsections A through D of this section.
E. School District Lands: Subject to the approval of the governing body and acceptance by the school district trustees, a subdivider may dedicate a land
donation provided under subsections A through D of this section to a school district, adequate to be used for school facilities or buildings.
F. Funds: The governing body will administer funds dedicated to the public under this section in accordance with Montana Code Annotated 76-3-621.
G. Definitions: For the purposes of this park dedication requirement, the following words are defined as follows:
CASH DONATION: The fair market value of the unsubdivided, unimproved land.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential structure in which a person or persons reside. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-18: FIRE PROTECTION:
All subdivisions must be planned, designed, constructed, and maintained so as to minimize the risk of fire and to permit the effective and efficient
suppression of fires in order to protect persons, property, and forested areas. Measures must include:
A. Placement Of Structures: The placement of structures so as to minimize the potential for flame spread and to permit adequate access for firefighting
equipment.
B. Firefighting Facilities: The presence of adequate firefighting facilities on site, including an adequate water supply and water distribution system.
C. Fire Protection Services: The availability, through a fire protection district or other means, of fire protection services adequate to respond to fires that
may occur within a subdivision. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-19: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS PROPOSED IN AREAS OF HIGH FIRE HAZARD:
For areas identified as wildfire hazard areas by the United States forest service, the Montana department of natural resources and conservation, a local
fire protection authority, or a local growth policy, the following apply:
A. Fire Prevention And Control Plan: A fire prevention and control plan must accompany the submission of any application for preliminary plat approval.
B. Contents Of Plan: The fire prevention and control plan must include the following items:
1. An analysis of the wildfire hazards on the site, as influenced by existing vegetation and topography;
2. A map showing the areas that are to be cleared of dead, dying, or severely diseased vegetation;
3. A map of the areas that are to be thinned to reduce the interlocking canopy of trees;
4. The identification of roads, driveways, and bridges that are sufficient for emergency vehicle access and fire suppression activities. Slopes of all roads
and driveways must be provided.
C. Entrances/Exits: At least two (2) entrances/exits must provide escape routes for residents and access to the subdivision by firefighting vehicles. Bridges
providing access to the subdivision must be built to a design load of twenty (20) tons and constructed of nonflammable materials. Road rights of way
must be cleared of slash.
D. Slopes: Building sites may not be located on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) or at the apex of "fire chimneys" (topographic features,
usually drainageways or swales, which tend to funnel or otherwise concentrate fire toward the top of steep slopes).
E. Plan Implemented Prior To Final Plat Approval: The fire prevention and control plan must be implemented before the governing body will approve the
final plat, and will be considered part of the subdivider's obligations for land development. The local fire chief, or designee, will inspect and approve the
implementation of the fire prevention and control plan. The plan will not be considered fully implemented until the fire chief has given written notice to
the planning board or subdivision administrator that the plan has been completed as approved by the planning board.
F. Maintenance Of Plan: Provisions for the maintenance of the fire prevention and control plan shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and
restrictions for the development. A property owners' association must be formed and designated to enforce the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
G. Location Of Open Space, Park Land, And Recreational Areas: Open space, park land, and recreation areas (including green belts, riding or hiking
trails) should be located, where appropriate, to separate residences and other buildings from densely forested areas.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 149/242
H. Water Supply:
1. A water supply of sufficient volume for effective fire control must be provided in accordance with standards set by the appropriate local fire protection
authority.
2. In the absence of such standards, the subdivider must at least provide the following for effective fire control:
a. A central water system with a minimum continuous flow of one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute; or
b. Cisterns, reservoirs or fill ponds:
(1) For single dwelling units: minimum capacity of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons;
(2) For six (6) or more dwelling units: minimum capacity of five hundred (500) gallons per dwelling unit. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-8-20: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
A weed control plan shall be developed and implemented for every new subdivision. An agreement with the county weed control board shall be signed and
notarized by the subdivider, and the agreement must be recorded with the final plat. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 9
AREAS FOR RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLES OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED
HOMES; LAND SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY RENT OR LEASE
12-9-1: DEFINITION:
A "subdivision created by rent or lease, including a mobile home/manufactured home or recreational vehicle park", is any tract of land divided by renting or
leasing portions of it. The land is owned, however, as one parcel under single ownership (which can include a number of persons owning property in
common). Plans, not plats, are submitted to the subdivision administrator for review. The plan shows spaces, not lots. The plan must comply with
applicable zoning. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-2: SUBDIVISIONS PROVIDING MULTIPLE SPACES FOR RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLES OR
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOMES:
A. Recreational Camping Vehicles: Developments which are subject to subdivision review because they will provide two (2) or more spaces for
recreational camping vehicles, will be reviewed under section 12-9-13 of this chapter.
B. Mobile/Manufactured Homes: Developments which are subject to subdivision review because they will provide two (2) or more spaces for
mobile/manufactured homes, will be reviewed under section 12-9-13 of this chapter.
C. Subdivisions For Lease Or Rent, Generally:
1. Land subdivision created by rent or lease will be reviewed under the procedures described in chapter 6 of this title, or chapter 5 of this title, as may
be appropriate, except that the subdivider shall submit an unsurveyed final plan drawn to scale, rather than a final plat, following the final plat
procedure in chapter 4 of this title.
2. Land subdivisions created by rent or lease are subject to the applicable standards contained in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-3: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Subdivisions which will provide multiple spaces for recreational camping vehicles or mobile homes and subdivisions created for rent or lease are exempt
from the surveying and filing requirements of the MSPA. However, these subdivisions must be submitted for review and approved by the governing body
before portions of the subdivision may be rented or leased.
A. Submittal: The subdivider shall submit a completed application in accordance with section 12-3-5 of this title and a plan of the proposed development,
conforming to the requirements for preliminary plats.
B. Review: The procedure used to review subdivisions for rent or lease will depend on the number of spaces within the proposed subdivision. Proposed
subdivisions containing six (6) or more spaces must be reviewed pursuant to chapter 6 of this title. Proposed subdivisions containing five (5) or fewer
spaces must be reviewed pursuant to chapter 5 of this title. The subdivider shall submit to the subdivision administrator the preliminary plans, profiles,
tentative grades, and specifications for proposed improvements. The plan must show the space layout and the proposed location of the mobile home,
recreational vehicle, or other unit on the land included in the plan. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-4: IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall install all required improvements before renting or leasing any portion of the subdivision. The governing body or its agents, including
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 150/242
the county sanitarian, will inspect all required improvements in order to assure conformance with the approved construction plans and specifications. (Ord.
784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-5: FINAL PLAN REVIEW:
In lieu of filing a final plat, the subdivider shall submit a final plan to the subdivision administrator, complying with the requirements of final plats in chapter
4 of this title. The final plan will be reviewed to assure that it conforms to the approved preliminary plan. The approved plan shall be maintained in offices
of clerk and recorder and the subdivision administrator. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-6: DPHHS LICENSE:
If a subdivision that will provide multiple spaces for recreational camping vehicles or mobile homes is also a "trailer court", "work camp", "youth camp", or
"campground" as those terms are defined in Montana Code Annotated section 50-52-102, the governing body will not grant final approval of the
subdivision until the subdivider obtains a license for the facility from the Montana department of public health and human services under Montana Code
Annotated title 50, chapter 52. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-7: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Subdivisions created by rent or lease must comply with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-8: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
The governing body may require provision for:
A. Storage facilities on the lot or in compounds located within a reasonable distance;
B. A central area for storage or parking of boats, trailers, or other recreational vehicles;
C. Landscaping or fencing to serve as a buffer between the development and adjacent properties;
D. An off street area for mail delivery; and
E. Street lighting. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-9: MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK STANDARDS:
A. Spaces: Mobile/manufactured home spaces must be arranged to permit the safe and practical placement and removal of mobile homes.
B. Distance From Boundary Lines: All mobile/manufactured homes must be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any property boundary line abutting
upon a public street or highway right of way and at least fifteen feet (15') from other boundary lines of the park.
C. Mobile/Manufactured Home Pad:
1. Location: The mobile/manufactured home pad must be located at least ten feet (10') from the street that serves it.
2. Size: The size of the mobile/manufactured home pad must be suitable for the general market to be served and must fit the dimensions of
mobile/manufactured homes anticipated.
3. Occupation Of Space Restricted: A mobile/manufactured home pad may not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the area of its space. The total area
occupied by a mobile home and its roofed accessory buildings and structures may not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the area of a space.
4. Adequate Support For Placement And Tie Down: The governing body may require that the mobile/manufactured home pad be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie down of the mobile home.
D. Distance From Other Mobile Home Or Attached Structure: No mobile/manufactured home or its attached structures, such as awnings and carports, may
be located within twenty feet (20') of any other mobile home or its attached structures.
E. Detached Structure: No detached structure, such as a storage shed, may be located within five feet (5') of any mobile/manufactured home or its
attached structures.
F. Off Street Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces must be provided on or adjacent to each mobile/manufactured home space. The
driveway must be located to allow for convenient access to the mobile/manufactured home, and be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 151/242
G. Guest Parking: One guest parking space must be provided for each ten (10) mobile/manufactured home spaces. Group parking may be provided.
H. Limits Of Space: The limits of each mobile/manufactured home space must be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers or
other suitable means. Location of space limits on the ground must be approximately the same as those shown on the approved plans. Precise
engineering of space limits is not required either on the plans or on the ground.
I. Skirting: Each mobile/manufactured home must be skirted within thirty (30) days after it is moved to a space within the mobile/manufactured home park.
The skirting must be of a fire resistant material similar to that of the mobile/manufactured home exterior. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-10: STREETS:
Streets within a mobile/manufactured home park must meet the standards specified in section 12-8-9 of this title. Streets must be designed to allow safe
placement and removal of mobile homes.
A. Streets must be designed to provide safe access to public roads.
B. Roads within the mobile/manufactured home park must be designed to provide safe traffic circulation and parking.
C. One-way roads must be at least fifteen feet (15') wide; two-way roads must be at least twenty four feet (24') wide. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-11: ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS:
Electrical systems must be designed and installed in accordance with the applicable codes adopted by the authority having jurisdiction. Where the state or
other political subdivision does not assume jurisdiction, such installations must be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable state
electrical standards. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-12: GAS SYSTEMS:
Gas equipment and installations must be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable codes adopted by the authority having jurisdiction.
Where the state or other political subdivision does not assume jurisdiction, such installation must be designed and constructed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the "national fuel gas code" (NFPA Pamphlet 54-1981) and the "Standard For The Storage And Handling Of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases" (NFPA Pamphlet 58-1981).
A. Shutoff Valve For Entire Piping System: A readily accessible and identified shutoff valve controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas piping system must
be installed near to the point of connection of the liquefied petroleum gas container.
B. Shutoff Valve For Each Mobile/Manufactured Home: Each mobile/manufactured home lot must have an accessible, listed gas shutoff installed. This
valve must not be located under a mobile home. Whenever the mobile home lot gas outlet is not in use, the shutoff valve must be plugged to prevent
accidental discharge. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-13: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACES:
A. Arrangement: Spaces in recreational vehicle parks must be arranged to allow for the safe movement of traffic and access to spaces.
B. Roads: Roads within recreational vehicle parks must be designed to provide safe traffic circulation and parking.
C. Distance Between: Recreational vehicles must be separated from each other and from other structures by at least fifteen feet (15'). Any accessory
structures such as attached awnings must, for purposes of this separation requirement, be considered part of the recreational vehicle.
D. Distance From Public Street Or Highway Right Of Way: No recreational vehicle space may be located less than twenty five feet (25') from any public
street or highway right of way. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-9-14: DENSITY:
The density of a recreational vehicle park must not exceed twenty five (25) recreational vehicle spaces per acre of gross site area. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 10
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
12-10-1: PURPOSE; DEFINITION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 152/242
The purpose of this chapter is to provide flexibility in applying certain subdivision standards, allowing the subdivider creativity in higher density subdivision
design. Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-103(10) defines a "planned unit development" as a land development project consisting of residential
clusters, industrial parks, shopping centers or office building parks that compose a planned mixture of land uses built in a prearranged relationship to each
other and having open space and community facilities in common ownership or use. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-10-2: PROCEDURES:
If the governing body designates a proposed development plan as a PUD, the preliminary plat may then be submitted for review. Submittal must comply
with requirements and procedures contained in chapters 4 and 6 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-10-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
PUDs must comply with the standards contained in chapter 8 of this title. However, the governing body may modify the design and improvement standards
contained in sections 12-8-6, 12-8-8 and 12-8-16 of this title upon request of the subdivider when the plan for a PUD includes provisions for efficient traffic
circulation, adequate light, air, and open space. In such cases, no application for a variance under section 12-13-2 of this title is necessary. (Ord. 784, 8-6-
2007)
12-10-4: STREETS:
The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade and location of all streets must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, and to public convenience and safety. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-10-5: OPEN SPACE:
Each PUD must comply with the requirements of section 12-8-17 of this title. The open space must be:
A. Owned by a property owners' association; or
B. Dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the governing body; or
C. A combination of subsections A and B of this section; or
D. The governing body may waive dedication or cash donation requirements when the subdivider agrees to create a property owners' association for the
proposed subdivision and deed to the association land to be held in perpetuity for use as parks or playgrounds. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 11
CONDOMINIUMS
12-11-1: PROCEDURES:
Unless exempted by Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-203, all condominium developments are subdivisions subject to the terms of the MSPA. (Ord.
784, 8-6-2007)
12-11-2: REVIEW WHERE LAND NOT DIVIDED:
If no division of land will be created by a condominium subdivision, the subdivision must be reviewed under the procedures contained in chapter 9 of this
title, with the following exception: final approval will not be given until the subdivider has either installed all required improvements, or has entered into a
subdivision improvements agreement pursuant to section 12-4-4 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-11-3: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS INVOLVING LAND DIVISIONS:
If a proposed condominium development will involve a division of land, the subdivision must be reviewed under the procedures contained in chapters 4
and 6 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-11-4: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Condominium developments must comply with applicable standards contained in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-11-5: UNIT OWNERSHIP ACT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 153/242
Condominium developments must comply with all provisions of the unit ownership act, Montana Code Annotated sections 70-23-102 through 70-23-703.
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Chapter 12
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
12-12-1: REQUIREMENTS; PARK DEDICATION:
If the governing body has adopted a growth policy that meets the requirements of Montana Code Annotated section 76-1-601, and further adopts the
following to promote cluster development and preserve open space:
A. Requirements: As authorized by Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-509, the following apply to subdivisions proposed under this chapter:
1. An area of open space must be preserved that is at least as large as the area that will be developed.
2. Open space must be preserved through an irrevocable conservation easement, granted in perpetuity as provided in Montana Code Annotated title
76, chapter 6, prohibiting further subdivision of the parcel.
3. Unless the subdivision will be provided with community sewer or water, each lot in the cluster must be a minimum of one acre.
4. Multiple adjacent tracts of record may be aggregated to create a single parcel for the purpose of creating a cluster development.
5. The maximum number of parcels permissible in a cluster development is the maximum number of parcels that are authorized by the administrative
rules adopted by the DEQ under Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 4.
6. The maximum size of parcels allowed within a cluster development is one-fourth (1/4) acre.
B. Park Dedication Requirements Waived: Park dedication requirements for clustered subdivisions created under this chapter are waived. (Ord. 784, 8-6-
2007)
Chapter 13
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
12-13-1: FEE SCHEDULE1:
Fees shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (2008 Code)
12-13-2: VARIANCES:
A. Power To Grant: The governing body may grant variances from chapter 8 of this title, when, due to the characteristics of land proposed for subdivision,
strict compliance with these standards would result in undue hardship and would not be essential to the public welfare. A variance will not be granted if
it would have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.
B. Criteria For Approval: The governing body will not approve a variance unless they find that:
1. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or injurious to other adjoining properties;
2. Due to the physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the property involved, strict compliance with the regulations will impose an
undue hardship on the owner. Undue hardship does not include personal or financial hardship, or any hardship that is self-imposed;
3. The variance will not cause a substantial increase in public costs; and
4. The variance will not place the subdivision in nonconformance with any adopted zoning regulations. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-3: VARIANCES FROM FLOODWAY PROVISIONS:
The governing body will not by variance permit subdivision for building purposes in areas located within the floodway of a flood of 100-year frequency as
defined by Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 5. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-4: PROCEDURE:
The subdivider shall include with the submission of the preliminary plat a written statement describing and justifying the requested variance. The planning
board will consider the requested variance and recommend its approval or denial to the governing body. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 154/242
12-13-5: CONDITIONS:
In granting variances, the governing body may impose reasonable conditions to secure the objectives of this title. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-6: STATEMENT OF FACTS:
When a variance is granted, the motion to approve the proposed subdivision must contain a statement describing the variance and the facts and
conditions upon which the issuance of the variance is based. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-7: AMENDMENT OF TITLE:
Before the governing body amends this title, they shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the time and place of the public
hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than fifteen (15) days or more than thirty (30) days before the date
of the hearing. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as provided in Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-303 and this title, every final subdivision plat must be filed for record with the clerk and
recorder before title to the subdivided land can be sold or transferred in any manner. If unlawful transfers are made, the city attorney or county attorney
shall commence action to enjoin further sales or transfers and compel compliance with all provisions of the MSPA and this title. The cost of this action shall
be imposed against the nonprevailing party. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-13-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity that violates any of the provisions of the MSPA or this title is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each sale, lease, or transfer, or offer of sale, lease, or transfer of each separate parcel of land in violation of any
provision of the MSPA or this title shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
12-13-10: APPEALS:
A. Definition: For the purposes of this section, "aggrieved" means a person who can demonstrate a specific personal and legal interest, as distinguished
from a general interest, who has been or is likely to be specially and injuriously affected by the decision.
B. Who May File: The following parties may appeal under the provisions of subsection D of this section:
1. The subdivider;
2. A landowner with a property boundary contiguous to the proposed subdivision or a private landowner with property within the county or municipality
where the subdivision is proposed, if that landowner can show a likelihood of material injury to the landowner's property or its value; and
3. The governing body.
C. Recover Actual Damages: A person who has filed an application for a subdivision under the MSPA and this title with the governing body, may bring an
action in the state of Montana district court to sue the governing body to recover actual damages caused by a final action, decision, or order of the
governing body or any regulation adopted pursuant to the MSPA that is arbitrary or capricious.
D. Petition: A party identified in subsection B of this section who is aggrieved by a decision of the governing body to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny an application and preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision or a final subdivision plat, pursuant to this title, may, within thirty (30) days after the
decision, appeal to the district court. The petition must specify the grounds upon which the appeal is made. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 14
FORMS, INSTRUCTIONS AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
12-14-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND INFORMATION:
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND INFORMATION
1.Name of the proposed subdivision
2.Location (City and/or County)
Legal description: 1/4 1/4 of Section Township Range
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 155/242
3.Type of water supply system:
a.Individual surface water supply from spring
b.Multiple-family water supply system (3-14 connections and fewer than 25 people)
c.Service connection to multiple-family system
d.Service connection to public system
e.Extension of public main
f.New public system
g.Individual well
4.Type of wastewater treatment system:
a.Individual or shared on site septic system
b.Multiple-family on site system (3-14 connections and fewer than 25 people)
c.Service connection to multiple-family system
d.Service connection to public system
e.Extension of public main
f.New public system
5.Name of solid waste garbage disposal site and hauler:
6.Is information included which substantiates that there will be no degradation of state waters or that degradation will be nonsignificant?
7.Descriptive Data:
a.Number of lots or rental spaces
b.Total acreage in lots being reviewed
c.Total acreage in streets or roads
d.Total acreage in parks, open space, and/or common facilities
e.TOTAL gross acreage of subdivision
f.Minimum size of lots or spaces
g.Maximum size of lots or spaces
8.Indicate the proposed use(s) and number of lots or spaces in each:
Residential, single-family
Residential, multiple-family
Types of multiple-family structures and numbers of each (e.g., duplex)
Planned unit development (Number of units )
Condominium (Number of units )
Mobile Home Subdivision (Number of spaces )
Recreational vehicle subdivision (Number of spaces )
Commercial or industrial
Other (please describe)
9.Provide the following information regarding the development:
a.Current land use
b.Existing zoning or other regulations
c.Depth to ground water at the time of year when water table is nearest to the natural ground surface within the drainfield area
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 156/242
d.Depth to bedrock or other impervious material in the drainfield area
e.If a tract of land is to be subdivided in phases, an overall development plan indicating the intent for the development of the remainder of the tract.
f.Drafts of any covenants and restrictions to be included in deeds or contracts for sale. Drafts of homeowners' association bylaws and articles of
incorporation, if applicable. (Submitting a draft copy of a homeowners' association bylaws and articles of incorporation is adequate for DEQ to initiate and
complete its review of sanitary facilities, but a copy of the fully executed documents must be submitted before DEQ can issue final approval.)
g.Indicate whether the mineral rights have been severed from the property:
Yes No Unknown
h.Indicate whether water rights have been severed from the property:
Yes No
10.Is the applicant claiming an exemption under section 12-6-2 of the subdivision regulations from the requirement to prepare an environmental
assessment?
Yes No
Name, address, and telephone number of designated representative, if any (e.g., engineer, surveyor):
Name
Phone
Address (Street or PO Box, City, State, Zip Code)
Name, address, and telephone number of owner(s):
Name
Signature of owner
Address (Street or PO Box, City, State, Zip Code)
Phone
Date
Name, address, and telephone number of subdivider if different than owner(s):
Name
Signature of subdivider
Address (Street or PO Box, City, State, Zip Code)
Phone
Date
The application must be signed by the owner of the land proposed for subdivision or the responsible officer of the corporation offering the same for sale.
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT FORM, CONTENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS:
A. Preliminary Plat Subdivision Application Form: The subdivider shall submit a completed subdivision application form that is signed by the landowner(s)
of record.
B. Preliminary Plat Review Fee: The subdivider shall submit the required review fee as identified in the preapplication meeting and in section 12-13-1 of
this title.
C. Preliminary Plat Form, Contents, And Supplements: The subdivider shall submit an eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") (or 24 inch by 36 inch)
preliminary plat completed by a land surveyor.
The following information must be provided on the preliminary plat or in supplements to the preliminary plat:
1. The subdivision or development name (the title must contain the words "plat" and/or "subdivision");
2. The legal description, including section, township, and range, and any underlying survey data;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 157/242
3. A north arrow;
4. The scale used on the plat;
5. The certification of a professional land surveyor;
6. The certification of a professional engineer (if the preliminary plat application or data includes engineering plans or specifications);
7. The names of all owners of record and the subdivider (if different from the owner(s));
8. The date the preliminary plat is completed;
9. Proposed lot layout with approximate dimensions and sizes;
10. Lots and blocks identified by number or letter;
11. The use of each lot, if other than for single-family residential;
12. The exterior boundaries of the parcel proposed for subdivision with bearings, distances, and curve data indicated outside of the boundary lines.
When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or body of water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse shall be given;
13. All existing streets, roads, highways, avenues, alleys, and/or access easements within or adjacent to the subject property;
14. All proposed streets, roads, alleys, avenues, and easements; the width of the easement or rights of way, grades, curvature of each;
15. Existing and proposed road and street names;
16. Proposed location of intersections for any subdivision requiring access to state or local streets, roads, avenues, alleys, or highways;
17. The names of adjoining platted subdivisions and recording information from adjoining subdivisions, certificates of survey, or unplatted lands;
18. The approximate location of all section corners or legal subdivision corners of sections pertinent to the subdivision boundary;
19. Approximate area, location, boundaries, and dimensions of all parks, common grounds, and other grounds dedicated for public use;
20. The total gross area of the subdivision and the total net area, exclusive of public areas and rights of way;
21. Existing and proposed infrastructure and proposed utilities including:
a. The approximate location, size, and depth of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers;
b. The approximate location, size, and depth of existing and proposed water mains, lines, wells, and facilities; and
c. The approximate locations of gas lines, fire hydrants or firefighting water storage facilities, electric and telephone lines, and streetlights.
D. Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch showing:
1. The approximate locations of all existing buildings, structures, and other improvements;
2. Ownership of lands immediately adjoining a subdivision, and existing buildings, structures and other improvements on those lands; and
3. Any existing or proposed zoning of the tract and adjacent lands, if applicable.
E. Topographic Map:
1. For any land area which will be subdivided or disturbed, contour intervals of two feet (2') where the average slope is less than ten percent (10%);
intervals of five feet (5') where the average slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and less than fifteen percent (15%); and intervals of ten feet (10')
where the average slope is fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
2. Slopes greater than 25 percent shall be shown as no-build zones.
F. Grading And Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan that includes:
1. Proposed grades of all streets and roads;
2. Proposed drainage facilities for all lots, blocks, and other areas displaying accurate dimensions, courses, and elevations;
3. Existing and proposed contours, using the contour requirements of a topography map;
4. Graded slopes;
5. Calculations for a 10-year frequency 1-hour storm and a method to mitigate adverse impacts for a 100-year frequency 1-hour storm; and
6. Construction procedures, slope protection, or information describing the ultimate destinations of storm runoff used to minimize erosion; and
7. Slope stability report shall be completed if the proposed subdivision includes areas with the potential for landsliding or slope instability. The report
must be completed by a qualified soil or geotechnical engineer and indicate the locations, character, and extent of all areas of all slope stability, and
these areas shall be shown on the plat.
G. Improvements Plans: Engineering plans for all public and private improvements.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 158/242
H. Development Plan: Overall development plan and if the improvements are to be completed in phases, the approximate area of each phase shall be
shown on the plat.
I. Abstract Of Title: Abstract of title (or title report) dated not more than ninety (90) days prior to the date of submittal.
J. Lien Holder's Acknowledgment: Lien holders' acknowledgment of subdivision for each lien holder identified on the abstract of title or title report.
K. Access Documentation: Documentation of legal and physical access.
L. Existing Easements: Documentation of existing easements, including those for agricultural water user facilities.
M. Covenants; Deed Restrictions: Existing covenants and deed restrictions.
N. Water Rights: Existing water rights.
O. Adjoining Property Owners: Names and addresses of all adjoining property owners.
P. Road Plan: A proposed road plan and profile that includes:
1. Street names;
2. Right of way or easement widths;
3. Pavement widths;
4. Street grades;
5. Pavement and base thickness;
6. Typical cross sections for each type of road;
7. Road profiles and cross sections for all proposed streets and roads which have grades exceeding five percent (5%), or cuts and fills exceeding three
feet (3');
8. The type and location of sidewalks and curbs (where required);
9. The minimum sight distances at corners;
10. The minimum curb radii at corners;
11. For cul-de-sac streets:
a. Widths of turnaround radii;
b. Minimum right of way widths at the turnarounds;
c. Minimum pavement or road surface width at the turnarounds;
d. Total lengths of the streets;
12. The locations and characteristics of bridges and culverts;
13. The locations and dimensions of adjoining lots and open spaces;
14. The locations and widths of easements and dedicated land, which provide a buffer between the subdivision lots and streets;
15. Typical grading and location of intersections with private driveways; and
16. Description of how the roads will be maintained.
Q. Encroachment Permits: Encroachment permits from Montana department of transportation or the local jurisdiction.
R. Proposed Easements: Proposed easements.
S. Proposed Water Rights: Proposed disposition of water rights, as required by section 12-8-16 of this title.
T. Park Land Dedication Calculations: Park land dedication calculations, including a property valuation assessment or appraisal if cash in lieu of park land
is proposed.
U. Environmental Assessment: Environmental assessment and/or summary of probable impacts including:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 159/242
1. Proof that the subdivider has submitted for review copies of the subdivision application and environmental assessment, if applicable, to the public
utilities and agencies of the local, state, and federal government identified during the preapplication meeting or subsequently identified as having an
interest in the proposed subdivision; and
2. An explanation of how the subdivider has responded to the comments of the subdivision administrator at the preapplication meeting.
V. Transportation Plan: Transportation impact analysis or transportation plan.
W. Fire Prevention Plan: Fire risk rating analysis and fire prevention plan as required in section 12-8-19 of this title.
X. Weed Management Plan: Weed management plan and revegetation plan.
Y. Property Owners' Association Documents: Property owners' association documents shall accompany the preliminary plat, and at a minimum shall
provide the information, form, and contents included in section 12-4-3 of this title.
Z. Floodplain Map: FIRM or FEMA panel map and/or letter identifying floodplain status and other hydrologic characteristics including surface water bodies,
designated floodplain and areas of riparian resource, as required in section 12-8-5 of this title and subsection GG of this section.
AA. Water And Sanitation Information: Required water and sanitation information, including:
1. Attachments: Provide the following attachments to the preliminary plat:
a. A vicinity map or plan that shows:
(1) The location, within one hundred feet (100') outside of the exterior of the property line of the subdivision and on the proposed lots, of:
(A) Floodplains;
(B) Surface water features;
(C) Springs;
(D) Irrigation ditches;
(E) Existing, previously approved, and for parcels less than twenty (20) acres, proposed water wells and wastewater treatment systems;
(F) For parcels less than twenty (20) acres, mixing zones identified as provided in subsection AA3a(3)(A) of this section;
(G) The representative drainfield site used for the soil profile description as required under subsection AA3a(1) of this section; and
(2) The location, within five hundred feet (500') outside of the exterior property line of the subdivision, of public water and sewer facilities.
b. A description of the proposed subdivision's water supply systems, stormwater systems, solid waste disposal systems, and wastewater treatment
systems, as provided below, including whether the water supply and wastewater treatment systems are individual, shared, multiple user, or public
as those systems are defined in rules published by the DEQ;
c. A drawing of the conceptual lot layout at a scale no smaller than one inch equal to two hundred feet (1" = 200') that shows all information required
for a lot layout document in rules adopted by DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104.
2. Water Supply:
a. High ground water report indicating there is not a problem with high ground water present on the property proposed for subdivision. When
evidence of high ground water is present, the developer must submit plans that are prepared by a professional engineer to mitigate the problem;
b. A vicinity map or plan that shows:
(1) The location, within one hundred feet (100') outside of the exterior property line of the subdivision and on the proposed lots of:
(A) Floodplains;
(B) Surface water features;
(C) Springs;
(D) Irrigation ditches;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 160/242
(E) Existing, previously approved, and, for parcels less than twenty (20) acres, proposed water wells and wastewater treatment systems;
(F) For parcels less than twenty (20) acres, mixing zones identified as provided in subsection AA3a(3)(A) of this section.
(2) The location, within five hundred feet (500') outside the exterior property line of the subdivision, of public water and sewer facilities;
c. A description of the proposed subdivision's water supply systems, stormwater systems, solid waste disposal systems, and wastewater treatment
systems, including whether the water supply and wastewater treatment systems are individual, shared, multiple user, or public as those systems
are defined in rules published by the department of environmental quality in the administrative rules of Montana, or Montana Code Annotated
section 76-4-101 et seq., including the following information:
(1) If an individual water supply system is proposed for each parcel:
(A) Indicate the distance to the nearest public water system.
(B) Attach a copy of the lot layout showing the proposed location of each spring, well, or cistern and indicating the distance to existing or
proposed wastewater treatment systems.
(C) Evidence of sufficient water quality in accordance with rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
(2) For a multiple user water system:
(A) If an existing system is to be used:
(i) Identify the system and the person, firm, or agency responsible for its operation and maintenance;
(ii) Indicate the system's capacity to handle additional load and its distance from the development;
(iii) Provide evidence that permission to connect to the system has been granted;
(B) Provide the following attachments:
(i) Map or plat showing location, sizes, and depth of any existing water supply lines and facilities which may directly serve parcels within the
proposed development;
(ii) Provide plans and specifications for all proposed extensions and additional lines and facilities as required by ARM 17.38.305 and circular
DEQ 3;
(C) Evidence of sufficient water quality in accordance with rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
d. Where a new system is proposed:
(1) Provide evidence of adequate water availability, unless cisterns are proposed:
(A) Obtained from well logs or testing of on site or nearby wells;
(B) Obtained from information contained in published hydrogeological reports; or
(C) As otherwise specified by rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
(i) Indicate who will install the system, who will bear the costs, when it will be completed, and who will own it;
(ii) Provide all information required in ARM 17.36.330_336 and circular DEQ-3;
(iii) Evidence of sufficient water quality in accordance with rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to 76-4-104;
(2) For a public water system:
(A) If an existing system is to be used:
(i) Identify the system and the person, firm, or agency responsible for its operation and maintenance;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 161/242
(ii) Indicate the system's capacity to handle additional load and its distance from the development;
(iii) Provide evidence that permission to connect has been granted;
(iv) Provide the following as attachments:
(a) A map or plat showing the location, sizes, and depth of any existing water lines and facilities which will directly serve parcels within the
proposed development;
(b) Plans and specifications for all proposed extensions and additional lines and facilities as required by ARM 17.36.328_330 and circular
DEQ-1 or circular DEQ-3;
(c) Evidence of sufficient water quality in accordance with rule adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
(B) If a new system is proposed:
(i) Provide evidence of adequate water availability:
(a) Obtained from well logs or testing of on site or nearby wells;
(b) Obtained from information contained in published hydrogeological reports; or
(c) As otherwise specified by rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
(ii) Indicate who will install the system, who will bear the costs, when it will be completed, and who will own it;
(iii) Provide plans and specifications for all proposed extensions and additional lines and facilities as required by ARM 17.36.328_330 and
circular DEQ-1 or circular DEQ-3;
(iv) Evidence of sufficient water quality in accordance with rules adopted by the DEQ pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-104;
3. Wastewater Treatment System:
a. For new on site wastewater treatment systems, evidence of suitability that at a minimum includes:
(1) A soil profile description from a representative drainfield site identified on the vicinity map, as provided in subsection AA1a(1)(G) of this section,
that complies with the standards published by DEQ;
(2) Demonstration that the soil profile contains a minimum of four feet (4') of vertical separation distance between the bottom of the permeable
surface of the proposed wastewater treatment system and a limiting layer; and
(3) In cases in which the soil profile or other information indicates that ground water is within seven feet (7') of the natural ground surface, evidence
that the ground water will not exceed the minimum vertical separation distance provided in subsection AA3a(2) of this section.
(A) For all new wastewater treatment systems a preliminary analysis of potential impacts to ground water quality using as guidance rules
adopted by the board of environmental review pursuant to Montana Code Annotated sections 75-5-301 and 75-5-303 related to standard
mixing zones for ground water, source specific mixing zones, and nonsignificant changes in water quality. The preliminary analysis may be
based on currently available information and must consider the effects of overlapping mixing zones from proposed and existing wastewater
treatment systems within and directly adjacent to the subdivision. Instead of performing the preliminary analysis required under this subsection
the subdivider may perform a complete nondegradation analysis in the same manner as is required for an application that is reviewed under
Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 4.
b. If individual wastewater treatment systems are proposed for each parcel:
(1) Indicate the distance to the nearest public wastewater treatment system.
(2) Provide all information required in ARM 17.36.320_345 and in circular DEQ-4 for conventional systems or circular DEQ 5 for alternative
systems.
(3) Evidence of suitability as provided in subsection AA3a(1) of this section.
(4) Preliminary analysis of potential impact to ground water as provided in subsection AA3a(2) of this section.
c. For a multiple user wastewater treatment system:
(1) If an existing system is to be used:
(A) Identify the system and the person, firm, or agency responsible for its operation and maintenance;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 162/242
(B) Indicate the system's capacity to handle additional load and its distance from the development;
(C) Provide evidence that permission to connect to the system has been granted;
(D) Provide the following attachments:
(i) A map or plat showing the location, sizes, and depth of any existing sewer lines and facilities which will directly serve parcels within the
proposed development; and
(ii) Plans and specifications for all proposed extensions and additional lines and facilities as required by ARM 17.36.320_345 and circular
DEQ-4 or circular DEQ-5.
(2) If a new system is proposed:
(A) Indicate who will install the system, who will bear the costs, when it will be completed, and who will own it.
(B) Provide all information required in ARM 17.36.320_326 and circular DEQ-4 or circular DEQ-5.
(C) Evidence of suitability as provided in subsection AA3a(1) of this section.
(D) Preliminary analysis of potential impact to ground water as provided in subsection AA3a(2) of this section.
d. For a public wastewater treatment system:
(1) If an existing system is to be used:
(A) Identify the system and the person, firm, or agency responsible for its operation and maintenance;
(B) Indicate the system's capacity to handle additional load and its distance from the development;
(C) Provide evidence that permission to connect to the system has been granted;
(D) Provide the following attachments:
(i) A map or plat showing the location, sizes, and depth of any existing sewer lines and facilities which will directly serve parcels within the
proposed development;
(ii) Plans and specifications for all proposed extensions and additional lines and facilities as required by ARM 17.36.328 and circular DEQ-2 or
circular DEQ-4.
4. Stormwater:
a. Describe measures for the collection and disposal of storm runoff from streets and roads within the subdivision.
b. Indicate the type of road surface proposed.
c. Describe facilities for stream or drainage crossing (e.g., culverts, bridges).
d. Describe how surface runoff will be drained or channeled from parcels.
e. Indicate whether storm runoff will enter state waters and describe any proposed treatment measures. (A storm water discharge permit may be
required.)
f. Describe any existing or proposed stream bank or shoreline alteration, and any proposed construction or modification of lake beds or stream
channels. Provide information on location, extent, type, and purpose of alteration.
g. Provide the grading and storm water or drainage plan as required by subsection C of this section.
5. Solid Waste:
a. Describe the proposed method of solid waste collection and disposal.
b. If use of an existing collection system or disposal facility is proposed, indicate the name and location of the facility.
c. If on site disposal of solid waste is proposed, provide the information required in ARM 17.36.309(2).
BB. Subdivision Improvements Agreement: A form of subdivision improvements agreement, if proposed;
CC. Agricultural Covenants: Letter requesting a revocation of agricultural covenants;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 163/242
DD. Cultural Or Historic Resources: Letter indicating locations of cultural or historic resources;
EE. Variances: Variance request or approval;
FF. Rezoning: Rezoning application or approval;
GG. Flood Hazard Evaluation: When required, a flood hazard evaluation which contains the following detailed information (to be submitted to the water
resources division, department of natural resources):
1. Certification by a registered professional engineer.
2. An overall scaled plan view with identified scale for vertical and horizontal distance showing the following:
a. Watercourse.
b. Floodplain boundaries.
c. Location of property.
d. Contours.
e. Cross sections.
f. Bridges or other contractions in the floodplains.
g. USGS gauging stations, if any.
3. The location and elevation of a temporary bench mark(s) established within the subdivision and referenced to mean sea level with appropriate
elevation adjustment.
4. Cross sectional information which contains the following information:
a. Elevations and stations that are determined at points representing significant breaks in ground slope and at changes in the hydraulic
characteristics of the floodplain (i.e., points where ground cover, soil, or rock conditions change). Elevations must be reported in NAVD 88 or
NGVD 29 datum.
b. Each cross section must cross the entire floodplain. The cross section alignment should be perpendicular to the general flow of the watercourse
(approximately perpendicular to contour lines). Occasionally, wide floodplains require a dog leg alignment to be perpendicular to the anticipated
flow lines. Shots should be taken at the water's edge and measurements taken (if elevation shots cannot be taken) to determine the channel
bottom shape. Cross sections must be accurately located on a USGS 71/2 minute quad sheet.
c. The number of cross sections needed, and the distance between cross sections, will vary depending on the site, the slope of the watercourse, the
slope of the channel, and the hydraulic characteristics of the reach. A minimum of four (4) cross sections are required over the entire reach with at
least two (2) cross sections at the property where the elevations are desired. Additional cross sections must be taken at bridges, control structures,
or natural constrictions in topography. (Photogrammetric methods may be used in lieu of cross sections whenever appropriate and when reviewed
and approved by the county.)
5. A description and sketch of all bridges within the reach, showing unobstructed waterway openings and elevations.
6. Elevation of the water surface is to be determined by survey as part of each valley cross section.
7. Supporting documentation, such as engineering reports of computer computations, calculations, and assumptions that may include:
a. Hydrology (research of published hydrology or calculations showing how hydrology was derived).
b. Input files (hard copy and on diskette).
c. Output files (diskette only).
HH. Potential Hazards Or Adverse Impacts: Letter identifying and proposing mitigation for potential hazards or other adverse impacts as identified in the
preapplication meeting and not covered by any of the above required materials; and
II. Additional Information: Such additional relevant and reasonable information as identified by the subdivision administrator during the preapplication
meeting that is pertinent to the required elements of this section. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-3: ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT:
Information specified in this section must be provided in addition to that required in sections 12-14-1 and 12-14-2 of this chapter, unless the proposed
subdivision qualifies for an exemption under subsection 12-6-2B of this title.
Describe the following environmental features, provide responses to each of the following questions and provide reference materials as required.
A. Surface Water: Locate on a plat overlay or sketch map:
1. Any natural water systems such as streams, rivers, intermittent streams, lakes or marshes (also indicate the names and sizes of each).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 164/242
2. Any artificial water systems such as canals, ditches, aqueducts, reservoirs, and irrigation systems (also indicate the names, sizes and present uses
of each).
3. Time when water is present (seasonally or all year).
4. Any areas subject to flood hazard, or in delineated 100-year floodplain.
5. Describe any existing or proposed stream bank alteration from any proposed construction or modification of lake beds or stream channels. Provide
information on location, extent, type and purpose of alteration, and permits applied for.
B. Ground Water: Using available datum, provide the following information:
1. The minimum depth to water table and identify dates when depths were determined. What is the location and depth of all aquifers which may be
affected by the proposed subdivision? Describe the location of known aquifer recharge areas which may be affected.
2. Describe any steps necessary to avoid depletion or degradation of ground water recharge areas.
C. Topography, Geology And Soils:
1. Provide a map of the topography of the area to be subdivided, and an evaluation of suitability for the proposed land uses. On the map identify any
areas with highly erodible soils or slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) grade. Identify the lots or areas affected. Address conditions such as:
a. Shallow bedrock.
b. Unstable slopes.
c. Unstable or expansive soils.
d. Excessive slope.
2. Locate on an overlay or sketch map:
a. Any known hazards affecting the development which could result in property damage or personal injury due to:
(1) Falls, slides or slumps - soil, rock, mud, snow.
(2) Rock outcroppings.
(3) Seismic activity.
(4) High water table.
3. Describe measures proposed to prevent or reduce these dangers.
4. Describe the location and amount of any cut or fill more than three feet (3') in depth. Indicate these cuts or fills on a plat overlay or sketch map.
Where cuts or fills are necessary, describe plans to prevent erosion and to promote vegetation such as replacement of topsoil and grading.
D. Vegetation:
1. On a plat overlay or sketch map:
a. Indicate the distribution of the major vegetation types, such as marsh, grassland, shrub, coniferous forest, deciduous forest, mixed forest.
b. Identify the location of critical plant communities such as:
(1) Stream bank or shoreline vegetation.
(2) Vegetation on steep, unstable slopes.
(3) Vegetation on soils highly susceptible to wind or water erosion.
(4) Type and extent of noxious weeds.
2. Describe measures to:
a. Preserve trees and other natural vegetation (e.g., locating roads and lot boundaries, planning construction to avoid damaging tree cover).
b. Protect critical plant communities (e.g., keeping structural development away from these areas), setting areas aside for open space.
c. Prevent and control grass, brush or forest fires (e.g., green strips, water supply, access).
d. Control and prevent growth of noxious weeds.
E. Wildlife:
1. Identify species of fish and wildlife that use the area affected by the proposed subdivision.
2. On a copy of the preliminary plat or overlay, identify known critical wildlife areas, such as big game winter range, calving areas and migration routes;
riparian habitat and waterfowl nesting areas; habitat for rare or endangered species and wetlands.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 165/242
3. Describe proposed measures to protect or enhance wildlife habitat or to minimize degradation (e.g., keeping buildings and roads back from
shorelines; setting aside wetlands as undeveloped open space). (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-4: SUMMARY OF PROBABLE IMPACTS:
Summarize the effects of the proposed subdivision on each topic below. Provide responses to the following questions and provide reference materials as
required:
A. Effects On Agriculture:
1. Is the proposed subdivision or associated improvements located on or near prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance as defined by the
natural resource conservation service? If so, identify each area on a copy of the preliminary plat.
2. Describe whether the subdivision would remove from production any agricultural or timber land.
3. Describe possible conflicts with nearby agricultural operations (e.g., residential development creating problems for moving livestock, operating farm
machinery, maintaining water supplies, controlling weeds or applying pesticides; agricultural operations suffering from vandalism, uncontrolled pets
or damaged fences).
4. Describe possible nuisance problems which may arise from locating a subdivision near agricultural or timber lands.
5. Describe effects the subdivision would have on the value of nearby agricultural lands.
B. Effects On Agricultural Water User Facilities:
1. Describe conflicts the subdivision would create with agricultural water user facilities (e.g., residential development creating problems for operating
and maintaining irrigation systems) and whether agricultural water user facilities would be more subject to vandalism or damage because of the
subdivision.
2. Describe possible nuisance problems which the subdivision would generate with regard to agricultural water user facilities (e.g., safety hazards to
residents or water problems from irrigation ditches, head gates, siphons, sprinkler systems, or other agricultural water user facilities).
C. Effects On Local Services:
1. Indicate the proposed use and number of lots or spaces in each:
Residential, single-family
Residential, multiple-family
Types of multiple-family structures and number of each (e.g., duplex, 4-plex)
Planned unit development (number of units)
Condominium (number of units)
Mobile home park
Recreational vehicle park
Commercial or industrial
Other (please describe)
2. Describe the additional or expanded public services and facilities that would be demanded of local government or special districts to serve the
subdivision.
a. Describe additional costs which would result for services such as roads, bridges, law enforcement, parks and recreation, fire protection, water,
sewer and solid waste systems, schools or busing (including additional personnel, construction, and maintenance costs).
b. Who would bear these costs (e.g., all taxpayers within the jurisdiction, people within special taxing districts, or users of a service)?
c. Can the service providers meet the additional costs given legal or other constraints (e.g., statutory ceilings on mill levies or bonded indebtedness)?
d. Describe off site costs or costs to other jurisdictions may be incurred (e.g., development of water sources or construction of a sewage treatment
plant; costs borne by a nearby municipality).
3. Describe how the subdivision allows existing services, through expanded use, to operate more efficiently, or makes the installation or improvement
of services feasible (e.g., allow installation of a central water system, or upgrading a country road).
4. What is the present tax revenue received from the unsubdivided land?
a. By the county $
b. By the municipality, if applicable $
c. By the school(s) $
5. Provide the approximate revenues received by each above taxing authority if the lots are reclassified, and when the lots are all improved and built
upon. Describe any other taxes that would be paid by the subdivision and into what funds (e.g., personal property taxes on mobile/manufactured
homes are paid into the county general fund).
6. Would new taxes generated from the subdivision cover additional public costs?
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 166/242
7. How many special improvement districts would be created which would obligate local government fiscally or administratively? Are any boding plans
proposed which would affect the local government's bonded indebtedness?
D. Effects On Historic Or Natural Environment:
1. Describe and locate on a plat overlay or sketch map known or possible historic, paleontological, archaeological or cultural sites, structures, or
objects which may be affected by the proposed subdivision.
2. How would the subdivision affect surface and ground water, soils, slopes, vegetation, historical or archaeological features within the subdivision or
on adjacent land? Describe plans to protect these sites.
a. Would any stream banks or lake shorelines be altered, streams rechanneled or any surface water contaminated from sewage treatment systems,
runoff carrying sedimentation, or concentration of pesticides or fertilizers?
b. Would ground water supplies likely be contaminated or depleted as a result of the subdivision?
c. Would construction of roads or building sites require cuts and fills on steep slopes or cause erosion on unstable, erodible soils? Would soils be
contaminated by sewage treatment systems?
d. Describe the impacts that removal of vegetation would have on soil erosion, bank, or shoreline instability.
e. Would the value of significant historical, visual, or open space features be reduced or eliminated?
f. Describe possible natural hazards the subdivision could be subject to (e.g., natural hazards such as flooding, rock, snow or land slides, high winds,
severe wildfires, or difficulties such as shallow bedrock, high water table, unstable or expansive soils, or excessive slopes).
3. How would the subdivision affect visual features within the subdivision or on adjacent land? Describe efforts to visually blend the proposed
development with the existing environment (e.g., use of appropriate building materials, colors, road design, underground utilities, and revegetation of
earthworks).
E. Effects On Wildlife And Wildlife Habitat:
1. Describe what impacts the subdivision or associated improvements would have on wildlife areas such as big game wintering range, migration routes,
nesting areas, wetlands, or important habitat for rare or endangered species.
2. Describe the effect that pets or human activity would have on wildlife.
F. Effects On Public Health And Safety:
1. Describe any health or safety hazards on or near the subdivision, such as: natural hazards, lack of water, drainage problems, heavy traffic,
dilapidated structures, high pressure gas lines, high voltage power lines, or irrigation ditches. These conditions, proposed or existing should be
accurately described with their origin and location identified on a copy of the preliminary plat.
2. Describe how the subdivision would be subject to hazardous conditions due to high voltage lines, airports, highways, railroads, dilapidated
structures, high pressure gas lines, irrigation ditches, and adjacent industrial or mining uses.
3. Describe land uses adjacent to the subdivision and how the subdivision will affect the adjacent land uses. Identify existing uses such as feedlots,
processing plants, airports or industrial firms which could be subject to lawsuits or complaints from residents of the subdivision.
4. Describe public health or safety hazards, such as dangerous traffic, fire conditions, or contamination of water supplies which would be created by the
subdivision. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-5: COMMUNITY IMPACT REPORT:
Provide a community impact report containing a statement of estimated number of people coming into the area as a result of the subdivision, anticipated
needs of the proposed subdivision for public facilities and services, the increased capital and operating cost to each affected unit of local government.
Provide responses to each of the following questions and provide reference materials as required:
A. Education And Busing:
1. Describe the available educational facilities which would serve this subdivision.
2. Estimate the number of schoolchildren that will be added by the proposed subdivision. Provide a statement from the administrator of the affected
school system indicating whether the increased enrollment can be accommodated by the present personnel and facilities and by the existing school
bus system. If not, estimate the increased expenditures that would be necessary to do so.
B. Roads And Maintenance:
1. Estimate how much daily traffic the subdivision, when fully occupied, will generate on existing streets and arterials.
2. Describe the capability of existing and proposed roads to safely accommodate this increased traffic.
3. Describe increased maintenance problems and increased cost due to this increase in volume.
4. Describe proposed new public or private access roads including:
a. Measures for disposing of storm runoff from streets and roads.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 167/242
b. Type of road surface and provisions to be made for dust.
c. Facilities for streams or drainage crossing (e.g., culverts, bridges).
d. Seeding of disturbed areas.
5. Describe the closing or modification of any existing roads.
6. Explain why road access was not provided within the subdivision, if access to any individual lot is directly from arterial streets or roads.
7. Is year round access by conventional automobile over legal rights of way available to the subdivision and to all lots and common facilities within the
subdivision? Identify the owners of any private property over which access to the subdivision will be provided.
8. Estimate the cost and completion date of the system, and indicate who will pay the cost of installation, maintenance and snow removal.
C. Water, Sewage, And Solid Waste Facilities:
1. Briefly describe the water supply and sewage treatment systems to be used in serving the proposed subdivision (e.g., methods, capacities,
locations).
2. Provide information on estimated cost of the system, who will bear the costs, and how the system will be financed.
3. Where hookup to an existing system is proposed, describe estimated impacts on the existing system, and show evidence that permission has been
granted to hook up to the existing system.
4. All water supply and sewage treatment plans and specifications will be reviewed and approved by the department of environmental quality (DEQ)
and should be submitted using the appropriate DEQ application form.
5. Describe the proposed method of collecting and disposing of solid waste from the development.
6. If use of an existing collection system or disposal facility is proposed indicate the name and location of the facility.
D. Fire And Police Protection:
1. Describe the fire and police protection services available to the residents of the proposed subdivision including number of personnel and number of
vehicles or type of facilities for:
a. Fire Protection: Is the proposed subdivision in an existing fire district? If not, will one be formed or extended? Describe what fire protection
procedures are planned?
b. Law Enforcement Protection; Which Of: Is the proposed subdivision within the jurisdiction of a county sheriff or municipal law enforcement
agency?
2. Can the fire and law enforcement agency protection service needs of the proposed subdivision be met by present personnel and facilities? If not,
describe the additional expenses that would be necessary to make these services adequate, and who would pay the costs?
E. Payment For Extension Of Capital Facilities: Indicate how the subdivider will pay for the cost of extending capital facilities resulting from expected
impacts directly attributable to the subdivision. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-6: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL FORM:
Date
1.Name of subdivision
2.Location: 1/4 Section Township Range
For Amended Plats: Lot(s) Block(s)
Subdivision
3.Name, address and telephone number of subdivider:
4.Name, address and telephone number of persons of firms providing services and information (e.g., surveyor, engineer, designer, planning consultant,
attorney):
5.Descriptive Data:
a.Gross area in acres:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 168/242
b.Number of lots or rental spaces:
c.Existing zoning or other regulations
6.Date preliminary plat approved:
7.Any conditions? (If yes, attach list of conditions.)
8.Any deed restrictions or covenants? (If yes, attach a copy.)
9.All improvements installed? (If no, attach a subdivision improvements agreement or guarantees.)
10.List of materials submitted with this application:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
I do hereby certify that all the statements and information and the statements and information contained in all exhibits transmitted herewith are true. I
hereby apply to the governing body for approval of the final plat of
(Name of Subdivision)
Subdivider
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.Application number
2.Date application submitted
3.Date by which final plat must be approved or rejected
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-7: SAMPLE CERTIFICATES:
A. Certificate Of Completion Of Public Improvements Agreement: To be submitted with application for approval of final subdivision plat.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
I, (Name of Subdivider), and I, (Name of Subdivider's Registered Engineer), a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Montana, hereby certify that the following public improvements, required as a condition of approval of (Name of Subdivision), have been installed in
conformance with the attached engineering specifications and plans: (List the improvements actually installed.)
Signature of SubdividerDate
Signature of Professional EngineerDate
Registration No.
(Engineers Seal)
Address
B. Certificate Of Surveyor - Final Plat:
STATE OF MONTANA)
) ss.
County of )
I, (Name of Surveyor), a Professional Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that I have performed the survey shown on the attached plat of (Name of
Subdivision); that such survey was made on (Date of Survey); that said survey is true and complete as shown and that the monuments found and set
are of the character and occupy the positions shown thereon.
Dated this day of , 20 .
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 169/242
(Seal)
(Signature of Surveyor)
Registration No.
(Address)
C. Certificate Of Dedication - Final Plat:
(I) (We), the undersigned property owner(s), do hereby certify that (I) (We) have caused to be surveyed, subdivided and platted into lots, blocks,
streets and alleys, as shown by the plat hereto annexed, the following described land in (City and County, if in unincorporated Area), to-wit:
(Exterior boundary description of area contained in plat and total acreage)
The above described tract of land is to be known and designated as (Name of Subdivision), and the lands included in all streets, avenues, alleys,
and parks or public squares shown on said plat are hereby granted and donated to the use of the public forever.
Dated this day of , 20 .
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all record owners of platted property)
D. Consent To Dedication By Encumbrances, If Any:
(I) (We), the undersigned encumbrancer(s), do hereby join in and consent to the annexed plat and release (my) (our) respective liens, claims and
encumbrances as to any portion of said lands shown on such plat as being dedicated to the use of the public forever.
Dated this day of , 20 .
(Acknowledged and notarized signatures of all encumbrancers of record)
E. Certificate Of Waiver Of Park Land Dedication And Acceptance Of Cash In Lieu Thereof:
I, , Toole County Clerk and Recorder, Shelby, Montana, do certify that the following order was made by the (city of Shelby) (Toole
County Commissioners) at a meeting thereof held on the day of , 20 , and entered into the proceedings of said body to-wit:
Inasmuch as the dedication of park land within the platted area of (Name of Subdivision) is undesirable for the reasons set forth in the minutes of this
meeting, it is hereby ordered by the (city of Shelby) (Toole County Commissioners) that land dedication for park purposes be waived and that cash in
lieu of park with the provisions of Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 3.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto affixed my seal this day of , 20 .
(Seal)(Signature of county clerk and
recorder)
F. Certificate Of Examining Land Surveyor Where Required - Final Plat:
I, (Name of Examining Land Surveyor), acting as an Examining Land Surveyor do hereby certify that I have examined the final plat of (Name of
Subdivision) and find that the survey data shown thereon meet the conditions set forth by or pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 3,
part 4.
Dated this day of , 20 .
Signature
Name of Surveyor
Registration No.
G. Certificate Of County Treasurer:
I hereby certify, pursuant to Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-611(1)(b), MCA, that all real property taxes assessed and levied on the land
described below and encompassed by the proposed ( Name of Subdivision ) have been paid:
(legal description of land)
Dated this day of , 20 .
(Seal)
(Signature of County Treasurer)
Treasurer, Shelby, Montana
H. Certificate Of Final Plat Approval - County:
The (governing body) does hereby certify that it has examined this subdivision plat and having found the same to conform to law, approves it,
and hereby accepts the dedication to public use of any and all lands shown on this plat as being dedicated to such use, this day of ,
20 .
(Signatures)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 170/242
ATTEST:
(Signature of Clerk and Recorder)
(Seal of County)Shelby, Montana
I. Certificate Of Final Plat Approval - City:
The governing body of the city (town) of (name of city or town) does hereby certify that it has examined this subdivision plat and, having found the
same to conform to law, approves it, and hereby accepts the dedication to public use of any and all lands shown on this plat as being dedicated to such
use, this day of , 20 .
By: (Signature of city or town clerk) (Signature of mayor)
ClerkMayor
J. Certificate Of Filing By Clerk And Recorder:
STATE OF MONTANA)
) ss.
County of)
Filed for record this day of , 20 , at o'clock.
(Signature of Clerk and Recorder)
County Clerk and Recorder, Shelby, Montana
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-8: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT; GUARANTEE:
MODEL SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT
The parties to this Subdivision Improvements Agreement ("this agreement") are ("the subdivider") and ("the city" or "the county").
WHEREAS, the subdivider desires to defer construction of improvements described in Attachment ( ); and
WHEREAS, the purpose of this agreement is to protect the city of Shelby and is not intended for the benefit of contractors, suppliers, laborers or others
providing work, services, or materials to the subdivision, or for the benefit of lot or home buyers in the subdivision; and
WHEREAS, the mutual promises, covenants and obligations contained in this agreement are authorized by state law and the county subdivision
regulations.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
1.Effective Date: The effective date of this agreement is the date that final subdivision plat approval is granted by the county.
2.Attachments: The attachments cited herein are hereby made a part of this agreement.
Subdivider's Obligations:
3.Improvements: The subdivider shall construct and install, at his own expense, those subdivision improvements listed in attachment ( ) of this
agreement. The subdivider's obligation to complete the improvements arises upon approval of the final subdivision plat, is not conditioned on the
commencement of construction in the development or sale of any lots or improvements within the subdivision, and is independent of any obligations of the
city (or county) contained in this agreement.
4.Security: To secure the performance of his obligations under this agreement, the subdivider shall deposit with the city (or county) on or before the
effective date, an irrevocable letter of credit (or other financial security acceptable to the local officials) in the amount of $ . The letter of credit shall
be issued by (lending institution), be payable at sight to the city (or county) at any time upon presentation of (1) a sight draft drawn on the issuing lending
institution in the amount up to $ , (2) a signed statement or affidavit executed by an authorized city (or county) official stating that the subdivider is in
default under this agreement; and (3) the original copy of the letter of credit.
5.Standards: The subdivider shall construct the required improvements according to the standards and specifications required by the city (or county) as
specified in attachment ( ) of this agreement.
6.Warranty: The subdivider warrants that each and every improvement shall be free from defects for a period of 1 year from the date that the city (or
county) accepts the dedication of the last improvement completed by the subdivider.
7.Commencement And Completion Periods: The subdivider shall complete all of the required improvements within 2 years from the effective date of this
agreement.
8.Compliance With Law: The subdivider shall comply with all relevant laws, ordinances, regulations and requirements in effect at the time of subdivision
plat approval when meeting his obligations under this agreement.
City (Or County) Obligations:
9.Inspection And Certification:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 171/242
a.The city (or county) shall provide for inspection of the improvements as they are completed and, where found acceptable, shall certify those
improvements as complying with the standards and specifications set forth in attachment ( ) of this agreement. The inspection and certification, shall
occur within 14 days' of notice by the subdivider that the improvements are complete and that he desires city (or county) inspection and certification.
Before requesting city (or county) certification of any improvement the subdivider shall present to the city (or county) valid lien waivers from all persons
providing materials or performing work on the improvement.
b.Certification by the city (or county) does not constitute a waiver by the city (or county) of the right to draw funds under the letter of credit in the event
defects in or failure of any improvement are found following the certification.
10.Notice Of Defect: The city (or county) shall provide timely notice to the subdivider whenever inspection reveals that an improvement does not
conform to the standards and specifications set forth in attachment ( ), or is otherwise defective. The subdivider shall have 30 days from the date the
notice is issued to remedy the defect. The city (or county) may not declare a default under this agreement during the 30 day remedy period unless the
subdivider clearly indicates he does not intend to correct the defect. The subdivider shall have no right to correct the defect in, or failure of, any
improvement found after the city (or county) accepts dedication of the improvements.
11.Reduction Of Security: After the acceptance of any improvement, the amount that the city (or county) is entitled to draw on the letter of credit shall be
reduced by an amount equal to 90 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement as shown in attachment ( ). At the request of the subdivider, the city
(or county) shall execute a certificate verifying the acceptance of the improvement and waiving its right to draw on the letter of credit to the extent of the
amount. Upon the certification of all of the improvements the balance that may be drawn under the credit shall be available to the city (or county) for the 1
year warranty period plus an additional 90 days.
12.Use Of Proceeds: The city (or county) shall use funds drawn under the letter of credit only for the purposes of completing the improvements or
correcting defects in or failure of the improvements.
Other Provisions:
13.Events Of Default: The following conditions, occurrences or actions constitute a default by the subdivider during the completion period:
a.Failure to complete construction of the improvements within 2 years of final subdivision plat approval;
b.Failure to remedy the defective construction of any improvement within the remedy period;
c.Insolvency of the subdivider or the filing of a petition for bankruptcy;
d.Foreclosure of the property or assignment or conveyance of the property in lieu of foreclosure.
14.Measure Of Damages: The measure of damages for breach of this agreement is the reasonable cost of completing the improvements. For purposes
of this agreement the estimated cost of the improvements as specified in attachment ( ) is prima facie evidence of the minimum cost of completion.
However, neither that amount nor the amount of the letter of credit establishes the maximum amount of the subdivider's liability. The city (or county) may
complete all unfinished improvements at the time of default regardless of the extent to which development has taken place in the subdivision or whether
development ever was commenced.
15.Local Government Rights Upon Default:
a.Upon the occurrence of any event of default, the city (or county) may draw on the letter of credit to the extent of the face amount of the credit less the
estimated cost (as shown in attachment ( ) of all improvements previously certified by the city (or county). The city (or county) may complete
improvements itself or contract with a third party for completion, or the city (or county) may assign the proceeds of the letter of credit to a subsequent
subdivider who has acquired the subdivision and who has the same rights of completion as the city (or county) if and only if the subsequent subdivider
agrees, in writing, to complete the unfinished improvements.
b.In addition, the city (or county) may suspend final plat approval. During this suspension the subdivider may not sell, transfer or otherwise convey lots
or homes within the subdivision without the express approval of the city (or county) until the improvements are completed and certified by the city (or
county).
16.Indemnification: The subdivider agrees to indemnify and hold the city (or county) harmless for and against all claims, costs and liability of every kind
and nature, for injury or damage received or sustained by any person or entity in connection with, or on account of the performance of work under this
agreement. The subdivider is not an employee or agent of the city (or county).
17.Amendment Or Modification: The parties to this agreement may amend or modify this agreement only by written instrument executed on behalf of the
city (or county) and by the subdivider.
18.Attorney Fees: Should either party be required to resort to litigation, arbitration or mediation to enforce the terms of this agreement, the prevailing
party, whether plaintiff or defendant, is entitled to costs, including reasonable attorney fees and expert witness fees, from the opposing party. If the court,
arbitrator or mediator awards relief to both parties, each shall bear its own costs in their entirety.
19.Third Party Rights: No person or entity who is not party to this agreement has any right of action under this agreement, except that if the city (or
county) does not exercise its rights within 60 days following an event of default, a purchaser of a lot or home in the subdivision may bring an action in
mandamus to compel the city (or county) to exercise its rights.
20.Scope: The agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and no statement, promise or inducement that is not contained in this
agreement is binding on the parties.
21.Time: For the purpose of computing the commencement and completion periods, and time periods for city (or county) action, times in which war, civil
disasters, acts of god or extreme weather conditions occur will not be included if the events prevent the subdivider or the city (or county) from performing
the obligations under this agreement.
22.Assigns: The benefits of this agreement to the subdivider may not be assigned without the express written approval of the city (or county). Such
approval may not be withheld unreasonably, but any unapproved assignment is void. There is no prohibition on the right of the city (or county) to assign its
rights under this agreement.
The city (or county) shall release the original subdivider's letter of credit if it accepts a new security from any subdivider or lender who obtains the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 172/242
property. However, no action by the city (or county) constitutes a release of the original subdivider from his liability under this agreement.
23.Severability: If any part, term or provision of this agreement is held by the courts to be illegal the illegality shall not affect the validity of any other part,
term or provision, and the rights of the parties shall be construed as if the part, term or provision were never part of the agreement.
Dated this day of , 20 .
City or County Official
Subdivider
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-9: ACCEPTABLE FORMS OF IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES:
The following are acceptable means of guaranteeing subdivision improvements agreements, although others may also be acceptable. The irrevocable
letter of credit is often the preferable guaranty because it is usually feasible for a subdivider to secure, and the local government can readily obtain funds to
complete the required improvements should the subdivider fail to install the required the improvements. A suggested irrevocable letter of credit and
commentary are included as part of this chapter and other common guaranties are also explained below.
The subdivider shall provide one or more of the following financial security guarantees in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated total cost of installing all required improvements:
A. Letter Of Credit: Subject to governing body approval, the subdivider shall provide the governing body a letter of credit from a bank or other reputable
institution or individual certifying the following:
1. That the creditor guarantees funds in an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost, as approved by the governing body, of
completing all required improvements.
2. That if the subdivider fails to complete the specified improvements within the required period, the creditor shall immediately pay to the governing
body upon presentation of a sight draft without further action, an amount of cash necessary to finance the completion of those improvements, up to
the limit of credit stated in the letter.
3. That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the governing body.
B. Escrow Account: The subdivider shall deposit cash, or collateral readily convertible to cash at face value, either with the governing body or in escrow
with a bank. The use of collateral other than cash, and the selection of the bank where funds are to be deposited must be approved by the governing
body.
Where an escrow account is to be used, the subdivider shall give the governing body an agreement with the bank guaranteeing the following:
1. That the funds in the escrow account are to be held in trust until released by the governing body and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider
as security for any obligation during that period.
2. That, should the subdivider fail to complete the required improvements, the bank shall immediately make the funds in escrow available to the
governing body for completing these improvements.
C. Property Escrow: The subdivider may offer as a guarantee land or other property, including corporate stocks or bonds. The value of any real property to
be used, accounting for the possibility of a decline in its value during the guarantee period, must be established by a licensed real estate appraiser or
securities broker, as applicable, at the subdivider's expense. The governing body may reject the use of property as collateral when the property value is
unstable, when the property may be difficult to sell, or when other factors exist which will inhibit the exchange of the property for an amount of money
sufficient to complete required improvements.
When property is offered as an improvement guarantee, the subdivider shall:
1. Enter an agreement with the escrow agent instructing the agent to release the property to the governing body in the case of default. The agreement
must be placed on file with the county clerk and recorder.
2. File with the governing body an affidavit affirming that the property to be used as a guarantee is free and clear of any encumbrances or liens at the
time it is to be put in escrow.
3. Execute and file with the governing body an agreement stating that the property to be placed in escrow as an improvement guarantee will not be
used for any other purpose, or pledged as a security for any other matter until it is released by the governing body.
D. Sequential Development: Where a subdivision is to be developed in phased portions, the governing body may, at its discretion, waive the use of a
guarantee on the initial portion, provided that the portion contains no more than twenty five (25) lots, or fifty percent (50%) of the total number of lots in
the proposed subdivision, whichever is less. The governing body may grant final plat approval to only one portion at a time. The plat approval for each
succeeding portion will be contingent upon completion of all improvements in each preceding portion and acceptance of those improvements by the
governing body. Completion of improvements in the final portion of the subdivision must be guaranteed through the use of one of the other methods
detailed in this section.
E. Surety Performance Bond: The bond must be executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of Montana and acceptable as a
surety to the governing body and countersigned by a Montana agent. The bond must be payable to the county by the governing body.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 173/242
F. Special Improvements District: The governing body may enter into an agreement with the subdivider, and the owners of the property proposed for
subdivision if other than the subdivider, that the installation of required improvements will be financed through a special or rural improvement district
created pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 7, chapter 12. This agreement must provide that no lots within the subdivision shall be sold, rented,
or leased, and no contract for the sale of lots executed, before the improvement district has been created.
If the proposed subdivision lies in an unincorporated area, the subdivider, or other owners of the property involved must also petition the board of
governing body to create a rural improvement district pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-12-2102.
An agreement to finance improvements through the creation of a special improvement district, or a petition to create a rural improvement district,
constitutes a waiver by the subdivider or the other owners of the property of the right to protest, or petition against, the creation of the district under
either Montana Code Annotated section 7-12-2109 or section 7-12-4110. This waiver must be filed with the county clerk and recorder and shall be
deemed to run with the land.
Note: Local officials should be cautious in accepting special improvement districts or rural improvement districts as forms of improvements guarantees.
In a number of cases in Montana, the subdivider has been unable to pay the assessments, and the city or county has had to bear the cost of
completing the required improvements. These problems occur most frequently where improvement districts are formed as a means to provide
improvements on raw land, and local officials may want to avoid creating improvement districts for undeveloped property.
Local officials should consult a bond underwriter before accepting an improvement district as a form of improvements guaranty.
Letters of credit may be revocable, so it is important to express that the letter of credit is irrevocable. Because the letter of credit does not incorporate
the subdivision improvement agreement, the issuer of the credit cannot raise objections to the demand for payment. If the letter of credit specifies that
the local government need only present a signed statement or affidavit that the subdivider is in default, the local government need not present proof of
default or signed statements from any other party.
Under the letter of credit the local government is committed to use the funds for completion of the improvement.
It is important that the expiration date of the letter of credit allows the local government a reasonable amount of time after the improvements completion
deadline to inspect the improvements and, if defects are found, prepare proper drafts and present a notice of default to the lending institution.
Lending institutions may be reluctant to issue letters of credit to be in force for long periods of time. Typically, improvements can be completed in
eighteen (18) to twenty four (24) months, and an additional one year warranty period is appropriate to allow the local government to monitor for defects
or failures. Following the warranty period an additional ninety (90) days is reasonable to give local officials time to submit any drafts and documentation
to draw funds, if necessary.
A "sight draft" commits the payor to make payment at the time the draft is presented, or on sight. Other types of drafts allow a waiting period or
approval before the payor must make the payment. (Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-10: MODEL IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT:
Letter of Credit No.
Name of Local GovernmentDate
Address:
Gentlemen:
We hereby establish in your favor our Irrevocable Letter of Credit # for the account of (subdivider) , available by your drafts at sight up to
an aggregate amount of $ . Should (subdivider) default or fail to complete the improvements under the terms specified in the attached
subdivision improvements agreement for (name of subdivision) , we shall pay on demand your sight draft or drafts for such funds, to the limit of credit
set forth herein, as are required to complete said improvements.
All drafts must be presented prior to (expiration date) and this Letter of Credit must accompany the final draft for payment. Drafts drawn
hereunder must be by sight draft marked:
"Drawn under (lending institution) , Letter of Credit # dated (date of letter of credit) ," and the amount drawn endorsed on the
reverse hereof by the lending institution.
Unless otherwise stated, this Letter of Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practices for Commercial Documentary Credits (1983 Revision)
International Chamber of Commerce. We hereby agree with the drawers, endorsers and bona fide holders of the drafts drawn under and in compliance
with the terms of this Credit, that these drafts shall be duly honored upon presentation to the drawee.
This letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in any amount prior to its expiration date except by your draft or written release.
(Lending institution)
(Signature and title of official)
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
12-14-11: GRANT OF ACCESS EASEMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 174/242
GRANT OF ACCESS EASEMENT
THIS INDENTURE, made and entered into this day of , 20 , by and between , of , Montana, hereinafter referred to as the
"Grantor", and (subdivider) of , Montana, hereinafter referred to as the "Grantee."
THE GRANTOR does hereby give, grant and convey unto the Grantee, its successor and assigns, the right, privilege and authority to construct,
reconstruct, maintain, operate, repair, improve, and to travel upon and use, a road and its necessary fixtures and appurtenances through, over, and across
a corridor, 60 feet wide, shown on the attached certificate of survey, extending across the following described tract(s) of land:
(legal description of Grantor's property over which easement is granted)
THIS GRANT of right and authority shall run with the said property and be binding on the Grantor, its successors, all subsequent owners and any parties
having right, title, or interest in the said property.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Grantor has hereunto set his hand this day of , 20 .
Grantor
STATE OF MONTANA)
) ss.
County of )
On this day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public for the State of Montana, personally appeared , known to
me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged to me that they executed the same.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my Notarial Seal this day of 20 .
Notary Public for the State of Montana
Residing at , Montana
My commission expires
(Ord. 784, 8-6-2007)
Title 13
ZONING REGULATIONS1
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 2 of this code for provisions regarding the board of adjustment, city-county planning board and zoning commission.
Chapter 1
JURISDICTION AND ZONING MAP1
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SHELBY, MONTANA, and may be referred to as the "zoning ordinance" and the
map referred to herein is identified by the title "official zoning map, Shelby, Montana", and may be known as the "zoning map". (1975 Code § 17.04.010)
13-1-2: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
The zoning jurisdiction of the city shall include the land within the corporate limits of the city as established on the official zoning map. (1975 Code
§ 17.04.020)
13-1-3: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
A. Incorporated By Reference: The official zoning map, and all notations, references, and other information shown on the map are incorporated by
reference and made a part of this title.
B. Identification: The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city finance officer, and bearing the seal of the city
under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Shelby,
Montana", together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title.
C. Changes: If, in accordance with the provisions of this title and Montana Code Annotated sections 76-2-301 through 76-2-328, changes are made in
district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the city council. The changes shall be delineated in numerical order with the date of each change noted adjacent to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 175/242
the appropriate number. The detailed description of the change will be noted in the city official minutes. No amendment to this title which involves
matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been noted on said map.
D. Changes Made In Conformity With Procedure; Unauthorized Change: No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter
shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this title. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall
be considered a violation of this title and punishable as provided under section 13-12-10 of this title.
E. Located In Office Of City Finance Officer; Publication: The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the city finance officer and shall be the
final authority as to the current zoning status of the land, water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. Updated copies of the official zoning
map will be published periodically; however, their accuracy is not guaranteed.
F. New Official Zoning Map: In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the city council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning
map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have
the effect of amending the original official zoning map and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city finance officer, and
bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
This is the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Shelby, Montana.
Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. (1975 Code § 17.04.030)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
13-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
A. Words used in this present tense include the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise. (1975 Code § 17.08.010)
13-2-2: GENERALLY:
Definitions for uses subject to general requirements under chapter 3 of this title will be included in the appropriate section. (1975 Code § 17.08.020)
13-2-3: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following words and terms have the meaning indicated in this chapter:
ABUTTING: Having property or district lines in common; e.g., two (2) lots are abutting if they have property lines in common.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, or
purpose to the principal use or structure.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for farming, dairying, grazing, cultivation, horticulture, floriculture and silviculture, provided that the operation does not
include commercial feedlots or commercial facilities for slaughtering, dressing, and packing of animal products.
ALLEY: A public right of way built in accordance with subdivision regulations, which provides a secondary means of access to a property, normally at the
back side of a property.
AUTO WRECKING YARD: Any open space of more than two hundred (200) square feet used for storing, dismantling, disassembling, salvaging or
abandoning wrecked or otherwise immobilized motor vehicles.
BUFFER: A strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another with which it is incompatible.
BUILDING: A structure, of more or less permanent construction, having a roof and intended to be used for sheltering people, animals, property, or
business activity.
BUILDING DENSITY: The average number of housing units per acre of land.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, or
the midline of any other roof.
COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT: Any confined place or facility used for the feeding of animals for commercial purposes and not normally used for pasturage
where more than twenty five percent (25%) of the animals do not belong to the owner of the place or facility.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A group, foster, or other home specifically provided as a place of residence for developmentally disabled or
handicapped persons who do not require nursing care or a district youth guidance home established pursuant to Montana Code Annotated title 50, chapter
5, or a halfway house operated in accordance with regulations of the department of health and environmental sciences for the rehabilitation of alcoholics or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 176/242
drug dependent persons, or a licensed adult foster family care home.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted within a zoning district, provided the additional conditions specified in the district regulations for the use are met.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages
in or on disposable plates or cups and where customers may be served in their motor vehicles, may serve themselves or may eat or drink the food,
refreshments, or beverages on the premises.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily
movable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation.
DWELLING, MODULAR UNIT: A factory fabricated transportable building designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building
site into a structure on a permanent foundation which complies with the Montana building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical construction codes and the
rules and regulations for modular housing of the building code division of the Montana department of administration. The term is intended to apply to major
assemblies and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees, and other prefabricated subelements which are to be incorporated into a
structure at the site.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A residential building or portion thereof designed for or occupied as the home of three (3) or more families living
independently of each other, including tenement houses, apartment houses or apartment hotels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or
rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure,
and which may or may not contain independent cooking and sleeping facilities, i.e., motels and hotels.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES: Include quarrying, the removal of sand, soil, stone, gravel, or clay, and mining operations.
FAMILY: One or more persons, living, sleeping and usually cooking and eating on the premises, as a single housekeeping unit.
LOT: A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for structure, use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards
and other open spaces as are required in this title. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record;
B. A portion of a lot of record;
C. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title.
"Lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", or "tract".
LOT FRONTAGE: The side of a lot boundary which is nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through
lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county clerk and recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES: The diagram (Figure 1 of this definition) which illustrates terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots, reversed
frontage lots and through lots.
In the diagram, A equals "corner lot", defined as a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets
shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lots lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior
angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). See lots marked A(1) in the diagram.
B equals "interior lot", defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 177/242
Figure 1
Lot Types
Figure 2
Location of Yards on Lots
C equals "through lot", defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be
referred to as double frontage lots.
D equals "reversed frontage lot", defined as a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135
degrees to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot (A-D in the diagram), or a through lot (C-D).
MOBILE HOME LOT: A designated portion of a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory buildings or
structures for the exclusive use of the occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot, tract or parcel of land used, maintained, or intended to be used, leased or rented for occupancy by two (2) or more mobile
homes together with accessory structures provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include trailer sales lots on which unoccupied mobile
homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sales.
PERSON: Includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and company, as well as an individual.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 178/242
REPAIR GARAGE OR BODY SHOP: Buildings and premises used primarily for mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in service stations.
SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where the primary function is to dispense at retail gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile
accessories. A service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
SHALL: Always mandatory and not merely directory.
SHIPPING CONTAINERS: Shipping containers, conexs, crates or other items used for shipping goods and semi-truck trailers with their wheels and axles
removed.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, and billboards.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached units separated by property lines and with open space on at least two (2)
sides.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable unit built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having
a body width not exceeding eight feet (8').
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any lot, tract or parcel of land used, maintained or intended to be used for accommodating travel trailers.
USED FOR: Includes the meaning "designed for".
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of the zoning title where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this title would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
As used in this title, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a
use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district
or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
YARD: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure; provided, however,
that fences, walls, poles, posts, other customary yard accessories, sidewalks, terraces, and swimming pools may be permitted in any yard subject to
height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility in chapter 5 of this title. See figure 2 in the definition of "lot types" for illustrations of yard
types.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public street. In the case of through and corner lots, unless the
prevailing front yard pattern on abutting lots indicates otherwise, shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the front yards that would normally be
required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the administrative official may waive the requirement for the normal front yard
and substitute therefor a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on abutting lots.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear
yards, but only front and side yards.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the
point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear
lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after front yards have been established shall be considered side yards.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The city building inspector or other designated person approved by the city council. (1975 Code §§ 17.08.010, 17.08.030 -
17.08.400; amd. Ord. 706, 2-5-1996; Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
13-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The following zoning districts are established for the zoning jurisdictional area of the city. For the interpretation of this title the zoning districts have been
formulated to realize the general purposes as set forth in the preamble of the ordinance codified in this title. The districts shall be named and designated
as follows:
District Designation
Low density residential LR
Medium density residential MR
Central business CB
Central business 2 CB2
Highway business HB
Highway business 2 HB2
General industrial GI
Rural residential RR
(1975 Code § 17.36.010; amd. Ord. 654, 10-15-1990)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 179/242
13-3-2: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. Centerlines: Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
B. Platted Lot Lines: Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. City Limits: Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits.
D. Railroad Lines: Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E. Parallel; Distances: Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through D of this section are so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map are to be determined by the scale of the map.
F. Interpretation By Board Of Adjustment: Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning
map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through E of this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
(1975 Code § 17.36.020)
ARTICLE A. LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
13-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The low density residential district is established to provide for the development of single-family and two-family residences within the city limits at a density
compatible with existing residential development and where public water supply and sewerage are available. This district is also intended to accommodate
those institutional and public uses compatible with residential neighborhoods. (1975 Code § 17.40.010)
13-3A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the low density residential district are as follows:
Churches.
Community residential facilities.
Hospitals.
Libraries.
Museums.
Nursing homes.
Public parks and recreational facilities.
Schools.
Single-family dwelling, modular unit.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings. (1975 Code § 17.40.020)
13-3A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses in the low density residential district are as follows:
None permitted. (1975 Code § 17.40.030)
13-3A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses permitted in the low density residential district include home occupations in accordance with provisions of chapter 8 of this title, on site
signs, off street parking1, garages, toolsheds, greenhouses, solar panels, and any other structure which the zoning administrator judges to meet the
definition of accessory uses. A separate accessory building may be erected in any required yard provided the accessory building is not within five feet (5')
of the side or rear property line, and is not within five feet (5') of any other building. No accessory building may be erected in the required front yard. (1975
Code § 17.40.040; amd. 2008 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 180/242
13-3A-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary structures, storage buildings and storage areas on construction sites, temporary signs, and temporary structures on sites of grading operation
shall be removed when the building construction is completed. (1975 Code § 17.40.050; amd. 2008 Code)
13-3A-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum area of a zoning lot is five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet per dwelling unit where public water supply and sewerage are available
and connection approved. Property annexed into the city after the zoning ordinance codified in this title becomes effective will be seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet. (1975 Code § 17.40.060)
13-3A-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
No building or structure in the low density residential district shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (1975 Code
§ 17.40.070)
13-3A-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of measuring depth of required yards, all protruding portions of buildings or structures shall be considered part of the building or structure.
A. Front Yard: A twenty five foot (25') front yard shall be provided on all frontages.
B. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall be not less than five feet (5').
C. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be provided not less than twenty feet (20') in depth. (1975 Code § 17.40.080)
13-3A-9: PARKING:
Off street parking as an accessory use is permitted in accordance with title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (1975 Code § 17.40.090)
13-3A-10: SIGNS:
On site signs as accessory uses are permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.40.100)
13-3A-11: SCREENING AND BUFFERS:
Screening and buffers must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.40.110)
13-3A-12: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (1975 Code § 17.40.120)
ARTICLE B. MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
13-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The medium density residential district is established to accommodate a mix of all residential structures including multi-family and mobile homes within the
city limits where public water supply and sewerage are available. It is also intended that this district be maintained and expanded to preserve the
residential attractiveness of the district in a mixed use atmosphere. (1975 Code § 17.44.010)
13-3B-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses for the medium density residential district are as follows:
Churches.
Community residential facilities.
Funeral homes.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 181/242
Hospitals.
Libraries.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Museums.
Nursing homes.
Public parks and recreational facilities.
Schools.
Single-family dwellings.
Single-family dwellings; modular unit.
Townhouses.
Two-family dwellings. (1975 Code § 17.44.020; amd. Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
13-3B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses must comply with additional requirements as listed in chapter 7 of this title and secure approval from the board of adjustment, if
required under section 13-4-4, "Moving Of Existing Buildings" of this title, and must comply with the conditions specified in section 13-12-2, "Zoning
Permits", of this title:
Mobile home parks.
Mobile homes.
Retail grocery stores. (Ord. 616, 8-4-1986)
13-3B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses permitted in the medium density residential district include home occupations in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title, on
site signs, garages, toolsheds, greenhouses, solar panels and any other structure which the zoning administrator judges to meet the definition of
accessory use. A separate accessory building may be erected in any required yard provided the accessory building is not within thirty inches (30") of the
side or five feet (5') of the rear property line, and is not within five feet (5') of any other building. No accessory building may be erected in the required front
yard. (1975 Code § 17.44.040)
13-3B-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the medium density residential district are as follows: temporary structures, storage buildings, and storage areas on construction sites;
temporary signs; temporary structures on sites of grading operations. These temporary structures shall be removed when the building construction is
completed. (1975 Code § 17.44.050)
13-3B-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum area of zoning lot is four thousand (4,000) square feet per dwelling unit where public water supply and sewerage are available and
connection approved. Property annexed into the city after the ordinance codified in this title becomes effective will be six thousand (6,000) square feet.
(1975 Code § 17.44.060)
13-3B-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
No building or structure in the medium density residential district may be erected or structurally altered to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (1975 Code
§ 17.44.070)
13-3B-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of measuring depth of required yards, all protruding portions of buildings or structures are part of the building or structure.
A. Front Yard: A twenty five foot (25') front yard shall be provided on all frontages. (1975 Code § 17.44.080)
B. Side Yard: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5'). Townhouses are permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between
attached units. (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 182/242
C. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be provided of not less than twenty feet (20') in depth. (1975 Code § 17.44.080)
13-3B-9: PARKING:
Off street parking as an accessory use shall be provided in accordance with title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (1975 Code § 17.44.090)
13-3B-10: SIGNS:
On site signs as accessory uses and temporary signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.44.100)
13-3B-11: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.44.110)
13-3B-12: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (1975 Code § 17.44.120)
ARTICLE C. CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The central business district is intended to accommodate and encourage expansion and renewal in the core business area of the community. A variety of
business, institutional, office, service establishments, and public uses are encouraged in an effort to provide the mix of activities necessary to maintain a
downtown character. (1975 Code § 17.48.010)
13-3C-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the central business district are as follows:
Amusements, commercial, except shooting ranges, racing of manned motor vehicles, outdoor theaters, miniature golf or other outdoor uses.
Auditoriums.
Churches.
Clubs and lodges.
Financial institutions.
Hotels, motels and boarding homes.
Law enforcement agency or fire stations.
Libraries.
Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Museums and art galleries.
Parking areas.
Professional offices.
Public buildings.
Public parks or recreational facilities, except shooting ranges and racing of manned motor vehicles.
Restaurants.
Retail business establishments whose principal activity is conducted within an enclosed building.
Schools, postsecondary professional or vocational institutions.
Services including, but not limited to, barbershops, self-service laundries, repair shops, rental shops, custom fabrication.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 183/242
Townhouses.
Two-family dwellings.
Utilities, public or private except electrical substations, gas regulator stations, and microwave reflectors. (1975 Code § 17.48.020; amd. Ord. 650, 8-20-
1990; Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
13-3C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses must comply with additional requirements as listed in chapter 7 of this title, and secure approval from the board of adjustment in
accordance with the conditions specified in section 13-12-2 of this title:
Service stations complying with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana department of justice, fire marshal bureau, current rules and
regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city finance officer. (1975 Code § 17.48.030)
13-3C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the central business district are as follows:
On site wall signs and any other use which the zoning administrator determines meets the definition of accessory use, excluding outdoor storage. (1975
Code § 17.48.040)
13-3C-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the central business district are as follows: temporary structures, mobile homes, and storage areas on construction sites; temporary
structures on sites of grading operations, temporary signs, the use of open land for meetings, circuses, or carnivals or the sale of Christmas trees, baked
goods, or collected clothing or the like, if no permanent structure is erected. These temporary structures shall be removed when building construction is
completed or activity is finished. (1975 Code § 17.48.050)
13-3C-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
No minimum lot size is required in the central business district. (1975 Code § 17.48.060)
13-3C-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
No building may be erected or structurally altered to exceed forty five feet (45') in height. (1975 Code § 17.48.070)
13-3C-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Front Yard: Any building or structure may be set back not less than ten feet (10') from the curb or street pavement or in keeping with the front of other
structures on that block. Canopies covering front sidewalks shall not be considered as part of the building. (1975 Code § 17.48.080)
B. Side Yards: No side yards are required, but any side yard provided adjacent to an interior lot line must be at least five feet (5') in width. Townhouses are
permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between attached units. (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
C. Rear Yard: Any building or structure must be at least ten feet (10') from the rear property line. (1975 Code § 17.48.080)
13-3C-9: PARKING:
No off street parking and loading spaces are required in the central business district. (1975 Code § 17.48.090)
13-3C-10: SIGNS:
On site wall signs as accessory uses are permitted in the central business district and must comply with the size provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (1975
Code § 17.48.100)
13-3C-11: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.48.110)
13-3C-12: LIGHTING:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 184/242
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (1975 Code § 17.48.120)
ARTICLE D. CENTRAL BUSINESS 2 DISTRICT
13-3D-1: PURPOSE:
The central business 2 district is intended to provide a buffer zone between the central business district and surrounding residential districts. A variety of
business, institutional, office, services establishments, public uses, single-family, two-family and multi-family uses are encouraged in an effort to provide a
multi-use buffer zone between the central business district and surrounding residential districts. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the central business 2 district are as follows:
Churches.
Clubs and lodges.
Hotels, motels, and boarding houses.
Libraries.
Medical and other healthcare offices, clinics and laboratories.
Multi-family dwellings.
Parking areas.
Professional offices and office complexes.
Public buildings.
Public parks.
Schools.
Single-family dwellings.
Townhouses.
Two-family dwellings.
Utilities, public or private except electrical substations, gas regulator stations, microwave reflectors. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990; amd. Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
13-3D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Microwave reflectors.
Retail business establishments whose principal activity is conducted within an enclosed building. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the central business 2 district are as follows:
On site wall signs and any other use which the zoning administrator determines meets the definition of accessory use, excluding outdoor storage. (Ord.
655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the central business 2 district are as follows: temporary structures, mobile homes, and storage areas on construction sites; temporary
structures on sites of grading operations, temporary signs, the use of open land for meetings, circuses, or carnivals or the sale of Christmas trees, baked
goods, or collected clothing or the like, if no permanent structure is erected. These temporary structures shall be removed when building construction is
completed or activity is finished. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum area of lot size when the use is for single-family, two-family, or multi-family dwellings is five thousand (5,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 185/242
No minimum lot size is required when the use is a permitted principal use or conditional use, other than those previously listed in this section permitted in
the central business 2 district. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENT:
No building may be erected or structurally altered to exceed forty feet (40') in height. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Protruding Portions Of Buildings Or Structures: For single-family, two-family, and multi-family structures, all protruding portions of the buildings or
structures should be considered part of the building or structure.
B. Single-Family, Two-Family, And Multi-Family Structures: For single-family, two-family, and multi-family structures, the yard requirements are as follows:
1. Front Yard: A twenty five foot (25') front yard shall be provided on all frontages upon a street;
2. Side Yard: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5');
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be provided not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
C. Other Uses: For the other permitted principal uses or conditional uses permitted in the central business 2 district, the yard requirements are as follows:
1. Front Yard: Any building or structure must be set back not less than ten feet (10') from the curb or street pavement or in keeping with the front of
other structures on that block. Canopies covering front sidewalks shall not be considered as part of the building; (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
2. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5'). Townhouses are permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between
attached units; (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
3. Rear Yard: Any building or structure must be at least ten feet (10') from the rear property line. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-9: PARKING AND LOADING:
The parking requirements of title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code shall be met by all uses in the central business 2 district. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-10: SIGNS:
On site wall signs as accessory uses are permitted in the central business 2 district and must comply with the size provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord.
655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-11: SCREENING AND BUFFERS:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3D-12: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
ARTICLE E. HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-3E-1: PURPOSE:
The highway business district is intended to accommodate the business and light industrial uses which require more space than is normally available in
the central business district and whose operations require access to the major transportation facilities serving the area. It is also the purpose of this district
to accommodate such uses while preserving the traffic carrying capacity of the road system, the desirability of abutting land for residential development
and the quality of the natural environment to the degree possible. (1975 Code § 17.52.010)
13-3E-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the highway business district are as follows:
All uses permitted in the central business district.
Amusements, commercial, including outdoor uses except drive-in theaters, shooting ranges, and racing manned motor vehicles.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 186/242
Auto repair and body shops.
Beverage bottling and distributing.
Building equipment and materials, wholesale and retail sales, including storage yards.
Car washes.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments.
Electric equipment, assembly and repair.
Feed and seed sales, wholesale and retail.
Freight terminals, truck.
Laboratories (analytical, experimental, testing, research and development).
Motor vehicles, including mobile homes, travel trailers, agricultural implements, or heavy machinery, sale, repair, rental or storage.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Outdoor advertising business.
Service stations complying with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana department of justice, fire marshal bureau, current rules and
regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city finance officer.
Signs, off site.
Stadiums, armories, fairgrounds, auditoriums, or meeting halls.
Storage yards, bulk material.
Townhouses.
Two-family dwellings.
Utilities, public or private.
Wholesale storage or sales, or storage services. (1975 Code § 17.52.020; amd. Ord. 651, 8-20-1990; Ord. 673, 11-4-1991; Ord. 682, 7-6-1992; Ord. 706,
2-5-1996)
13-3E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses must comply with additional requirements as listed in chapter 7 of this title, and secure approval from the board of adjustment in
accordance with the conditions specified in section 13-12-2 of this title:
Agriculture (grazing and tillage).
Drive-in theaters.
Flammable liquids, or gases, bulk storage aboveground complying with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana department of justice, fire
marshal bureau, current rules and regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city finance officer.
Mobile home park.
Veterinary office/hospital. (1975 Code § 17.52.030; amd. Ord. 673, 11-4-1991)
13-3E-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the highway business district are as follows: off street parking and loading, on site signs, outdoor storage of merchandise or inventory
usually carried in stock, or other use or structure judged by the zoning administrator to be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure. (1975 Code § 17.52.040)
13-3E-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the highway business district are as follows: temporary structures, mobile homes, and storage areas on construction sites; temporary
structures on sites of grading operations; temporary signs; the use of open land for meetings, circuses or carnivals, or the sale of Christmas trees, baked
goods, or collected clothing or the like, if no permanent structure is erected. These temporary structures shall be removed when building construction is
completed or activity is finished. (1975 Code § 17.52.050)
13-3E-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
Where public water supply and sewerage are available and connection approved, there is no minimum lot size. (1975 Code § 17.52.060)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 187/242
13-3E-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
No building may be erected or structurally altered to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (1975 Code § 17.52.070)
13-3E-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
For permitted principal uses or conditional uses permitted in highway business zoned areas, the yard requirements are as follows:
A. Front Yard: Any building or structure may be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the curb or street pavement or in keeping with the front of other
structures on that block. Canopies covering front sidewalks shall not be considered as part of the building. (Ord. 659, 11-19-1990)
B. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5'). Townhouses are permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between
attached units. (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
C. Rear Yard: Any building or structure must be at least ten feet (10') from the rear property line. (Ord. 659, 11-19-1990)
13-3E-9: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking and loading facilities must comply with the provisions of title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (1975 Code § 17.52.090)
13-3E-10: SIGNS:
On site signs as accessory uses, off site signs permitted as principal uses, and temporary signs must comply with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
(1975 Code § 17.52.100)
13-3E-11: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.52.110)
13-3E-12: FENCING:
The following uses must be shielded by a protective fence not less than six feet (6') in height:
A. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment;
B. Aboveground storage of flammable liquids, gases, or other material; and
C. Electrical substations, gas regulator stations, and microwave reflectors. (1975 Code § 17.52.120)
13-3E-13: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (1975 Code § 17.52.130)
ARTICLE F. HIGHWAY BUSINESS 2 DISTRICT
13-3F-1: PURPOSE:
Highway business 2 district is intended to accommodate a mix of business, single-family, two-family, and multi-family uses. It is also the purpose of this
district to accommodate such uses while preserving the traffic carrying capacity of the road system, the desirability of abutting land for residential
development and the quality of the natural environment to the degree possible. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the highway business 2 district are as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 188/242
All uses permitted in the central business 2 district.
Auto repair and body shops.
Electric equipment, assembly and repair.
Motor vehicle, including mobile homes, travel trailers, agricultural implements, or heavy machinery, sales, repair, rental or storage.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Plumbing supply.
Signs, off site.
Townhouses. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990; amd. Ord. 682, 7-6-1992; Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
13-3F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Mobile home parks. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-4: ACCESSORY USES:
If the principal use of the property is for a residential dwelling, the accessory use must comply with the accessory uses of the closest residential district. If
the principal use of the property is commercial, the accessory use must comply with the accessory use of the highway business district. Any other use or
structure judged by the zoning administrator to be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure may be approved. (Ord. 655, 10-15-
1990)
13-3F-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the highway business 2 district are as follows: temporary structures, mobile homes, and storage areas on construction sites; temporary
structures on sites of grading operations; temporary signs; the use of open land for meetings, circuses or carnivals, or the sale of Christmas trees, baked
goods, or collected clothing or the like, if no permanent structure is erected. These temporary structures shall be removed when building construction is
completed or activity is finished. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum area of lot size when the use is for single-family, two-family, or multi-family dwellings is four thousand (4,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
No minimum lot size is required when the use is a permitted principal use, other than those previously listed in this section, permitted in the highway
business 2 district. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
No building may be erected or structurally altered to exceed forty feet (40') in height. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Protruding Portions Of Buildings Or Structures: For single-family, two-family, and multi-family structures, all protruding portions of the buildings or
structures should be considered part of the building or structure.
B. Single-Family, Two-Family, And Multi-Family Structures: For single-family, two-family, and multi-family structures, the yard requirements are as follows:
1. Front Yard: A twenty five foot (25') front yard shall be provided on all frontages upon a street.
2. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be provided not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
C. Other Uses: For the other permitted principal uses or conditional uses permitted in the highway business 2 district, the yard requirements are as follows:
1. Front Yard: Any building or structure must be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the curb or street pavement or in keeping with the front of
other structures on that block. Canopies covering front sidewalks shall not be considered as part of the building. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
2. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than five feet (5'). Townhouses are permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between
attached units. (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
3. Rear Yard: Any building or structure must be at least ten feet (10') from the rear property line. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-9: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 189/242
Parking and loading facilities must comply with the provisions of title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-10: SIGNS:
On site wall signs as accessory uses, off site signs permitted as principal uses, and temporary signs must comply with the provisions of chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-11: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-12: FENCING:
The following uses must be shielded by a protective fence not less than six feet (6') in height:
Aboveground storage of flammable liquids, gases, or other material.
Electrical substations, gas regulator stations, and microwave reflectors.
Outdoor storage of materials or equipment. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3F-13: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
ARTICLE G. GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
13-3G-1: PURPOSE:
The general industrial district is established to provide for industries which generally require specially selected locations in the community. These activities
require reasonable access to arterial highways, may have extensive open storage and service areas, and generate heavy traffic. The requirements for the
district are intended to ensure reasonable standards of community safety and acceptability consistent with industrial purposes. (1975 Code § 17.56.010)
13-3G-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Permitted principal uses in the general industrial district are as follows:
Airports or heliports.
Auto repair and body shops.
Beverage bottling and distributing.
Building equipment and materials, wholesale and retail sales including storage yards.
Cement products including mixing plants for concrete or paving materials.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments.
Electric equipment, assembly and repair.
Feed and seed sales, wholesale and retail.
Freight terminals, truck or rail.
Grain elevators.
Laboratories (analytical, experimental, testing research and development).
Laboratories (industrial processes).
Law enforcement agency or fire stations.
Manufacturing or processing:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 190/242
A. Any processing or the manufacturing of any products from any material (including, but not limited to, animal or vegetable matter, chemicals, glass,
metal, minerals, stones, or earth).
B. Fabrication or assembly of products from prestructured materials or compounds.
C. Manufacture of foodstuff, textiles, electrical components, fabrication of wood, leather, paper, or plastic products.
Motor vehicles, including mobile homes, travel trailers, agricultural implements, or heavy machinery, sale, repair, rental or storage.
Service stations complying with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana department of justice, fire marshal bureau, current rules and
regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city finance officer.
Shipping containers.
Signs (off site).
Storage yards, bulk material.
Utilities, public or private.
Welding or sheet metal working.
Wholesale storage or sales, or storage services. (1975 Code § 17.56.020; amd. Ord. 673, 11-4-1991; Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
13-3G-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses must comply with additional requirements as listed in section 13-7-1 of this title and secure approval from the board of adjustment in
accordance with the conditions specified in section 13-12-3 of this title:
Agriculture (grazing and tillage).
Auto wrecking yards, building material salvage yards, general salvage yards, scrap metal processing yards.
Feedlots, meatpacking plants, rendering plants, slaughterhouses.
Flammable liquids or gases, bulk storage above ground complying with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana department of justice, fire
marshal bureau, current rules and regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city finance officer.
Quarries or other extractive industries.
Veterinary office/hospital. (1975 Code § 17.56.030; amd. Ord. 673, 11-4-1991)
13-3G-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted accessory uses in the general industrial district are as follows: accommodations for caretakers, watchmen or custodians, off street parking and
loading, on site signs, outdoor storage of merchandise or inventory usually carried in stock, or other use or structure judged by the zoning administrator to
be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. (1975 Code § 17.56.040)
13-3G-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Permitted temporary uses in the general industrial district are as follows: temporary structures, mobile homes, and storage areas on construction sites;
temporary structures on sites of grading operations; temporary signs; the use of open land for meetings, circuses or carnivals, or the sale of Christmas
trees, baked goods, or collected clothing or the like, if no permanent structure is erected. These temporary structures shall be removed when building
construction is completed or activity is finished. (1975 Code § 17.56.050)
13-3G-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
Where public water supply and sewerage are available and connection approved, there shall be no minimum lot size. (1975 Code § 17.56.060)
13-3G-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Front Yard: A fifty foot (50') front yard must be provided on all frontages.
B. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines may be not less than twenty five feet (25').
C. Rear Yard: Depth of rear yard may not be less than twenty feet (20'). (1975 Code § 17.56.070)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 191/242
13-3G-8: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
There is no height requirement in the general industrial district. (1975 Code § 17.56.080)
13-3G-9: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking and loading facilities must be provided in compliance with the provisions of title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (1975 Code § 17.56.090)
13-3G-10: SIGNS:
On site signs as accessory uses, off site signs as a principal use, and temporary signs must comply with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (1975
Code § 17.56.100)
13-3G-11: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
Buffers and screening must be provided in compliance with chapter 4 of this title. (1975 Code § 17.56.110)
13-3G-12: FENCING:
The following uses must be shielded by protective fence not less than six feet (6') in height:
A. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment;
B. Aboveground storage of flammable liquids, gases, or other material; and
C. Electrical substations, gas regulator stations, and microwave reflectors. (1975 Code § 17.56.120)
13-3G-13: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (1975 Code § 17.56.130)
13-3G-14: PROTECTIVE COVENANTS:
For those general industrial businesses locating in the city industrial park, the "declaration of protective covenants, Shelby industrial park" must be
observed. (1975 Code § 17.56.140)
ARTICLE H. RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
13-3H-1: PURPOSE:
A district to provide estate type development. These areas would normally be located in rural areas away from concentrated development. (Ord. 655, 10-
15-1990)
13-3H-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Accessory buildings or uses.
Agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural.
Guesthouses.
Kennels, commercial and private.
Nurseries.
Parks.
Single-family dwellings.
Stables, private and public.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 192/242
Townhouses. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990; amd. Ord. 706, 2-5-1996; Ord. 728, 12-15-1997)
13-3H-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Churches.
Landfills.
Livestock.
Mobile homes.
Modular units.
Prisons, both public and private.
Public utility shops and buildings.
Temporary buildings or structures.
Water storage facilities. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses permitted in the rural residential district include home occupations in accordance with the provisions of chapter 8 of this title, on site signs,
garages, toolsheds, greenhouses, solar panels, barns, animal sheds, corrals, animal runs, and any other structure which the zoning administrator judges
to meet the definition of accessory use. A separate accessory building may be erected in any required yard provided the accessory building also meets the
required yard size and setback requirements. No accessory building may be erected within five feet (5') of any other building. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses in the rural residential district are as follows: temporary structures, storage buildings, and storage areas on construction sites, temporary
signs, temporary structures on sites of grading operations. These temporary structures shall be removed when the building construction is completed.
(Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum area of zoning is one acre. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENT:
No building or structure in the rural residential district may be erected or structurally altered, to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height (agricultural buildings
are exempt from this standard). (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-8: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of measuring depth of required yards, all protruding portions of buildings or structures are part of the building or structure.
A. Front Yard: A sixty foot (60') front yard shall be provided on all frontages. If frontages are on a dedicated public street or highway, a minimum thirty foot
(30') front yard shall be provided on all frontages. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
B. Side Yards: Side yards abutting interior lot lines shall not be less than sixty feet (60') unless requirements of subsection A of this section are met.
Townhouses are permitted zero foot (0') lot line setbacks between attached units. (Ord. 706, 2-5-1996)
C. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be provided of not less than sixty feet (60') in depth unless requirements of subsection A of this section are met. (Ord. 655,
10-15-1990)
13-3H-9: PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking as an accessory use shall be provided in accordance with title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-10: SIGNS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 193/242
On site signs as accessory uses and temporary signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-11: FENCING:
Fencing is permitted in accordance with the provisions of section 13-4-5 of this title. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
13-3H-12: LIGHTING:
In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (Ord. 655, 10-15-1990)
Chapter 4
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
13-4-1: YARD MEASUREMENT:
All measurements shall be made from the property line. (1975 Code § 17.12.010)
A. Front Yards: Depth of required front yards is measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost
point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, will be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot
lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear yard lines will be parallel. (1975 Code § 17.12.020)
B. Side Yards: Width of a required side yard is measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. (1975 Code § 17.12.030)
C. Rear Yards: Depth of a required rear yard is measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. (1975 Code § 17.12.040)
13-4-2: ADDITIONAL YARD SIZES:
Additional yard sizes may be required as provided in the international building codes. (1975 Code § 17.12.050)
13-4-3: BUFFERS AND SCREENING:
A. Required: Whenever a nonresidential use of off street parking area abuts a residential use, the nonresidential use must not be less than forty feet (40')
from such property. The use shall be effectively screened at the property line on all sides which adjoin or face the residential district or institutional use
by an acceptable designed, sight obscuring wall, fence or planting screen.
B. Specifications: Such fence, wall or planting screen shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in
good condition.
C. Off Street Parking: When off street parking is provided within the forty foot (40') buffer area, the screen shall be five feet (5') from the property line as
required in subsection 13-4-5C of this chapter.
D. Exception: In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such fence, wall or planting screen will not serve the intended
purpose, then no such wall, fence or planting screen shall be required. (1975 Code § 17.12.060)
13-4-4: MOVING OF EXISTING BUILDINGS:
The movement of any type of building from one location to another shall be permitted provided the following conditions are complied with:
A. Written Consent: Written consent of the owners of not less than seventy five percent (75%) of all the property owners within a distance of two hundred
feet (200') of the lot upon which the proposed establishment is to be erected; provided, that the real estate occupied by the moved building within the
two hundred foot (200') distance shall not count either for or against such consent.
B. Permits: The necessary building, zoning and moving permits shall be acquired. (1975 Code § 17.12.070)
C. Publication Of Notice:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 194/242
1. Required: Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, but prior to the granting of any zoning or moving permits, the city shall cause to be
published a notice to the general public that a permit or permits have been applied for to move an existing building onto property located within the
municipal limits of the city as a conditional use. Such notice shall be published one time in a local newspaper and shall notify any interested party
that within seven (7) days, excluding the date of publication, they must make a written protest to the granting of a permit to locate the existing
building on the desired premises.
2. Written Protest: Such written protest must be made within the seven (7) days stated above and must be directed to the building inspector of the City.
3. Hearing; Decision Of Board: If a written protest is timely made, then a public hearing shall be set before the Board of Adjustment. Upon hearing
public opinion and evidence, the board shall make the decision as to whether or not the required permits shall be granted pursuant to section 13-12-
3 of this title. (Ord. 617, 8-4-1986)
D. Exception:
1. Definition: For the purpose of this subsection, a "newly constructed dwelling" is defined as a building or structure never previously utilized or
occupied for residential or business purposes.
2. Newly Constructed Dwellings: The provisions of subsections A and C of this section shall not apply to Medium Density Residential Districts when the
building inspector determines that the new dwelling proposed to be moved is a newly constructed dwelling and that the dwelling conforms to the
international building codes as adopted by the City, and the manufacturer of said new building is listed by the State of Montana on its list of FBB
(factory built buildings) manufacturers that are certified by the State of Montana. (Ord. 736, 2-16-1999, eff. 3-18-1999)
13-4-5: FENCES AND BARRIERS:
A. Low Or Medium Density Residential Districts: No fence or barrier exceeding five feet (5') in height shall be constructed in Low Density or Medium
Density Residential Districts except in the rear or side yard, where the fence may be six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 828, 11-21-2016)
B. Rural Residential Districts: No fence or barrier exceeding eight feet (8') in height shall be constructed in Rural Residential Districts.
C. Fences Within Five Feet Of Adjoining Property Line: When any fence encloses the side yard in any district and is within five feet (5') of the adjoining
property line, there shall be filed with the building inspector a signed statement of approval by the property owner of the adjoining property.
D. Natural Growth Barriers: Natural growth barriers may exceed the height regulations.
E. Sidewalks Placed Next To Street Curb: In districts where sidewalks are placed next to the street curb, a fence may be placed on public property at the
edge of the sidewalk.
F. Corner Lot: On a corner lot, a six foot (6') fence is permissible along the side yard that fronts a street, with a thirty foot (30') setback from the curb on the
street parallel to the alley and a thirty foot (30') setback from the alley.
G. Placement At Edge Of Sidewalk On Public Property: A property owner placing a fence at the edge of a sidewalk on public property does so at his own
risk, and any future modifications, removal, etc., by order of the City Council will be accomplished at the property owner's expense. Any property owner
who places a fence at the edge of a sidewalk on public property shall sign a fence agreement with the City as a condition of obtaining a fence permit.
(Ord. 717, 11-6-1996)
Chapter 5
SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
13-5-1: PURPOSE:
Supplementary district regulations are intended to take care of miscellaneous problems related to uses or conditions which occur in more than one zoning
district. (1975 Code § 17.60.010)
13-5-2: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS:
A. Residential Districts: On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing may be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as
materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in
the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines thirty feet (30') from the point of intersection of
the curb line adjacent to the property. (Ord. 669, 8-19-1991)
B. Interference Visibility Of Traffic Signs:
1. Prohibited: On a corner lot in any municipal district, or on any boulevard adjacent thereto, nothing may be allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede the vision of oncoming motorists from seeing traffic signs. All traffic signs must be clearly visible to oncoming traffic for a distance
of a minimum of one hundred feet (100').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 195/242
2. Trimming Or Removal Of Plants Or Trees: In the event that any plant or tree obstructs the vision of oncoming motorists from clearly seeing traffic
signs for a distance of a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from said sign, then the city shall take appropriate action by having said plants or trees
trimmed back or removed to provide for adequate visibility as hereinabove specified. (Ord. 621, 10-20-1986)
13-5-3: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted principal and/or conditional use may be erected on a single lot; provided, that yard minimum
area, and other requirements of this title are met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. (1975 Code § 17.60.030)
13-5-4: HEIGHT REQUIREMENT EXCEPTIONS:
The height limitations contained in the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. (1975 Code § 17.60.040)
13-5-5: ACCESS:
Every principal building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street other than an
alley. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide required off street parking and safe and convenient access for servicing and fire protection.
(1975 Code § 17.60.050)
13-5-6: FIRE HAZARDS:
Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials must comply with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Montana
department of justice, fire marshal bureau, current rules and regulations attached as exhibits A and B to ordinance 673 on file in the office of the city
finance officer and be entirely enclosed with protective fencing not less than six feet (6') in height and be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. The activities must be set back not less than
one hundred feet (100') from all lot lines. (1975 Code § 17.60.090; amd. Ord. 673, 11-4-1991)
13-5-7: SATELLITE DISHES:
Satellite dishes shall not be placed so that the outermost extremity of said satellite dish lies within five feet (5') of any property boundary; and further, no
satellite dish may be placed in the front yard of one's "residence" as defined by this code without prior consent, in writing, by the city council. (Ord. 615, 4-
21-1986)
13-5-8: SHIPPING CONTAINERS:
Shipping containers, conexs, crates or other items used for shipping goods and semi-truck trailers with their wheels and axles removed are allowed only in
the general industrial zone. (Ord. 822, 10-19-2015)
Chapter 6
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
13-6-1: INTENT:
A. Lawful Prior To Enactment: Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted there exist:
1. Lots;
2. Structures; and
3. Uses of land and structures which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendment. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Further, the intent of this title is that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. No Change Required: To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of
any building on which actual construction or preparatory excavation or demolition was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this title, provided a building permit has been issued. (1975 Code § 17.26.010)
13-6-2: LOTS OF RECORD:
A. Single Lot Of Record: In any district, the authorized uses may be established on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, and provided that
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 196/242
yard dimensions for the district can be met. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same
ownership. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through the action of the board of adjustment.
B. Lots Considered Undivided Parcel: If two (2) or more lots or combination of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this title, and if any of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or
area below the requirements stated in this title. (1975 Code § 17.16.020)
13-6-3: USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES:
Where, at the time of passage of this title, a lawful use of land or a structure exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title,
the use may be continued where it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
A. Enlarged Or Increased: No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land or structure than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title.
B. Moved In Whole Or In Part: No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by
such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, except to decrease the nonconforming use.
C. Cease In Use: If any such nonconforming use ceases or the actual operation of business is not visible for a period of more than six (6) months, any
subsequent use of such land or structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is located.
D. Erection Of Additional Structure: No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this title shall be erected in connection with such
nonconforming use of land or structures.
E. Destruction: Should any existing structure, the use of which is not in conformity with the zoned use of the area, be destroyed by any means in excess of
fifty one percent (51%) of the replacement value at the time of destruction such structure may not be reconstructed. (1975 Code § 17.16.030)
13-6-4: STRUCTURES:
A. Allowed To Continue: Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that could not be built under the terms
of this title by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. Enlarged Or Altered To Increase Nonconformity: No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
2. Destroyed: Should such nonconforming structure be destroyed or damaged by any means, it may be reconstructed, however, the reconstruction may
not increase the original nonconformity.
3. Moved: Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
4. Additional Requirements: Additional requirements may be necessary as provided in the international building codes.
B. Restoring Or Abating To Safe Condition: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the restoring or abatement to a safe condition of any building or
part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (1975 Code § 17.16.040)
13-6-5: LOCAL PLAN APPROVAL:
An application for a zoning permit for a travel trailer park or a mobile home park must include a copy of the plan approved by the governing body pursuant
to the subdivision and platting act (Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1 et seq.). An application for a zoning permit for a use within an approved
subdivision must include a copy of the plat approved by the governing body or evidence that the plat was approved. (1975 Code § 17.16.050; amd. 2008
Code)
Chapter 7
CONDITIONAL USES
13-7-1: DESIGNATED:
The following uses must comply with these additional requirements for location in zoning districts where their allowance is of a conditional use and must
secure approval from the zoning commission in accordance with the procedures specified in section 13-12-2 of this title:
Use Conditions
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 197/242
Agriculture -
grazing
and tillage
The use of agriculture land within any zoning district for any purpose other than grazing or tillage is prohibited.
Auto wrecking
yards, building
material salvage
yards, general
salvage yards,
scrap metal
processing yards
A. A solid fence or wall not less than 8 feet in height must be erected, or a screen of evergreen shrubs or trees not less than 8
feet in height at maturity must be planted, or a combination thereof must be installed, around such yard. Any such fence must be
painted, and any fence or shrubs or trees must be maintained in sound condition. No such fence may contain advertising other
than lettering which identifies the operation carried on within the enclosure. Such uses existing at the time of adoption of the
ordinance codified in this title must be provided with screening, immediately after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified
in this title.
B. All processing of paper, rags, cloth or other fibers must be conducted in a building.
Drive-in theaters
A. The movie screen of every drive-in theater must be located at least 100 feet from all street right of way lines and all lot lines,
and at least 500 feet from the boundary of any residential district.
B. Speakers must be limited to the type designed to be heard by the occupants of 1 car only.
C. Entrances and exits must connect only to major streets, as determined by the administrator, and must be located no closer
than 100 feet to any intersection.
D. The projection surface of motion picture screens must not be visible from any major traffic street.
Feedlots,
meatpacking
plants, rendering
plants,
slaughterhouses
A. No portion of a building or other enclosure to be used for retention of animals or processing of animal products may be
located less than 600 feet from a residential district or site of any institutional use.
B. No portion of a building or other enclosure to be used for the retention of animals or processing of animal products shall be
located upwind from residential or commercial districts in the direction of the prevailing winds.
Flammable
liquids or
gases, bulk
storage
aboveground
All such uses shall be set back not less than 300 feet from all lot lines.
Mobile homes Each mobile home must be skirted, entirely enclosing the bottom section within 60 days after its placement. Skirting must be of
fire resistant material similar to that of which the mobile home exterior is constructed and attached to the mobile home.
Mobile home
parks
A. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every parking area shall be paved, oiled or covered with stone screenings or other
approved solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust.
B. Trailers shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least 15 feet. Any accessory structure such as
attached awnings, carports, or individual storage facilities shall, for the purposes of this separation requirement, be considered
to be a part of the trailer.
C. All trailers shall be positioned at least 10 feet from any property line boundary.
D. Each mobile home park shall be provided with a community storage building or an accessory storage building on each lot.
E. Each mobile home lot must be provided with anchors and tie downs such as cast in place concrete "dead men" eyelets
imbedded in a concrete runway, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices for securing the stability of the mobile home.
Quarries or other
extractive
industries
A. If the operation involves removal of more than 10,000 cubic yards of material, and is otherwise subject to the provisions of the
open cut mining act (Montana Code Annotated title 82, chapter 4, part 4), the building or excavation permit application must be
accompanied by a valid reclamation contract with the Montana board of land commissioners.
B. No quarry excavation may take place nearer than 40 feet to any property line of a watercourse, or to any street right of way.
C. Any excavation to a depth greater than 5 feet must be fenced. However, no fencing shall be required on any property where
such fencing would be impracticable, as determined by the zoning administrator by reason of the location of such property on a
floodplain.
D. During any period that an extractive operation is temporarily discontinued, the site, along with all structures, machinery, and
fencing, must be properly maintained in a safe and orderly manner.
E. Notice of permanent discontinuance of extractive operations must be filed with the zoning administrator and must include a
plan for reclamation of the site unless such a plan is operational pursuant to the provisions of the open cut mining act. Except
where redevelopment for another permitted use is in progress on the site of a discontinued extractive industry, the last operator
must perform the following within 6 months:
1. All buildings and equipment must be removed;
2. All waste piles, overburden, and other materials must be graded so that the material assumes its natural angle of repose.
These materials must be planted with approved vegetation so as to prevent erosion;
3. Any quarry walls must be cleared of materials; and
4. Any excavation must be so graded as to provide for natural drainage; if the collection of water in an excavation is
unavoidable, the area must be fenced.
F. All blasting operations must be conducted between sunrise and sunset. Blasting must be performed in such manner as to
protect neighboring properties from flying debris.
G. Whenever an extractive industry would in the course of its operation create a flooding hazard, the operator, before
commencing any such excavation, and at such other times during the excavation as may be necessary, must erect such dikes,
barriers, or other structures as will afford the same protection as if no industry may impede the flow of any watercourse.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 198/242
H. Notice of intent to temporarily discontinue an extractive operation must be filed with the zoning administrator in advance of
such temporary discontinuance. Notice of intent to permanently discontinue an extractive operation must be filed with the zoning
administrator not less than 3 months in advance. The operator of any extractive industry must file with the zoning administrator,
in addition to any exhibits required elsewhere in this title, evidence of ownership or control of property, plans for reclamation, and
notices of intent as required herein. The zoning administrator will inspect the premises annually to determine that all specified
conditions are being met. Violation of the requirements herein will make the operator liable to the penalties set forth in this title.
Retail grocery
store
A. Written consent of the owners of not less than 75 percent of the property owners within a distance of 200 feet of the lot upon
which the proposed establishment is to be erected; provided, that the real estate occupied by a grocery store within the 200 foot
distance shall not count either for or against such consent.
B. No signs other than face signs not exceeding 20 square feet in area and no sign shall be of the flashing type.
C. Floor area shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
D. Off street parking shall be provided as per this title.
E. Yard area and buffering shall apply.
Service stations Parking and loading spaces must be provided as stated in title 7, chapter 3, article C of this code.
Veterinary
office/hospital
No portion of a building or other enclosure to be used for the retention of animals may be located less than 600 feet from a
residential district or site of an institutional use.
(1975 Code § 17.32.010; amd. Ord. 619, 8-4-1986)
13-7-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A. Intent: Conditional use permits, for specific uses other than those specifically permitted in each district, are intended to provide for the needs of the
community in areas where they may be appropriate, but where special safeguards may be needed to protect other permitted uses from their adverse
effects.
B. Requirements:
1. No structure or land may be used for any purpose or in a district where such use is not listed as a permitted use, unless such use is provided for by
special permit and a conditional use permit is applied for at the city finance officer's office, on appropriate forms and public hearings are held before
the zoning commission and the city council.
2. A conditional use permit shall only be granted by the city council based upon (if warranted by the facts and circumstances) a statement of findings by
the city council that:
a. The use conforms generally to the objectives of the comprehensive plan and the intent of this title, and
b. Such uses will not adversely affect nearby properties or their occupants, and
c. Such uses do not do violence to the overall density, coverage, yard, height and all other regulations of the district in which they are located,
however, and
d. Public hearings have been held, after the required legal notices have been given, and the public has been given a chance to be heard upon the
matter.
C. Procedure:
1. After the appropriate forms have been filed with the city finance officer and the required filing fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the
city council1 has been paid to the city finance officer, the city zoning commission shall cause to be made such investigation to assure that the action
on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title. The zoning commission shall hold public hearings on said application
to gather needed facts from all interested parties. The zoning commission may continue such hearing, if need be to take additional information. If
such continuance is required, a second legal notice will not be required if the time and date of the continued meeting is announced at the first
meeting and placed in the official record of the commission.
2. The zoning commission will cause to be sent to the city council their recommendation on the hearing item with any and all pertinent facts pertaining
to the application. The applicant will be given a true and exact copy of the zoning commission recommendations to the city council at least five (5)
days prior to the city council hearing on such application.
3. The city council shall cause to be held public hearing on said application at which the zoning commission recommendations shall be read and
additional testimony may be taken from interested parties. The city council shall, by resolution, approve, deny or change the recommendation of the
zoning commission. If the city council denies or changes the zoning commission recommendations, the reasons for such a change shall be made
part of the resolution.
D. Conditional Approval: The city council may make the granting of a conditional use permit subject to such additional reasonable limitations or conditions
as it may impose, to enhance the appearance of the property, to reduce any of its adverse effects on nearby property or its occupants: 1) to preserve
the character of the area, 2) to protect or enhance the view of the hills from this or other properties, or 3) to make it more acceptable in other ways.
E. Annual Review: Within one year from the date that a conditional use permit is granted, the zoning administrator/building inspector shall review the
conditional use, including any and all restrictions and conditions as may have been imposed thereon under subsection D of this section. He shall report
to the zoning commission and the city council whether, in his opinion, the conditional use permit should be allowed to continue in effect or should be
revoked. Each conditional use permit shall be reviewed annually or as soon thereafter as is possible.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 199/242
F. Revocation: The city council, after first receiving a recommendation from the zoning commission, may by resolution passed by an affirmative majority
vote of all the members of the city council and approved by the mayor and attested to by the city finance officer, revoke any or all conditional use
permits that may have been issued as herein provided, when it shall deem best for the public interest to do so. Once a conditional use permit is
revoked, the activity that was allowed under said conditional use permit shall be eliminated within seven (7) days from the date of such revocation of
conditional use permit. (Ord. 657, 11-5-1990)
13-7-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
B. Abrogation Or Annulment Of Rules Or Permits: It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul rules or permits previously adopted or
issued according to the law relating the use of buildings or premises, nor to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, convenant or agreement;
the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 657, 11-5-1990)
13-7-4: PENALTY:
Any person owning, controlling or managing any building or premises wherein or whereon there shall be placed, or there exists, anything in violation of the
provisions of this title; or any person who shall assist in the commission of any violation of the provisions of this title; or any person who shall assist in the
commission of any violation of these provisions, or who shall build contrary to the plans and specifications submitted to, and approved by, the building
inspector; or any person who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act required in these provisions shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 657, 11-5-1990; amd. 2008 Code)
Chapter 8
HOME OCCUPATIONS
13-8-1: DEFINITION:
A "home occupation" is an occupation conducted as a secondary use in a dwelling unit, provided that no person other than members of the family residing
on the premises may be engaged in such occupation. (1975 Code § 17.20.010)
13-8-2: SIZE:
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and
not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in the conduct of the home occupation. (1975 Code
§ 17.20.020)
13-8-3: BUILDING APPEARANCE:
There may be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation, other
than one sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. (1975 Code
§ 17.20.030)
13-8-4: ACCESSORY BUILDING:
No home occupation may be conducted in any accessory building. (1975 Code § 17.20.040)
13-8-5: PARKING AND TRAFFIC1:
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need
for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. (1975 Code § 17.20.050)
13-8-6: EQUIPMENT OR PROCESS NUISANCES:
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to
the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a singlefamily
residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. (1975 Code § 17.20.060)
13-8-7: STORAGE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 200/242
There shall be no outdoor, unenclosed storage on the premises of equipment or materials used in connection with a home occupation. (1975 Code
§ 17.20.070)
Chapter 9
SIGNS
13-9-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising signs,
and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the
physical appearance of the community, and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising
distraction and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public
rights of way, provide more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community development. (1975 Code § 17.28.010)
13-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
OFF SITE SIGN: A sign other than an on site sign.
ON SITE SIGN: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the
premises. On site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. Permitted on
site signs include wall signs mounted on a building and freestanding signs.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located. For the purpose of determining
number of signs, a sign will be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a
unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, or where there is a reasonable doubt about the
relationship of elements, each element will be considered to be a single sign. (1975 Code § 17.28.020)
13-9-3: SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts:
A. Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located;
B. Signs bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants on premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial
connotations;
C. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except moving parts or moving lights;
D. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter;
E. Bulletin boards for churches, schools, or other public, religious, or educational institution; provided such sign is located not less than ten feet (10') from
the established right of way line of any street or highway and does not obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections. (1975 Code
§ 17.28.030)
13-9-4: ON SITE SIGNS:
All on site signs permitted as accessory uses in business and industrial districts are subject to the following regulations:
A. Setback: No on site freestanding sign may be set nearer to the lot line adjacent to a street than the required minimum setback for the principal uses
permitted in the district.
B. Lighting: In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or
reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of
electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the state electrical code. (1975 Code § 17.28.040)
C. Wall Signs Mounted On A Building: Walls signs mounted on a building are allowed even if said sign overhangs or projects over a public right of way.
Said sign shall not project from the building more than eight feet (8') or a distance greater than two feet (2') from the existing curb, whichever is less. In
addition, said sign shall be erected so that the distance from the ground to the lowermost point of any part of the sign is at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
676, 4-20-1992)
13-9-5: OFF SITE SIGNS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 201/242
A. Setback: No off site sign may be set nearer to the lot line adjacent to a street than the required minimum setback for the principal uses permitted in the
district.
B. Lighting: In no event may an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so that the beams and illumination therefrom cause glare or
reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection, and operation of
electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the state electrical code. (1975 Code § 17.28.050)
13-9-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs may be erected for a period of sixty (60) days plus construction period. (1975 Code § 17.28.060)
Chapter 10
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
13-10-1: PURPOSE:
The following performance policies are intended to alleviate the undesirable impacts of land use activities on the quality of the natural resources of the city
zoning jurisdiction. These policies are also intended to reduce or eliminate the impact of objectionable uses on developed areas. (1975 Code § 17.64.010)
13-10-2: ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE:
No activity, use, or process may be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with radio or television reception in neighboring residential
districts. (1975 Code § 17.64.020)
13-10-3: OBNOXIOUS AND TOXIC MATTER:
No obnoxious, toxic, corrosive, or radioactive matter, smoke, fume, or gas may be discharged across the boundaries of any lot in such concentration as to
be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or to cause injury or damage to property or business. (1975 Code § 17.64.030)
13-10-4: NOISE:
Noise emanating from any use may not be of such volume or frequency as to be unreasonably offensive at or beyond the property line. Unreasonably
offensive noises due to intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. (1975 Code
§ 17.64.040)
13-10-5: EROSION:
The gradient of any land and its established cover may not be changed so as to cause erosion which carries soil, water or objectionable substances onto
neighboring properties in an amount greater than before the grading or use change occurred. (1975 Code § 17.64.050)
Chapter 11
FOWL AND LIVESTOCK
13-11-1: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AREA:
The keeping of fowl and livestock is allowed in single-family residential areas provided the following minimum requirements are met:
A. Keeping Fowl: "Fowl" means birds normally kept for food or eggs such as chickens, geese, and ducks.
1. Fowl shall have eight hundred forty (840) square feet of usable pasture per animal.
2. Roosters are prohibited in the city.
B. Other Livestock: All other livestock shall have at least one-half (1/2) acre or twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet of usable
pasture and are limited to one animal unit per one-half (1/2) acre as follows:
Horse, cow, donkey, etc. .50 animal unit
Sheep, goat, llama, etc. .20 animal unit
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 202/242
C. Animal Environments: Animal enclosures, sheds, shelters, coops, and pens shall be a clean and healthy environment.
D. Permission Of Neighbors: Persons keeping fowl and livestock shall have the written permission of any neighbor adjoining the property where any fowl
and livestock are kept. (Ord. 826, 5-16-2016)
13-11-2: CENTRAL OR HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
Livestock may not be kept in the central or highway business districts. (Ord. 667, 5-6-1991)
13-11-3: PIGS OR SWINE:
The keeping or raising of pigs or swine in low or medium density residential areas is not allowed. (Ord. 667, 5-6-1991)
13-11-4: FENCE REQUIRED:
All animals in residential zones shall be kept inside fenced enclosures. Related buildings such as barns and animal pens shall be allowed in rear and side
areas of the tract or lot. (Ord. 667, 5-6-1991)
Chapter 12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13-12-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Designated: A zoning administrator designated by the city council shall administer and enforce this title. This administrator may also serve as the
building inspector for the city. He may be provided with assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. (1975 Code § 17.68.010)
B. Duties:
1. Zoning Permits: The zoning administrator shall receive applications for zoning permits and conditional use permits, review applications and plans to
see that they meet zoning ordinance requirements, issue zoning permits and certificates of zoning compliance, and conditional use permits when
approved by the board of adjustment, inspect premises to see that permit conditions are met and maintain a permanent file of all applications,
permits issued with notations of approval conditions, and accompanying plans.
2. Violations: Further, if the administrative official finds that any of the provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of
illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any
other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. A form will be established to verify and notify
violators. (1975 Code § 17.68.020)
13-12-2: ZONING PERMITS:
A. Required: A zoning permit shall be secured from the zoning administrator prior to the construction, reconstruction, erection, enlargement, relocation or
structural alteration of any building or part thereof, or of any sign or group of signs having permanent geographical location, and prior to any change of
use of any building or land, except that no such permit shall be required for the erection or alteration of a barn or other outbuilding on a bona fide farm.
A zoning permit shall also be secured for any home occupation permitted under chapter 8 of this title and for permitted temporary uses. (1975 Code
§ 17.68.030)
B. Application:
1. Plans: All applications for permits, other than a permit for a temporary use, shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location
and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
2. Additional Information: The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative official, including
existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental
units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine
conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this title.
3. Copy Returned To Applicant: One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he has marked such copy
either as approved or disapproved and attested to the same by placing his signature on such copy.
4. Original: The original of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official. The zoning permit application may be combined
with the building permit application. (1975 Code § 17.68.040)
C. Certificate Of Compliance For Nonconforming Structures Or Uses: At such time that a person requests a building permit, the zoning administrator shall
survey the structure and the use thereof to determine conformity with applicable zoning ordinances. No nonconforming structure or use shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 203/242
changed, or extended until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator. The certificate of compliance shall state specifically
wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this title. (1975 Code § 17.68.050)
D. Expiration:
1. Commencement Of Work: If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance thereof, the
permit expires and the zoning administrator shall give written notice of the expiration to the persons affected. A single six (6) month extension of the
permit may be granted by the zoning administrator.
2. Temporary Use:
a. Issuance: A zoning permit for a temporary use other than those associated with construction and grading may be issued by the zoning
administrator for not more than six (6) months. Zoning permits for temporary uses associated with construction and grading may be issued for the
duration of the construction contract.
b. Extension: The zoning administrator may issue one extension of a temporary use permit for a period not exceeding the permitted maximum time
period of the original permit. (1975 Code § 17.68.060)
E. Use, Arrangement Or Construction Authorization: Zoning permits or certificates of compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved
by the administrative officer or the board of adjustment authorize only the use, arrangement, or construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized is a violation of this
title and punishable as provided by section 13-12-10 of this chapter. (1975 Code § 17.68.070)
13-12-3: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT1:
A. Established; Appointment: The city council may act as the board of adjustment or may provide for the appointment of a board of adjustment as
established in sections 76-2-321 through 76-2-328, Montana Code Annotated, 1979. (1975 Code § 17.68.090)
B. Rules: The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs in keeping with the provisions of this title.
C. Meetings: Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the
acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Meetings shall be open to the public.
D. Minutes: The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately
filed in the office of the board. (1975 Code § 17.68.100)
E. Powers, Duties And Procedures: The powers, duties and procedures for the board of adjustment are as follows:
1. Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the administrative official in the enforcement of this title.
2. Variances, Conditions Governing Applications; Proceedings: To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this title as
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until:
a. Upon rejection or revocation of a building permit or zoning permit or application, a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating
that:
(1) Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
(2) Literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district
under the terms of this title;
(3) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant;
(4) Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district;
Neither the nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or building in the same district, nor the permitted or nonconforming use of lands,
structures, or buildings in other districts are grounds for the issuance of a variance.
b. Notice Of Hearing: Notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of public hearing. The owner of the property for which variance is
sought or his agent shall be notified of the hearing by mail. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the property for which
variance is sought, at the county courthouse, in the city hall, and in a newspaper of general circulation within the zoning jurisdiction at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing.
c. Hearing: The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
d. Board Findings:
(1) Requirements Met: Before granting a variance the board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of subsection E2a of this
section have been met by the applicant.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 204/242
(2) Reasons Justify: The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the
variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building or structure.
(3) Harmony: The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this title and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
e. Additional Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this title and punishable under section 13-12-10 of this chapter.
f. Prohibited Uses: Under no circumstances may the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this title
in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in said district.
3. Board Has Powers Of Administrative Official On Appeals: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the terms of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. (1975 Code § 17.68.080)
F. Administrative Responsibilities And Procedures: The board of adjustment established by the city council shall have the following duties in the
administration of this title:
1. Review And Approve Conditional Uses: A permit for a conditional use will not be approved by the board of adjustment unless and until:
a. Application; Required Information: An accurate and complete written application for a conditional use is submitted to the board of adjustment
through the zoning administrator. All applications for conditional use permits must be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location on the lot of building already existing, if any; the location
and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration; and information which clearly states how the conditions for the use must be met. The
application must include such other information as may lawfully be required by the administrative official, including description of any proposed
building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the
lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this title. One copy of the
plans must be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he has marked it as either approved or disapproved and signed it. The
original plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official. (1975 Code § 17.68.080)
b. Notice Of Hearing: Notice shall be given at least seven (7) days in advance of public hearing before the board of adjustment. The owner of the
property for which a conditional use is sought or his agent shall be notified of the hearing by mail. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the property for which the conditional use is sought at the county courthouse, at the city hall, and in a newspaper of general circulation
within the zoning jurisdiction at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 618, 8-4-1986)
c. Hearing: The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. (1975 Code § 17.68.080)
d. Written Findings: The board of adjustment shall make a written finding that it is to grant the conditional use, and that the granting of the conditional
use will not adversely affect the character of the zoning district. (1975 Code § 17.68.080; amd. 2008 Code)
e. Findings Certifying Compliance: Before any conditional use is approved, the board shall make written findings certifying compliance with the
specific conditions governing the use.
2. Amendment Of Title Or Map: Review and recommend proposals for the amendment of this title and the official zoning map under the provisions of
section 13-12-8 of this chapter. (1975 Code § 17.68.080)
G. Hearing, Appeals And Notice:
1. Right Of Appeal: Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of this title may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer or bureau of the governing body of the city affected by any decision of the administrative official.
2. Deadline For Filing: Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days or such lesser period as may be provided by
the rules of the board, by filing with the administrative official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
3. Transmittal Of Records: The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
4. Notice Of Hearing: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notice as well as due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. (1975
Code § 17.68.110)
H. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official, after the notice of
appeal is filed with him, determines that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. (1975 Code § 17.68.120;
amd. 2008 Code)
I. Appeal From Board Decision:
1. Right Of Appeal: Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
2. Deadline For Filing: Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board.
3. Writ Of Certiorari: Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board of adjustment to review such
decision of the board of adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 205/242
attorney, which may not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the
decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order.
4. Return Of Papers: The board of adjustment need not return the original papers acted upon by it, but may return certified or sworn copies thereof or
of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to
show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
5. Court Hearing: If, upon the hearing, it appears to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence
or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which
constitutes a part of the proceedings upon which determination of the court will be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the decision brought up for review. (1975 Code § 17.68.140)
13-12-4: QUESTIONS ON INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It is the intent of this title that all questions of interpretation and enforcement be first presented to the zoning administrator, and that such questions be
presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of
adjustment be to the courts as provided by law. (1975 Code § 17.68.150)
13-12-5: FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES2:
A. Schedule Of Fees: The city council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building
permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this title. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the
zoning administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the city council.
B. Payment Required Prior To Action: Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action may be taken on any application or
appeal. (1975 Code § 17.68.160)
13-12-6: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standards, shall govern. (1975 Code § 17.68.180)
13-12-7: STATE PERMITS:
A. State Permits Or Licenses Required: A number of uses which will require local zoning permits also require permits or licenses from the state. A state
permit requirement does not usurp the right of the local government to require a zoning permit. Where there are duplicate standards the most stringent
will apply.
B. List Of Statutes And Administering Agencies: Below is a list of state statutes and administering agencies which will most often affect uses seeking local
zoning permits. It is included here as informational so that the zoning administrator and the public can be aware of the scope of permit requirements.
The "Environmental Permit Directory", published by the Environmental Quality Council, Helena, MT 59601, will provide a complete listing:
1. Department Of Health And Environmental Sciences: Statute citations for permits issued by the department of health and environmental sciences are
as follows:
a. The Montana solid waste management act (Montana Code Annotated section 75-10-201 et seq.);
b. The clean air act of Montana (Montana Code Annotated section 75-2-201 et seq.);
c. Water pollution control act (Montana Code Annotated section 75-5-401 et seq.);
d. Tourist campgrounds and trailer courts (Montana Code Annotated section 50-52-201 et seq.);
e. Sanitation in subdivision act (Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-101 et seq.);
f. Motor vehicle wrecking facilities (Montana Code Annotated section 75-10-501 et seq.); (1975 Code § 17.68.190)
g. Rules for trailer courts (Montana Code Annotated section 50-52-102); (1975 Code § 17.68.190; amd. 2008 Code)
h. Regulations for trailer courts (Reg. 53-43-8).
2. Department Of Highways: Statute citations for permits issued by the department of highways are as follows:
a. Junkyards along roads (Montana Code Annotated section 75-15-201 et seq.);
b. Outdoor advertising act (Montana Code Annotated section 75-15-101 et seq.);
3. City Of Shelby Declaration Of Protective Covenants: Shelby industrial park. (1975 Code § 17.68.190)
13-12-8: AMENDMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 206/242
A. Who May Initiate: Proposals to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal any of the regulations or the district boundaries established by this title or
hereafter established, may be initiated by the city council, the city board of adjustment, the county commissioners, the county planning board, or by
petition of any interested person. A petition by any interested person (which term shall include a partnership and a corporation) to amend or change the
regulations or district boundaries shall be submitted to the city council through and reviewed by the board of adjustment, which shall consider its merit
and make a recommendation to the city council.
B. Amendment Petition Requirements: A petition requesting such change shall first be presented to the board of adjustment, duly signed by the owners of
seventy five percent (75%) or more of the lots included in such proposed change and of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending one
hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom and of those adjacent on either side thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') therefrom and of those directly
opposite thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') from the street frontage on such opposite lots. No petition for zone change will be considered
for any area of less than one-half (1/2) block.
C. Amendment Petition Applications And Procedures: Amendment petition applications shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator.
Complete and accurate petitions shall be considered by the board of adjustment at its next regular monthly meeting; provided they have been filed,
complete in form and content, at least twenty four (24) calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the board of adjustment; otherwise
consideration may be deferred until the following monthly meeting. The board of adjustment shall forward its recommendation on an amendment
proposal to the city council not more than five (5) days following the meeting at which a recommendation was adopted. The city council shall take
action on the proposal and recommendation within thirty (30) days following their receipt of the board of adjustment recommendation.
D. Submission Requirements For Map Amendments: In addition to an accurate and completed amendment application, any petition to amend a zoning
classification shall include a current map drawn to scale showing all parcels of land included in the petition and the name of the owner of each parcel
certified by the tax assessor of Toole County from the records in his office.
E. Public Hearings Required:
1. Hearing Required; Notice: No action to amend, supplement, change or repeal this title may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If the petition is for amendment to the zoning map, notice of such hearing shall be
mailed to all owners of property included in the petition and shall also be conspicuously posted on the property for which an amendment is sought, at
the county courthouse, and at the city hall. Public hearing requirements apply to the board of adjustment meeting to consider a recommendation and
to the city council meeting for the purpose of acting on the proposal.
2. Protest: When a proposed amendment affects the zoning classification of property and a protest against such change is signed by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof
extending fifty feet (50') therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending fifty feet (50') from the street frontage on such opposite lots, then
such amendments may not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the city council. (1975 Code § 17.68.170)
13-12-9: COMPLAINTS:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate, and
take action thereon as provided by this title. (1975 Code § 17.68.200)
13-12-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Violation; Failure To Comply: Violation of the provision of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitutes a misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 17.68.210)
B. Penalty: Any person who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues is a separate offense. (1975 Code § 17.68.210; amd. 2008 Code)
C. Separate Offense: The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person
who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in
this section.
D. Additional Remedies: Nothing contained herein prevents the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (1975 Code § 17.68.210)
Chapter 13
AIRPORT ZONING
13-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF SHELBY AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-2: PURPOSE; INTENT; AUTHORITY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 207/242
The purpose of this chapter is to provide both airspace protection and land use compatibility with airport operations in the city. This chapter, through
establishment of airport zones and corresponding regulations, provides for independent review of development proposals in order to promote the public
interest in safety, health, and general welfare in the city and Toole County. Therefore, the city council deems it necessary to regulate uses of land located
within or near the traffic patterns of the airport through regulation of height of structures and objects of natural growth, and through regulation of land uses
within noise impacted areas and runway protection zones. There is hereby adopted and established the official airport zoning ordinance pursuant to the
authority conferred on the city council, consistent with Montana Code Annotated titles 67 and 76. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-3: JURISDICTION:
The city shall be exclusively responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter for those areas affected that lie within the corporate limits of the
city and for an area extending one mile beyond the corporate limits. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are applicable:
AIRPORT: Shelby airport.
AIRPORT CRITICAL AREA: Area enclosed by the contour line fifty feet (50') above the airport elevation on all approach and transitional surfaces as
shown in subsection 13-13-10B of this chapter. Used only for ease of permit administration.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The elevation of the highest point on the airport's established runways measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL) and based
on the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). The Shelby airport elevation is 3442.95 feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD (OBSTRUCTION): Any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land that would exceed the federal obstruction standards as
contained in 14 CFR parts 71.21, 77.23, 77.25, 77.28, and 77.29 and which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in taking off, maneuvering
or landing at an airport, or is otherwise hazardous to taking off, maneuvering or landing of aircraft, and is unpermitted, or for which a variance has not been
granted.
AIRPORT ZONING DISTRICT: Area as described within this chapter and shown in subsection 13-13-10A of this chapter, within which this chapter shall
apply.
ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECT: Any interference or impediment to the transmission or quality of navigation or communication signals to or from aircraft,
meteorological equipment, navigation equipment, communications equipment, or air traffic control facilities caused by a power source, radio frequency
transmitter, or an object or surface that emits, reflects, or reradiates an electromagnetic signal or electrical pulse.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limitations in all zones established by this chapter and shown on the Shelby airport maps attached to
ordinance 766, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation (NAVD 88) unless otherwise specified.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any structure, tree, natural growth or use of land, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or amendment
thereto.
RUNWAY: The defined and prepared surfaces of an airport, suitable for landing or taking off airplanes and sanctioned by the federal aviation
administration for public use. (The Shelby airport currently has 2 paved runways designated as runway 5-23 and runway 11-29.)
Nonprecision Instrument (NPI) Runway: A runway having or planned to have an authorized straight in instrument approach procedure without vertical
path guidance. (Runway 5-23 is a future NPI runway, with anticipated 1 mile approach visibility minimums.)
Precision Instrument Runway: A runway equipped or to be equipped with an authorized instrument approach procedure providing both course and
vertical path guidance. (No runways at the Shelby airport are anticipated to be classified precision instrument.)
Utility Nonprecision Instrument (NPI) Runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used primarily by aircraft of twelve thousand five
hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum gross weight or less, having or planned to have an authorized straight in instrument approach procedure without
vertical path guidance. (Runway 11-29 is a future utility NPI runway, with anticipated 1 mile approach visibility minimums.)
STRUCTURE: An object or structure constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead
transmission lines.
THRESHOLD: The beginning of that portion of the runway available for landing.
TREE: Any vegetation or other naturally growing object.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway without an existing or planned authorized instrument approach procedure. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-5: AIRPORT ZONES:
The city hereby adopts the following zones for the airport:
Airport zoning district (see subsection 13-13-10A of this chapter),
Airport airspace zones (see subsection 13-13-10B of this chapter),
Airport land use zones (see subsection 13-13-10C of this chapter), and
Airport influence notification zones (see subsection 13-13-10D of this chapter)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 208/242
The boundaries of these zones shall be established by this chapter and included in the official city zoning maps. All development applications for land
within these zones of influence shall comply with this chapter, as well as complying with applicable underlying zoning district requirements. Where a zone
overlays a portion of a property, only that portion within the zone shall be affected by the zone regulations. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-5-1: AIRPORT ZONING DISTRICT:
A. Intent: This zone establishes the extent of which this chapter shall apply.
B. Zones: The airport zoning district is the greatest extent of airport airspace, airport land use, and airport influence notification zones as defined in this
section and shown in subsection 13-13-10A of this chapter. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-5-2: AIRPORT AIRSPACE ZONES:
A. Intent: These zones are intended to prevent the creation or establishment of airport hazards by regulating and restricting the height of structures and
objects of natural growth in the vicinity of the airport.
B. Zones: Certain zones are established which include all of the land lying within the primary zones, horizontal zone, conical zone, precision instrument
approach zones, nonprecision instrument (NPI) approach zones, visual approach zones, transition zones and critical area. Where both an existing and
future threshold are planned for a runway, the approach zones will consist of the area enclosed by trapezoids for each threshold plus the lines
connecting corresponding outboard corners of the two (2) trapezoids. Such areas and zones are shown in subsection 13-13-10B, airport airspace
zones, of this chapter, for the airport, consisting of one sheet prepared by the airport board and dated January 2004, a copy of which is made a part
hereof by reference. The various zones are defined and described as follows:
1. Primary Zones: Primary zones are hereby established as the area extending equidistantly on either side of each runway centerline with total width:
a. For utility visual runways, two hundred fifty feet (250').
b. For utility NPI, visual, and NPI (>3/4 mile approach visibility minimums) runways, five hundred feet (500').
c. For precision and NPI (3/4 mile approach visibility minimums) runways, one thousand feet (1,000').
For the length of such runway plus two hundred feet (200') on each end. (Except turf runways where the length equals the length of the runway.)
2. Horizontal Zone: A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within a perimeter established by swinging arcs from points two hundred feet
(200') beyond the existing or planned ends of the runways on the extended runway centerline, then connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs. (For turf runways, the arcs begin at the runway ends.) When an arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two (2) adjacent arcs, the
arc encompassed must be disregarded in delineating the perimeter of the horizontal surface. The radius of each arc is:
a. For all visual and utility runways, five thousand feet (5,000').
b. For all others, ten thousand feet (10,000').
The horizontal zone does not include the primary, approach, and transition zones.
3. Conical Zone: A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward for a
distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical zone does not include the approach and transition zones.
4. Utility Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: A utility nonprecision instrument (NPI) approach zone is established at each end of utility
nonprecision instrument runways. Each utility NPI approach zone shall have a width of five hundred feet (500') at a distance of two hundred feet
(200') beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a distance of five thousand two
hundred feet (5,200') beyond each end of the runway with its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. (Shelby runway 11-29
has a future utility NPI runway designation planned, with anticipated 1 mile approach visibility minimums.)
5. Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones (1 Mile Approach Visibility Minimums): A nonprecision instrument (NPI) approach zone is established at
each end of nonprecision instrument (NPI) runways. Each NPI approach zone shall have a width of five hundred feet (500') at a distance of two
hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred feet (3,500') at a
distance of ten thousand two hundred feet (10,200') beyond each end of the runway with its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the
runway. (Runway 5-23 has a future NPI runway designation planned, with anticipated 1 mile approach visibility minimums.)
6. Transition Zones: Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each approach zone and symmetrically located on each side of primary zones
having variable widths as shown in subsection 13-13-10B, airport airspace zones, of this chapter. For precision instrument approach runways, an
additional transitional zone is established exterior of the conical surface, extending a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured at right angles
to the exterior of the conical surface.
C. Height Limitations: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any
zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the height limitation established for such zone. Such height limitations are established for each of
the zones as follows:
1. Primary Zones:
a. Objects greater than three inches (3") above grade shall be allowed only when constructed on low impact resistant supports with the frangible
point no higher than three inches (3") above grade.
b. Objects that need to be located in this area because of their function shall be constructed at the lowest practical height.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 209/242
2. Horizontal Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation.
3. Conical Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation plus one foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance
measured from and normal to the periphery of the horizontal zone.
4. Utility Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: For each runway end, the elevation of the threshold centerline plus one foot (1') in height for each
twenty feet (20') measured perpendicularly from the end of the primary zone, extending five thousand feet (5,000').
5. Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: For each runway end, the elevation of the threshold centerline plus one foot (1') in height for each thirty
four feet (34') measured perpendicularly from the end of the primary zone, extending ten thousand feet (10,000').
6. Transition Zones: Begin at an elevation equal to the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline, and extend outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline or extended runway centerline, increasing one foot (1') in height for each seven feet (7') from the sides of the primary
zone and from the sides of all approach zones.
7. Airport Critical Area: The area as called out in airport airspace zones, subsection 13-13-10B of this chapter, consisting of a fifty foot (50') elevation
line, above the airport elevation, on all approach and transition zones.
D. Conflicting Regulations: When an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive shall prevail.
E. Minimum Review Height: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a
height:
1. Equal to or below the airport elevation.
2. Up to fifty feet (50') above the surface of the land except the area delineated as "airport critical area", subsection 13-13-10B of this chapter. (Ord.
766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-5-3: AIRPORT LAND USE ZONES:
A. Intent: These zones are intended to overlay any other zoning districts and regulations comprising or pertaining to areas to which it is applicable, so as to
prevent undue negative interaction between aviation activities associated with the airport and the surrounding community. It is intended to protect the
lives and property of users of the airport and of occupants of land in its vicinity by restricting "places of public assembly" within these zones. These
zones are intended to preserve the utility of the airport and the public investment therein.
B. Zones: Development zones are hereby established within the airport land use zones. Such areas and zones are shown in subsection 13-13-10C of this
chapter, consisting of one sheet prepared by the airport board and dated January 2004, a copy of which is made a part hereof by reference. The
various zones are defined and described as follows:
1. Airport Runway Protection Zones: Airport runway protection zones are hereby established as trapezoidal areas centered about the extended runway
centerline. Where both an existing and future threshold are planned for a runway, the runway protection zone will consist of the area enclosed by
trapezoids for each planned threshold plus the lines connecting corresponding outboard corners of the two (2) trapezoids. Runway protection zones
are sized based on aircraft expected to be served and approach visibility minimums for the ultimate conditions.
a. Visual And Not Lower Than One Mile Approach Visibility Minimums (Approach Aircraft A And B Only): A runway protection zone is established at
each end of the runways. Each runway shall have protection zones that have a width of five hundred feet (500') at a distance of two hundred feet
(200') beyond the runway threshold, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of seven hundred feet (700') at a distance of one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200') beyond the runway threshold, with its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway, for all other than utility
runways. (Runway 11-29 is planned to have a NPI approach with not lower than 1 mile approach visibility minimums. Runway 5-23 is planned to
have a NPI approach with not lower than 1 mile approach visibility minimums.)
2. Municipal Airport Zone/Airport Property: The municipal airport zone is hereby established as the land area owned by Toole County and held as the
Shelby airport, exclusive of the airport runway protection zones.
C. Use Restrictions:
1. Airport Runway Protection Zones:
a. Permitted Uses:
Agriculture (other than forestry).
Livestock, outside of the airport's fence.
b. Conditional Uses:
Roadways, automobile parking areas, and railroads that satisfy height restrictions.
c. Prohibited Uses:
Educational centers (including all types of primary and secondary schools, preschools, childcare facilities).
Fuel handling and storage facilities.
Hospitals, medical inpatient treatment facilities, nursing/convalescent home facilities.
Places of public assembly not previously listed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 210/242
Places of worship.
Residences.
2. Municipal Airport Zone/Airport Property:
a. Permitted Uses:
Agriculture (other than forestry or livestock), golf courses, tourism information centers and museums.
Aircraft maintenance, manufacturing, and testing facilities.
Aircraft operational facilities including, but not limited to, instrument landing systems, visual navigational aids, and related equipment;
communication facilities; weather service offices and equipment.
Aircraft runways, taxiways, ramps, parking areas and fuel storage facilities.
Flight schools, flying clubs and other schools or training facilities relating to aviation or air related transportation.
Hangars and buildings which may be used for the storage or maintenance of aircraft; airport snow removal, sweeping and other maintenance
equipment, and other aviation related or ancillary activities.
Offices and facilities for airport management, air charter, air taxi, crop spraying, aircraft sales or rentals, and air cargo processing facilities.
Offices and facilities for the operation and maintenance of air rescue, emergency and firefighting services.
Offices and facilities of federal, state and local government entities.
Terminal buildings, which may house offices of airline companies, and other businesses and concessionaires.
b. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in this zone (see subsection 13-13-7B of this chapter):
Boarding of livestock or other animals by governmental agencies.
Businesses not located in the terminal building, and those uses, which are sanctioned by the airport board, but have not been heretofore
mentioned.
Driver education test track.
Firearm and sport shooting ranges.
Industrial development.
Light commercial development.
Live animal export facilities.
Municipal water storage tanks or towers.
Outdoor baseball/softball facilities and other public or private recreational uses.
Residential air park.
Under unique, extenuating circumstances, a temporary use, for up to one year, that complies with international building and fire codes.
c. Prohibited Uses:
No other use, other than those explicitly allowed above.
D. Additional Use Restrictions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this
chapter that creates an electromagnetic effect, makes it difficult for operators of aircraft to distinguish between airport lights and others, results in glare
in the eyes of operators of aircraft using the airport, impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, attracts flocks of birds or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off, maneuvering, or operating of aircraft. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-5-4: AIRPORT INFLUENCE NOTIFICATION ZONES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Intent: These zones are intended to overlay any other zoning districts and regulations comprising or pertaining to areas to which it is applicable, so as to
prevent undue negative interaction between aviation activities associated with the Shelby airport and the surrounding community. It is intended to notify
potential property purchasers in the vicinity of the existence of the airport approaches, associated noise, and activities. These zones are intended to
preserve the utility of the airport and the public investment therein.
B. Airport Influence Notification Zones: In order to effectuate the intent and provisions of this chapter, there is hereby created and established the airport
influence notification zones. These zones are defined as shown in subsection 13-13-10D of this chapter. A real estate disclosure statement, adhering to
the form of the statement below, shall be provided to and signed by each potential purchaser of property within the airport influence notification zone -
approach, for a property that lies in whole or part within the designated airport influence notification zone - approach. The seller shall affix a signed
certification (see following) to the buy/sell agreement:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 211/242
Airport Influence Approach Zones Notification Statement
The tract of land situated at in Toole County, Montana, consisting of approximately acres, which is being conveyed from to lies within the Shelby airport
approach and as such, may be subjected to noise, vibration, chemicals, odors, hours of operation, and other associated airport activities.
CERTIFICATION
The undersigned purchaser(s) of said tract of land certify(ies) that (he/they) (has/have) read and understand(s) the above disclosure statement and
acknowledge(s) the preexistence of the above named airport, as well as the noise and activities associated with the operation of said airport.
SellerBuyer
Sworn to and subscribed before me at:
Notary Public
Date:
(Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ENTITIES:
A. Permitting Authority: The city-county planner is hereby designated and charged with the duty of administering the permitting process for the city.
B. Airport Board Of Adjustment:
1. Created; Powers: There is hereby created under Montana Code Annotated sections 67-6-206 and 76-2-321 through 76-2-328, a city board of
adjustment that shall possess and exercise the following powers:
a. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city in the enforcement of this chapter.
b. To hear and decide special exceptions to the provisions of this chapter upon which the city, under such provisions, may be required to pass.
c. To hear and decide specific variances.
2. Membership; Term; Removal: The airport board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, three (3) members of the city council and two (2)
members appointed by the airport board. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.
Members may only be removed by the appointing authority for cause upon written charges after a public hearing.
3. Rules: The airport board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
4. Meetings: Meetings of the airport board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of adjustment
may determine. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All members of the city board of adjustment shall be
present at variance hearings. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
immediately be filed in the office of the board of adjustment and shall be a public record.
5. Written Findings Of Fact: The airport board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, giving the facts upon which it
acted and its legal conclusions from such facts, in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes
before it under the provisions of this chapter.
6. Voting: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the permitting authority, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to
grant any variance from the provisions or requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. Procedures For Obtaining An Airport Construction Permit:
1. Construction of any building, structure or object within the airport zoning district if the proposed construction is:
a. Within the airport critical area (as called out in subsection 13-13-10B of this chapter);
b. Planned to both exceed fifty feet (50') in height and exceed the airport elevation by fifty feet (50');
will require a permit.
2. The permit will be obtained from the city-county planner.
B. Criteria For Granting Permits:
1. Permits will not be granted for buildings, structures or objects that violate any airport airspace zones or land use zone requirements.
2. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be
made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date hereof, or than it is when the application for a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 212/242
permit is made. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any use or structure, which does not comply with
Montana state air pollution standards. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
C. Appeals:
1. Denied airport construction permits may be appealed within fifteen (15) days of the decision rendered.
2. Appeals, in the form of an application for variance, shall be heard by the city board of adjustment.
3. Appeals may be filed by the applicant, any person aggrieved, taxpayer affected, or governing body of a political subdivision.
D. Variances:
1. Procedures For Obtaining An Airport Obstruction Variance:
a. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to permit the growth of any tree, or to use his property in a manner not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may apply to the city board of adjustment for a variance. The request may be approved, approved
with conditions, or denied.
b. Prior to variance requests being scheduled for consideration by the board of adjustment, the applicant shall submit the following:
(1) A copy of the notice of proposed construction form submitted to the FAA, FAA form 7460-1;
(2) A final determination issued by the FAA based on its review of the applicant's notice of proposed construction submitted in accordance with 14
CFR part 77;
(3) A valid aeronautical evaluation (may consist of the evaluation performed by the FAA);
(4) Comments from the aeronautics division of the Montana department of transportation (MAD) or evidence that the MAD has made no comments
during its required forty five (45) day comment time frame. Said evidence shall include a return receipt showing that the MAD comment time
frame has been exceeded.
2. Criteria For Granting An Airport Obstruction Variance: Where the FAA has reviewed the proposed development and determined its construction
would exceed an obstruction standard of 14 CFR part 77, the board of adjustment may grant an airport obstruction variance for a proposed
development. Such a variance may be granted if the board determines that a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship and where the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, i.e., the development can be accommodated in
navigable airspace without adverse impact to the airport or aviation operations, but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit
of this section; provided, that:
a. If such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, any permit or variance
granted may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers
and lights as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft pilots the presence of an obstruction in accordance with the standards of FAA advisory
circular 70/7460-1K, as it may be amended. Where such marking or lighting is required, such requirement shall be satisfied prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy (CO) for the affected structure.
b. FAA determines the aeronautical evaluations submitted are valid.
c. Consideration is given to all of the following:
(1) The nature of the terrain and height of existing structures.
(2) Public and private interests and investments.
(3) The character of flying operations and planned development of airports.
(4) FAA designated federal airways.
(5) Whether construction of the proposed structure would cause an increase in the minimum descent altitude or the decision height at the affected
airport.
(6) Technological advances.
(7) The safety of persons on the ground and in the air.
(8) Land use density.
(9) The safe and efficient use of navigable airspace.
(10) The cumulative effects on navigable airspace of all existing structures, proposed structures identified in the applicable jurisdictions' growth
policies, and all other known proposed structures in the area.
(11) FAA determinations and results of aeronautical studies conducted by or for the FAA.
(12) MAD comments and recommendations, including MAD findings relating to Montana Code Annotated chapter 67.
(13) Comments and recommendations from local airport authorities.
(14) Other testimony and findings of aviation operations and safety experts.
E. Judicial Review: Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the airport board of adjustment, may appeal to the district court as
provided in Montana Code Annotated sections 67-6-206 and 76-2-327. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 213/242
13-13-8: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Nonconforming Uses:
1. Grandfather Clause: The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal or alteration of any structure not conforming to
these provisions as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use in existence on that date.
Nothing herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to such adoption and was diligently pursued.
2. Replacement: Whenever a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned, or has been torn down, physically deteriorated, decayed,
damaged or otherwise destroyed, to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of such occurrence, such structure
or tree shall not be reconstructed, repaired or replaced in a manner exceeding any applicable height limitation or otherwise deviating from the
provisions of this chapter, and no permit allowing the same shall be issued hereunder without the prior granting of a variance.
B. Conflicting Regulations: Where an area or location is subject to more than one height limitation under this chapter, or where a conflict exists between
any of the regulations or limitations prescribed by this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with
respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent or restrictive limitation or requirement shall govern.
(Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
C. Penalty; Injunction:
1. Misdemeanor: Each violation of this chapter or of any regulations, orders, or rulings promulgated or made pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004; amd. 2008 Code)
2. Injunction: In addition, the political subdivision or agency adopting zoning ordinances under this chapter may institute in any court of competent
jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter or of airport zoning ordinances adopted under this chapter or
of any order or ruling made in connection with their administration or enforcement; and the court shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief, by way of
injunction (which may be mandatory) or otherwise, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order fully to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter and of the regulations adopted and orders and rulings made pursuant thereto. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-9: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendments of this chapter may only be implemented after consultation between the city and the airport board. (Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
13-13-10: MAPS:
A. Sheet A: Airport Zoning District, dated January 2004:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 214/242
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 215/242
B. Sheet B: Airport Airspace Zones, dated January 2004.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 216/242
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 217/242
C. Sheet C: Airport Land Use Zones, dated January 2004.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 218/242
D. Sheet D: Airport Influence Zones, dated January 2004.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 219/242
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 220/242
(Ord. 766, 2-16-2004)
Title 14
FLOOD CONTROL
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 2 of this code for provisions regarding the board of adjustment, city-county planning board and zoning commission.
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-1-1: FLOODPLAIN HAZARD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS:
These regulations are known and may be cited as the SHELBY FLOODPLAIN HAZARD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS; hereinafter referred to as
"these regulations". (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-2: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
A. Floodplain and Floodway Management is incorporated in Montana Code Annotated (MCA) title 76, chapter 5 and describes the authority, procedures
and minimum standards for local regulations and is further described in Montana Administrative Rule (ARM) 36, chapter 15.
B. The authority to regulate development in specifically identified flood hazard areas has been accepted pursuant to 76-5-301, Montana Code Annotated.
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 221/242
14-1-3: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A. Flood hazard areas specifically adopted herein as regulated flood hazard areas have been delineated and designated by order or determination of the
Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) pursuant to Montana Code Annotated 76-5-201 et seq.
B. These regulations have been reviewed by Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation has found the regulations acceptable in meeting the department minimum
standards. The Federal Emergency Management Agency finds that these regulations are adequate and consistent with the comprehensive criteria for
land management and use pursuant to the standards established in 44 CFR 60.3. (76-5-302, MCA, ARM 36.15.202, 44 CFR 60.1(b), 42 USC 4022)
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-4: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in regulated flood hazard areas. These regulations are intended to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business and public service interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
disruptions; and to
G. Ensure compliance with the minimum standards for the continued participation in the National Flood Insurance Program for the benefit of the residents.
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-5: METHODS TO REDUCE LOSSES:
In accordance with 76-5-102, Montana Code Annotated, these regulations are intended to reduce flood losses through the following methods:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flooding or that may cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
B. Require that uses of land vulnerable to floods, including public facilities, be developed or constructed to at least minimum standards or to otherwise
minimize flood damage;
C. Regulate the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are needed to accommodate floodwaters;
D. Regulate filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will impact other land, floodwater depth or velocity of floodwaters;
F. Distinguish between the land use regulations applied to the floodway within the regulated flood hazard area and those applied to that portion of the
regulated flood hazard area not contained in the floodway;
G. Apply more restrictive land use regulations within the floodway of the regulated flood hazard area; and
H. Ensure that regulations and minimum standards balance the greatest public good with the least private injury. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-6: REGULATED AREA:
These regulations apply only to the flood hazard areas specifically adopted herein as regulated flood hazard areas which are more fully and specifically
described in chapter 4 of this title. Requirements and approvals for alterations to the regulated flood hazard area are specified in chapter 4 of this title. The
regulated flood hazard area includes areas specifically identified, labeled and illustrated on maps such as floodplain, floodway, or flood fringe that have
differing uses allowed and minimum building standards that apply. The regulated flood hazard area is the geographic area inundated by the flood of 100-
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 222/242
year frequency illustrated and depicted in the referenced studies and maps.
The regulated flood hazard area supporting study and maps illustrating the regulatory area are based on studies and maps that have been specifically
adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated 76-5-201 et seq. The maps and accompanying study become the regulated flood hazard area only when
formally adopted by DNRC and subsequently by the political subdivision by these regulations. The original source of studies and data may be from a flood
insurance study by FEMA, or other studies by Corps of Engineers, Soil Conservation, United States Geological Service or other Federal or State agency.
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-7: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
A Floodplain Administrator is hereby officially appointed and is the responsibility of the Office of Shelby Public Works. The Floodplain Administrator's duty
is to administer and implement the provisions of these regulations. The Floodplain Administrator must serve to meet and maintain the commitments
pursuant to 44 CFR 59.22(a) to FEMA to remain eligible for national flood insurance for individuals and business within the political subdivision. (44 CFR
59.22(b)(1)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(h)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-8: COMPLIANCE:
Development, new construction, alteration or substantial Improvement may not commence without full compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESPONSIBILITY:
It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, zoning or other regulations in
effect. However, where these regulations impose greater restrictions, the provision of these regulations must prevail. (44 CFR 60.1(d)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-
2016)
14-1-10: REGULATION INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: a) considered as minimum requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of
the Governing Body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes. (44 CFR 60.1) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
These regulations do not imply that land outside the regulated flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of these regulations is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding will in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of these regulations. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-13: DISCLOSURE PROVISION:
All property owners or their agents in the regulated flood hazard areas shall notify potential buyers or their agents that such property, including any
permitted uses transferred, is located within the regulated flood hazard area and is subject to regulation and any permitted uses that are transferred.
Information regarding regulated flood hazard area and the repository for floodplain maps is available in the Floodplain Administrator's Office. (ARM
36.15.204(2)(g)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-14: AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations may be amended after notice and public hearing in regard to the amendments to these regulations. The amendments must be found
adequate and acceptable by DNRC and FEMA to be effective and must be submitted for review at least sixty (60) days prior to official adoption. (Ord. 829,
12-5-2016)
14-1-15: PUBLIC RECORDS:
Records, including permits and applications, elevation and flood proofing certificates, certificates of compliance, fee receipts, and other matters relating to
these regulations must be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator and are public records and must be made available for inspection and for copies
upon reasonable request. A reasonable copying cost for copying documents for members of the public may be charged and may require payments of the
costs before providing the copies. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)(iii) and 44 CFR 59.22(a)(9)(iii)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-16: SUBDIVISION REVIEW:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 223/242
Within the regulated flood hazard area, subdivisions including new or expansion of existing manufactured home parks, must be designed to meet the
following criteria:
A. The base flood elevations and boundary of the regulated flood hazard area must be determined and considered during lot layout and building location
design;
B. Locations for future structures and development must be reasonably safe from flooding; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(4))
C. Adequate surface water drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(4)(iii))
D. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
and (44 CFR 60.3(a)(4)(ii))
E. Floodplain permits must be obtained according to these regulations before development occurs that is within the regulated flood hazard area. (44 CFR
60.3(b)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-1-17: DISASTER RECOVERY:
In the event of a natural or man-made disaster, the Floodplain Administrator should participate in the coordination of assistance and provide information to
structure owners concerning hazard mitigation and recovery measures with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Montana Disaster Emergency
Services, Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation, and other State, local and private emergency service organizations.
Upon completion of cursory street view structure condition survey within the regulated flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify owners
that a permit may be necessary for an alteration or substantial improvement before repair or reconstruction commences on damaged structures because
of damages caused by natural or man-made disasters such as floods, fires or winds.
Owners should be advised that structures that have suffered substantial damage and will undergo substantial improvements require a floodplain
application and permit and must be upgraded to meet the minimum building standards herein during repair or reconstruction. (MCA 76-5-404(3)(b)) (ARM
36.15.702) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(2 and 3)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
14-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and the most reasonable application. For the purpose of these regulations, the following definitions are adopted:
ALTERATION: Any change or addition to an artificial obstruction that either increases its external dimensions or increases its potential flood hazard. (ARM
36.15.101(2))
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure in which the use is incidental or accessory to the use of a principal structure. (44 CFR 59.1)
ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION: Any obstruction which is not natural and includes any development, dam, diversion, wall, riprap, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, revetment, excavation, channel rectification, road, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, refuse, automobile body, fill or other
analogous structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any regulated flood hazard area that may impede, retard, or change the direction of the
flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry the
same downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property. See also definition of development. (ARM 36.15.101(3) and MCA 76-5-103(1))
BASE FLOOD (FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY): A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (ARM
36.15.101(4) and 44 CFR 59.1)
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation above sea level of the base flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 or unless otherwise specified. (ARM 36.15.101(5))
BASEMENT: Any area of a building, except a crawl space, as having its lowest floor below ground level on all sides. (44 CFR 59.1) (NFIP Insurance
Manual, rev., May 2013)
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. (44
CFR 59.1)
CHANNEL: The geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse or drain way. (MCA 76-5-103(2))
CRAWL SPACE: An enclosure that has its interior floor area no more than five feet (5') below the top of the next highest floor. See definitions of enclosure
and subgrade crawlspace. (NFIP Insurance Manual, rev., May 2013)
DNRC: Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. See also definition of artificial obstruction. (44 CFR
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 224/242
59.1)
ELEVATED BUILDING: A building that has no basement and that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings or columns. A building on a crawlspace is considered an elevated building. (NFIP Insurance Manual, rev., May 2013)
ENCLOSURE: That portion below the lowest elevated floor of an elevated building that is either partially or fully shut in by rigid walls including a
crawlspace, subgrade crawlspace, stairwell, elevator or a garage below or attached.
ENCROACHMENT: Activities or construction within the regulated flood hazard area including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development.
ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS: A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed by an engineer to assess the effects of the proposed artificial obstruction or
nonconforming use on base flood elevation, flood flows and flood velocities.
ESTABLISH: To construct, place, insert, or excavate. (MCA 76-5-103(7)) (ARM 36.15.101(9))
EXISTING ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION OR NONCONFORMING USE: An artificial obstruction or nonconforming use that was established before land
use regulations were adopted pursuant to section 76-5-301(1), Montana Code Annotated. (MCA 76-5-404(3))
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD FRINGE: The identified portion of the floodplain of the regulated flood hazard area outside the limits of the floodway. (ARM 36.15.101(10))
FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY (BASE FLOOD): A flood magnitude expected to recur on the average of once every one hundred (100) years or a
flood magnitude that has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year. (MCA 76-5-103(9)) (44 CFR 59.1)
FLOOD PROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, electrical, plumbing, HVAC systems, structures and their contents. The term
includes wet flood proofing, dry flood proofing and elevation of structures. (44 CFR 59.1)
FLOODPLAIN: The area of the regulated flood hazard area including and adjoining the watercourse or drainway that would be covered by the floodwater
of a base flood. The area is partitioned into a flood fringe and floodway where specifically designated. See definition of regulated flood hazard area.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: Community official or representative appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this title.
FLOODWAY: The identified portion of the floodplain of the regulated flood hazard area that is the channel and the area adjoining the channel that is
reasonably required to carry the discharge of the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface by more than one-half foot (1/2'). (MCA 76-
5-103(11)) (MCA 76-5-103(5))
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official response from FEMA that amends or revises the FEMA special flood hazard area and FEMA Flood
Insurance Study for flood insurance purposes and/or flood risk hazard. FEMA letters of map change specific to an amendment or revision include:
Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A FEMA letter of approval for a proposed physical change that when completed would propose to
change the flood zones, delineation or elevations on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map or FEMA Flood Boundary Map and may amend the FEMA
Flood Insurance Study through a subsequent LOMR. The CLOMR may be considered in an evaluation by DNRC and the Floodplain Administrator
during consideration of a proposed alteration to the regulated flood hazard area.
Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A letter of determination from FEMA issued in response to a request that a property or structure is not subject to
the mandatory flood insurance requirement because it was inadvertently located in the effective FEMA special flood hazard area. The material
submitted and response from FEMA may be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for determining if a property or structure is within the
regulated flood hazard area and subject to these regulations.
Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): An official FEMA amendment to the currently effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map or FEMA Flood Boundary
Map based on a physical change to the floodplain of the special flood hazard area. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and
elevations on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map or FEMA Flood Boundary Map and may amend the FEMA Flood Insurance Study. It must be
preceded by an approved alteration of the designated floodplain from DNRC and subsequently an amendment to the regulated flood hazard area.
Letter Of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F): A letter of approval from FEMA removing the mandatory requirement for flood insurance on
property based on placement of fill or an addition. Placement of fill or an addition must be preceded by a permit pursuant to these regulations.
Placement of fill does not remove the development from the regulated flood hazard area or these regulations.
LOWEST FLOOR: Any floor of a building including a basement used for living purposes, storage, or recreation. This includes any floor that could be
converted to such a use. (ARM 36.15.101(14)) (44 CFR 59.1)
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The construction of facilities for servicing the manufactured home lots and at a minimum includes the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. (44 CFR 59.1)
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: A building that may be residential or non-residential, is transportable in one or more sections, built on a
permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. (ARM 36.15.101(15))
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the commencement of clearing, grading, filling, or excavating to prepare a site for construction occurs on or
after the effective date of these regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. (ARM 36.15.101(20)) (44 CFR 59.1)
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed includes at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
(44 CFR 59.1)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 225/242
NON-RESIDENTIAL: Buildings including manufactured homes that are not residential including commercial, agricultural, industrial buildings and accessory
buildings. See definition of residential building.
100-YEAR FLOOD: One percent (1%) annual chance flood. See definition of base flood (flood of 100 year frequency).
OWNER: Any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to an artificial obstruction. (MCA 76-5-103(13))
PERSON: Any individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any other entity, including State and local governments and
agencies. (44 CFR 59.1)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A park trailer, travel trailer, or other similar vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or
less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motorized vehicle; and d) designed
primarily for use as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use, not for use as a permanent dwelling. (44 CFR 59.1)
REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA: A floodplain whose limits have been designated pursuant to part 2, chapter 5 of title 76, Montana Code Annotated,
and is determined to be the area adjoining the watercourse that would be covered by the floodwater of a base flood. The regulated flood hazard area
consists of the floodway and flood fringe where specifically designated. (MCA 76-5-103(4)), (MCA 76-5-103(10)), (ARM 36-15-101(11))
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: A dwelling or building for living purposes or place of assembly or permanent use by human beings and including any mixed use
of residential and non-residential use. All other buildings are non-residential.
RIPRAP: Stone, rocks, concrete blocks, or analogous materials that are placed along the bed or banks of a watercourse or drainway for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating erosion. (ARM 36.15.101(18))
SCOUR DEPTH: The maximum depth of streambed scour caused by erosive forces of the base flood.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Land area which has been specifically identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as the floodplain
within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is useful for the purposes of identifying flood hazards
by local subdivisions of government for regulatory purposes as well as use by the National Flood Insurance Program for establishing risk zones and flood
insurance premium rates. The FEMA flood hazard area zone designation or flood risk potential is as illustrated on FEMA's Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
STRUCTURE: Any artificial obstruction.
SUBGRADE CRAWLSPACE: A crawlspace foundation enclosure that has its interior floor no more than five feet (5') below the top of the next higher floor
and no more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent grade on all sides. A foundation exceeding either dimension is a basement. (NFIP Insurance
Manual, rev., May 2013)
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (44 CFR 59.1)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure where the cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the
damage occurred;
A. Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first construction of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences;
B. The term does not include:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or State Inventory of Historic Places. (ARM 36.15.101(21)) (44 CFR
59.1)
SUITABLE FILL: Fill material which is stable, compacted, well graded, and pervious, not adversely affected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar
foreign matter, tree stumps or other organic material; and is fitting for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure. (ARM
36.15.101(22))
VARIANCE: A grant or relief from the development requirements of these regulations which would permit construction in a manner that would be otherwise
prohibited by these regulations by an approval pursuant to chapter 12 of this title. (ARM 36.15.101(23))
VIOLATION: A finding and order pursuant to the regulations against the owner or responsible party of the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations. (44 CFR 59.1) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 3
FORMS AND FEES
14-3-1: FORMS:
The following forms may be required by the Floodplain Administrator:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 226/242
A. Floodplain Permit Application Form: The "Joint Application for Proposed Work in Montana's Streams, Wetlands, Regulated Flood Hazard Areas, and
Other Water Bodies", or other designated application form. A completed FEMA MT-1 form may be required to accompany the application when
required by the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Floodplain Permit Compliance Report: A report required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator once the permitted project in
the regulated flood hazard area is completed or within the designated time stipulated on the floodplain permit. A compliance report including an
elevation and/or flood proofing certificate may be required where specified for the purpose of documenting compliance with the requirements of the
permit.
C. Floodplain Variance Application Form: An application submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator to initiate a proposed variance from the
requirements of these regulations as described in chapter 12 of this title.
D. Floodplain Appeal Notice Form: A form submitted by the applicant or an aggrieved party to initiate the appeal process described in chapter 13 of this
title.
E. Floodplain Emergency Notification Form: A written notification form required pursuant to chapter 11 of this title.
F. Official Complaint Form: A form that may be used by any person to notify the Floodplain Administrator of an activity taking place that appears to be
noncompliant with the requirements of these regulations. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-3-2: FEES:
A reasonable application fee, as determined by the Shelby City Council by resolution, for processing of permit applications may be imposed. Fees may be
adopted for costs of permit applications, notices, variances, inspections, certifications or other administrative actions required by these regulations. (ARM
36.15.204(3)(b)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 4
REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA
14-4-1: REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
A. The regulated flood hazard areas are the 100-year floodplains illustrated and referenced in the following specific studies and reports described as
follows:
City of Shelby Incorporated Area
Community Number 300125
Effective date: October 9, 2002
B. The regulated flood hazard areas specifically described or illustrated in the above referenced studies and maps of the 100-year floodplain have been
delineated, designated and established by order or determination by the DNRC pursuant to 76-5-201 et seq., Montana Code Annotated.
C. Use allowances, design and construction requirements specifically in chapters 5, 6, 9, and 10 of this title vary by the specific floodplain areas including
areas identified as floodway and flood fringe within the regulated flood hazard area. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-4-2: INTERPRETATION OF REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA BOUNDARIES:
A. The mapped boundaries of the floodplain illustrated in the referenced studies and maps in this section are a guide for determining whether property is
within the regulated flood hazard area.
B. A determination of the outer limits and boundaries of the regulated flood hazard area or the flood fringe and floodway within the regulated flood hazard
area includes an evaluation of the maps as well as the particular study data referenced in this section. Supporting study material for base flood
elevations takes precedence over any map illustrations if it exists.
C. The regulated flood hazard area boundary is delineated by the base flood elevation. The physical field regulatory boundary of the regulated flood
hazard area is the actual intersection of the applicable study base flood elevation with the existing adjacent terrain of the watercourse or drainway.
(ARM 36.15.501(6))
D. The floodway boundary where identified within the floodplain is as illustrated on the referenced maps and studies. Since the floodway boundary is a
study feature, the location of the boundary may be physically located by referencing the study data to a ground feature. The Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of the boundary and decision may be appealed as set forth in chapter 13 of this title.
E. The Floodplain Administrator may request additional information described below to determine whether or not the proposed development is within the
regulated flood hazard area:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 227/242
1. Where base flood elevations exist, the property owner may provide additional information which may include elevation information provided by an
engineer or land surveyor in order to determine if the proposed development is subject to these regulations. (ARM 36.15.501(6))
2. Where base flood elevations do not exist, the property owner may provide additional information to be considered to determine the location of the
regulatory boundary or alternatively provide a computed base flood elevation provided by an engineer.
3. The Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of the boundaries and decision may be appealed as set forth in chapter 13 of this title.
F. Any owner or lessee of property who believes his property has been inadvertently included in the regulated flood hazard area including the floodway or
flood fringe may submit scientific and/or technical information to the Floodplain Administrator for a determination if the property is appropriately located.
Scientific or technical information submitted to FEMA by an owner to affect the insurance rating for insurance purposes may be considered by the
Floodplain Administrator. A determination by the Floodplain Administrator is independent of any determination by FEMA for insurance purposes. (Ord.
829, 12-5-2016)
14-4-3: ALTERATION OF REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA:
A. Revisions or updates to the specific maps and data that alter the established floodplains or floodway of the regulated flood hazard area requires DNRC
approval pursuant to 75-5-203, Montana Code Annotated. An alteration of the regulated flood hazard area is a DNRC approved amendment to the
DNRC order that originally delineated and designated the 100-year floodplain and is the basis of the regulated flood hazard area referenced in
subsection 14-4-1B of this chapter. A DNRC approved alteration consists of revisions or updates to the specific maps and data of the referenced
studies in this section and forms the basis for an amendment to the regulated flood hazard area in these regulations; (ARM 36.15.505)
B. Any change to the regulated flood hazard area as a result of a DNRC alteration is effective upon amendment to the regulated flood hazard area
described in subsection 14-4-1A of this chapter;
C. Substantial natural physical change or new technical or scientific flood data showing that the base flood elevation has or may be changed or was
erroneously established shall be brought to the attention of DNRC and FEMA; (ARM 36.15.505(1)(a)) (44 CFR 65.3)
D. Any floodplain permit application for a proposed development or artificial obstruction must be denied until a DNRC alteration pursuant to 76-5-203,
Montana Code Annotated is approved if it causes an increase of 0.5 feet or more to the base flood elevation of a regulated flood hazard area without a
floodway or an increase of more than 0.00 feet to the base flood elevation of a floodway;
E. To propose an alteration a petition must be submitted to DNRC and must include the following information:
1. Certification that no buildings are located in the areas which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation; (44 CFR 65.12(a)(5))
2. Evidence of notice to all property and land owners of the proposed impacts to their properties explaining the proposed impact on their property; (44
CFR 65.12(a)(3))
3. Information that demonstrates that alternatives are not feasible; (44 CFR 65.12(2))
4. Information that demonstrates that development is for a public use or benefit; and
5. Any other supporting information and data as needed for approvals. (ARM 36.15.505) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(10)) (44 CFR 60.3(d)(3)) (44 CFR 65.7(3))
(44 CFR 65.12)
F. The Floodplain Administrator may represent the permit authority for any necessary applications, approvals or endorsements such as the FEMA
Community Acknowledgement Form to FEMA where affecting the FEMA special flood hazard area;
G. A determination by the Floodplain Administrator that land areas located within the regulated flood hazard area are above the base flood elevation as
proven by a certified elevation survey does not constitute or require an alteration or an amendment of the regulated flood hazard area and may be
maintained as a public record that more explicitly defines the regulated flood hazard area boundary; and
H. Elevating with suitable fill as permitted does not alter the regulated flood hazard area or remove the elevated area from the regulated flood hazard area.
(ARM 36.15.505(2))
I. A floodplain permit implementing the physical change cannot be approved until a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 5
USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT WITHIN THE REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD
AREA
14-5-1: GENERAL:
Existing artificial obstructions or nonconforming uses established before land use regulations pursuant to section 76-5-301, Montana Code Annotated were
effective, are allowed without a permit. However, alteration or substantial improvement of an existing artificial obstruction or nonconforming use requires a
floodplain permit. Maintenance of an existing artificial obstruction or nonconforming use does not require a floodplain permit if it does not cause an
alteration or substantial improvement. (MCA 76-5-404(3)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 228/242
14-5-2: OPEN SPACE USES:
The following open space uses shall be allowed without a permit in the regulated flood hazard area, provided that such uses are not prohibited by any
other regulation or statute, do not require structures, and do not require fill, grading, excavation or storage of materials or equipment: (ARM 36.15.601)
(ARM 36.15.701(1)) (MCA 76-5-401) (MCA 76-5-404(3))
A. Agricultural uses, not including related structures, such as tilling, farming, irrigation, ranching, harvesting, grazing, etc.; (ARM 36.15.601(1)(a)) (MCA 76-
5-401(1))
B. Accessory uses, not including structures, such as loading and parking areas, or emergency landing strips associated with industrial or commercial
facilities; (ARM 36.15.601(1)(b)) (MCA 76-5-401(2))
C. Forestry, including processing of forest products with portable equipment; (ARM 36.15.601(1)(d)) (MCA 76-5-401(4))
D. Recreational vehicle use provided that the vehicle is on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and the vehicle is fully
licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system with wheels intact, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; (44 CFR 60.3(c)(14))
E. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas; (ARM 36.15.601(1)(e)) (MCA 76-5-401(5))
F. Maintenance of the existing state of an existing open space uses including preventive maintenance activities such as bridge deck rehabilitation and
roadway pavement preservation activities. Maintenance cannot increase the external size or increase the hazard potential of the existing open space
use; (MCA 76-5-404(3)(b))
G. Public or private recreational uses not requiring structures such as picnic grounds, swimming areas, boat ramps, parks, campgrounds, golf courses,
driving ranges, archery ranges, wildlife management and natural areas, alternative livestock ranches (game farms), fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails; (ARM 36.15.601(a)(c)) (MCA 76-5-401)
H. Fences that have a low impact to the flow of water such as barbed wire fences and wood rail fences, and not including permanent fences crossing
channels. Fences that have the potential to stop or impede flow or debris such as a chain link or privacy fence requires a floodplain permit and meet
the requirements of section 14-9-11 of this title; (ARM 36.15.601(2)(b)) (MCA 76-5-401)
I. Addition of highway guard rail, signing and utility poles that have a low impact to the flow of water along an existing roadway;
J. Irrigation and livestock supply wells, provided that they are located at least five hundred feet (500') from domestic water supply wells and with the top of
casing eighteen inches (18") above the base flood elevation. (ARM 36.15.601(2)(a)) (MCA 76-5-401) (ARM 36.21.647) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 6
PROHIBITED USES, ACTIVITIES AND STRUCTURES WITHIN THE REGULATED
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
14-6-1: FLOODWAY:
The following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses are prohibited in the floodway of the regulated flood hazard area, except for those established
before land use regulations pursuant to section 76-5-301, Montana Code Annotated have been adopted: (MCA 76-5-404(3))
A. A building for residential or non-residential purposes; (MCA 76-5-403(1)), (ARM 36.15.605(1a)), (ARM 36.15.605(2b)), (ARM 36.15.605(2)(a))
B. A structure, fill, or excavation that would cause water to be diverted from the floodway, cause erosion, obstruct the natural flow of waters or reduce the
carrying capacity of the floodway. Notwithstanding these requirements, excavation or fill may be allowed when it is a component to a permitted use
allowed in these regulations; (MCA 76-5-403(2))
C. The construction or storage of an object (artificial obstruction) subject to flotation or movement during flood level periods; (MCA 76-5-403(3) and ARM
36.15.605(1)(c))
D. Solid and hazardous waste disposal and individual and multiple family sewage disposal systems unless the systems meet the local health and
sanitation regulations and when permitted pursuant to these regulations and are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters and avoid
impairment or contamination; (ARM 36-15-605(2c)) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3))
E. Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials; and (ARM 36.15.605(2d))
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 229/242
F. Cemeteries, mausoleums, or any other burial grounds. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-6-2: FLOOD FRINGE OR REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREA WITHOUT A FLOODWAY:
The following artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses are prohibited in the flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area without a floodway, except for
those established before land use regulations have been adopted: (MCA 76-5-404(3))
A. Solid and hazardous waste disposal and individual and multiple family sewage disposal systems unless the systems meet the local health and
sanitation regulations and when permitted pursuant to these regulations and are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters and avoid
impairment or contamination; (ARM 36-15-703(1)) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3))
B. Storage of toxic, flammable, hazardous or explosive materials; (ARM 36-15-703(2))
C. The construction or storage of an artificial obstruction subject to flotation or movement during flood level periods;
D. Cemeteries, mausoleums, or any other burial grounds; and
E. Critical facilities, including buildings and associated structures that provide essential community care and emergency operation functions such as
schools, hospitals, nursing home facilities, fire stations and police stations. (44 CFR 60.22(a)(2)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 7
FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
14-7-1: GENERAL:
A. A floodplain permit is required for a person to establish, alter or substantially improve an artificial obstruction, nonconforming use or development within
the regulated flood hazard area; (44 CFR 60.1) (MCA 76-5-404) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(a))
B. A floodplain permit is required for artificial obstructions, developments and uses not specifically listed in chapters 9 and 10 of this title, except as allowed
without a floodplain permit in chapter 5 of this title, or as prohibited as specified in chapter 6 of this title, within the regulated flood hazard area;
C. Artificial obstructions and nonconforming uses in a regulated flood hazard area not exempt under chapter 5 of this title are public nuisances unless a
floodplain permit has been obtained; (MCA 76-5-404(1))
D. A floodplain permit is required for an alteration of an existing artificial obstruction or nonconforming use that increases the external size or increases its
potential flood hazard and not exempt under chapter 5 of this title; (MCA 76-5-404(3)(b)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(a))
E. A floodplain permit is required to reconstruct or repair an existing artificial obstruction that has experienced substantial damage and will undergo
substantial improvement; and
F. Maintenance of an existing artificial obstruction or use that is a substantial improvement or an alteration requires a floodplain permit. (MCA 76-5-404(3)
(b)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-7-2: REQUIRED FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATION INFORMATION:
A. A floodplain permit application shall include, but is not limited to the following:
1. A completed and signed floodplain permit application;
2. The required review fee;
3. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of the proposed project including landscape alterations, existing
and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to the regulated flood hazard areas and if applicable the floodway boundary;
(MCA 76-5-405) (ARM 36.15.216)
4. A copy of other applicable permits or pending applications required by Federal or State law as submitted which may include but are not limited to a
310 permit, SPA 124 permit, section 404 permit, 318 authorization, 401 certification or a navigable rivers land use license or easement for the
proposed project; and the applicant must show that the floodplain permit application is not in conflict with the relevant and applicable permits; and (44
CFR 60.3(a)(2))
5. Additional information related to the specific use or activity that demonstrates the design criteria and construction standards are met or exceeded as
specified in chapters 9 and 10 of this title. (MCA 76-5-405) (ARM 36.15.216) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 230/242
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATION EVALUATION
14-8-1: FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW:
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall review and evaluate the floodplain permit application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a correct and complete application. (MCA 76-5-405(2))
B. The Floodplain Administrator shall determine whether the floodplain permit application contains the applicable elements required in these regulations
and shall notify the applicant of the Floodplain Administrator's determination.
C. If the floodplain permit application is found to be missing the required elements and if the applicant corrects the identified deficiencies and resubmits the
floodplain application, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the applicant whether the resubmitted floodplain application contains all the elements
required by these regulations, as applicable.
D. This process shall be repeated until the applicant submits a completed floodplain permit application containing all the elements required by these
regulations, or the application is withdrawn.
E. If after a reasonable effort the Floodplain Administrator determines that the floodplain application remains incomplete, the Floodplain Administrator shall
deny the floodplain permit application and notify the applicant of missing elements. No further action shall be taken on the floodplain permit application
by the Floodplain Administrator until the floodplain permit application is resubmitted.
F. A determination that a floodplain permit application is correct and complete for review does not ensure that the floodplain permit application will be
approved or conditionally approved and does not limit the ability of the Floodplain Administrator to request additional information during the review
process. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-8-2: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOODPLAIN PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Upon receipt of a complete application for a floodplain permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall prepare a notice containing the facts pertinent to the
floodplain permit application and shall:
1. Publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area; (ARM 36.15.204(2)(c))
2. Serve notice by first-class mail upon adjacent property owners; (ARM 36.15.204(2)(c))
3. Serve notice to the State National Flood Insurance Program Coordinator located in DNRC by the most efficient method. Notice to other permitting
agencies or other impacted property owners may be provided; and
4. Prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse in the regulated flood hazard area, additionally provide notice to FEMA and adjacent
communities. (44 CFR 60.3(b)(6))
B. The notice shall provide a reasonable period of time, not less than fifteen (15) days, for interested parties to submit comments on the proposed activity.
(ARM 36.15.204(2)(c)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-8-3: FLOODPLAIN PERMIT CRITERIA:
A. Floodplain permit applications shall be approved provided the proposed new construction, substantial improvement, or alteration of an artificial
obstruction meets the requirements of the minimum standards and criteria in chapters 9 and 10 of this title and other requirements of these regulations.
(MCA 76-5-406) (44 CFR 60.3)
B. A floodplain permit application for a development that will cause an increase of more than 0.00 feet to the base flood elevation of the floodway or more
than 0.50 feet to the base flood elevation of the regulated flood hazard area without a floodway shall not be approved until approval for an alteration
pursuant to section 14-4-3 of this title has been approved, the regulated flood hazard area is amended and a FEMA CLOMR where required is issued.
C. The Floodplain Administrator shall determine that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 36 USC 1334. (44 CFR 60.3(a)
(2)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-8-4: DECISION:
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed floodplain permit application. The Floodplain Administrator
shall notify the applicant of his action and the reasons thereof within sixty (60) days of receipt of a correct and complete floodplain permit application
unless otherwise specified. A copy of the approved floodplain permit must be provided to DNRC. (MCA 76-5-405(2)) (ARM 36.15.204(2)(e))
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 231/242
B. The approval of a floodplain permit application does not affect any other type of approval required by any other statute or ordinance of the State or any
political subdivision or the United States, but is an added requirement. (MCA 76-5-108) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-8-5: FLOODPLAIN PERMIT CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Upon approval or conditional approval of the floodplain permit application, the Floodplain Administrator shall provide the applicant with a floodplain
permit with applicable specific requirements and conditions including but not limited to the following:
1. The floodplain permit will become valid when all other necessary permits required by Federal or State law are in place; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(2))
2. Completion of the development pursuant to the floodplain permit shall be completed within one year from the date of floodplain permit issuance or a
time limit commensurate with the project construction time line for completion of the project or development. The applicant may request an extension
for up to an additional year. The request must be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the permitted completion deadline;
3. The applicant shall notify subsequent property owners and their agents and potential buyers of the floodplain development permit issued on the
property and that such property is located within a regulated flood hazard area and shall record the notice with the Floodplain Administrator; (ARM
36.15.204(2)(g))
4. The applicant shall maintain the artificial obstruction or use to comply with the conditions and specifications of the permit;
5. The applicant shall allow the Floodplain Administrator to perform on site inspections at select intervals during construction or completion;
6. The applicant shall provide periodic engineering oversight and/or interim reports during the construction period to be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator to confirm constructed elevations and other project elements;
7. The applicant shall submit a compliance report including certifications where required and applicable including flood proofing, elevation, surface
drainage, proper enclosure openings and materials to the Floodplain Administrator within sixty (60) days of completion or other time as specified;
8. The applicant shall submit an annual performance and maintenance report on bank stabilization or other projects utilizing maturing vegetative
components to the Floodplain Administrator for a period of five (5) years or a time specified in the permit; or
9. The applicant shall submit evidence of a submittal of a FEMA letter of map revision (LOMR) to FEMA and applicable fees within six (6) months of
project completion and proceed with due diligence for acceptance of the document and necessary supporting materials by FEMA. (44 CFR 65.3)
(Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 9
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOODWAY
14-9-1: USES REQUIRING PERMITS:
Artificial obstructions including alterations and substantial improvements specifically listed in sections 14-9-3 to 14-9-15 of this chapter may be allowed by
permit within the floodway, provided the general requirements in section 14-9-2 of this chapter and the applicable requirements in sections 14-9-3 to 14-9-
15 of this chapter are met. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a permit shall meet the following requirements:
A. All projects shall be designed and constructed to ensure that they do not adversely affect the flood hazard on other properties and are reasonably safe
from flooding;
B. All projects shall assure that the carrying capacity of the floodway is not reduced. All projects in the floodway shall meet the following:
1. Demonstrate that the project does not increase the base flood elevation by conducting an encroachment analysis certified by an engineer. A minimal
or qualitative encroachment analysis may be accepted when the project or development does not require a structure, alteration of the floodway,
involve fill, grading, excavation or storage of materials or equipment but is also certified by an engineer to not exceed the allowable encroachment to
the base flood elevation; and
2. The allowable encroachment to the base flood elevation is 0.00 feet, and no significant increase to the velocity or flow of the stream or water course
unless approval of an alteration of the regulated flood hazard area pursuant to section 14-4-3 of this title and an approved FEMA conditional letter of
map revision occurs before permit issuance; and (ARM 36.15.604) (ARM 36.15.505) (ARM 36.15.605(b)) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3 and 4)) (44 CFR
65.12(a))
C. An application for a floodplain permit must also demonstrate the following factors are considered and incorporated into the design of the use or artificial
obstruction in the floodway:
1. The danger to life and property due to backwater or diverted flow caused by the obstruction or use; (MCA 76-5-406(1)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(a))
2. The danger that the obstruction or use may be swept downstream to the injury of others; (MCA 76-5-406(2)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(b))
3. The availability of alternative locations; (MCA 76-5-406(3)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(c))
4. Construct or alter the obstruction or use in such manner as to lessen the flooding danger; (MCA 76-5-406(4)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(d))
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 232/242
5. The permanence of the obstruction or use and is reasonably safe from flooding; (MCA 76-5-406(5)) (ARM 36.15.216(2e))
6. The anticipated development in the foreseeable future of the area which may be affected by the obstruction or use; (MCA 76-5-406(6)) (ARM
36.15.216(2f))
7. Relevant and related permits for the project have been obtained; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(2))
8. Such other factors as are in harmony with the purposes of these regulations, the Montana Floodplain and Floodway Management Act, and the
accompanying Administrative Rules of Montana; and (MCA 76-5-406(7)) (ARM 36.15.216(2)(g))
9. The safety of access to property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency services. (44 CFR 60.22(c)(7)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-3: MINING OF MATERIAL REQUIRING EXCAVATION FROM PITS OR POOLS:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. A buffer strip of undisturbed land of sufficient width as determined by an engineer to prevent flood flows from channeling into the excavation is left
between the edge of the channel and the edge of the excavation; (ARM 36.15.602(1)(a))
B. The excavation meets all applicable laws and regulations of other local and State agencies; and (ARM 36.15.602(1)(b))
C. Excavated material may be processed on site but is stockpiled outside the floodway. (ARM 36.15.602(1)(c)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-4: RAILROAD, HIGHWAY AND STREET STREAM CROSSINGS:
May be allowed including other transportation related crossings provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. Crossings are designed to offer minimal obstructions to the flood flow; (ARM 36.15.602(2))
B. Where failure or interruption of public transportation facilities would result in danger to public health or safety and where practicable and in consideration
of FHWA Federal-Aid Policy Guide 23CFR650A:
1. Bridge lower chords shall have freeboard to at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation to help pass ice flows, the base flood discharge and
any debris associated with the discharge; and
2. Culverts shall be designed to pass the base flood discharge and maintain at least two feet (2') freeboard on the crossing surface;
C. Normal overflow channels, if possible are preserved to allow passage of sediments to prevent aggradations; and
D. Mid stream supports for bridges, if necessary, have footings buried below the maximum scour depth. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-5: LIMITED FILLING FOR ROAD AND RAILROAD EMBANKMENTS:
May be allowed including other transportation related embankments not associated with stream crossings and bridges provided, in addition to the
requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. The fill is suitable fill;
B. Reasonable alternate transportation routes outside the floodway are not available; and (ARM 36.15.602(3))
C. The encroachment is located as far from the stream channel as possible. (ARM 36.15.602(3)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-6: BURIED OR SUSPENDED UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINES:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. Suspended utility transmission lines are designed such that the lowest point of the suspended line is at least six feet (6') higher than the base flood
elevation; (ARM 36.15.602(4))
B. Towers and other appurtenant structures are designed and placed to withstand and offer minimal obstruction to flood flows; (ARM 36.15.602(4))
C. Alternatives such as alternative routes, directional drilling, and aerial crossings are considered when technically feasible; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 233/242
D. Utility transmission lines carrying toxic or flammable materials are buried to a depth of at least twice the calculated maximum scour depth determined by
an engineer for the base flood. (ARM 36.15.602(4)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-7: STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by flooding and is properly anchored to prevent flotation or downstream movement; or (ARM
36.15.602(5)(a))
B. The material or equipment is readily removable within the limited time available after flood warning. Storage of flammable, toxic or explosive materials
shall not be permitted. (ARM 36.15.602(5)(b)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-8: DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY WELLS:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. They are driven or drilled wells located on ground higher than surrounding ground to assure positive drainage from the well; (ARM 36.15.602(6))
B. They require no other structures (e.g., a well house); (ARM 36.15.602(6))
C. Well casings are water tight to a distance of at least twenty five feet (25') below the ground surface and the well casing height is a minimum of two feet
(2') above the base flood elevation or capped with a watertight seal and vented two feet (2') above the base flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.602(6))
D. Water supply lines have a watertight seal where the lines enter the casing; (ARM 36.15.602(6))
E. All pumps and electrical lines and equipment are either of the submersible type or are adequately flood proofed; and (ARM 36.15.602(6))
F. Check valves are installed on main water lines at wells and at all building entry locations. (44 CFR 60.3(a)(5)) (ARM 36.15.602(6)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-9: BURIED AND SEALED VAULTS FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL IN CAMPGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, demonstrate approval by Montana Department of Environmental
Quality and local health and sanitation permits or approvals. (44 CFR 60.3(a)(6)) (ARM 36.15.602(7)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-10: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. Access roads require only limited fill and do not obstruct or divert floodwaters; (ARM 36.15.602(8))
B. The project meets the accessory structures requirements in this section;
C. No dwellings or permanent mobile homes are allowed; (ARM 36.15.602(8))
D. Recreational vehicles and travel trailers are ready for highway use with wheels intact, with only quick disconnect type utilities and securing devices, and
have no permanently attached additions; and (44 CFR 60.3(c)(14))
E. There is no large-scale clearing of riparian vegetation within fifty feet (50') of the mean annual high water mark. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-11: STRUCTURES ACCESSORY OR APPURTENANT:
Structures accessory or appurtenant to permitted uses such as boat docks, loading and parking areas, marinas, sheds, emergency airstrips, permanent
fences crossing channels that may impede or stop flows or debris, picnic shelters and tables and lavatories, that are incidental to a principal structure or
use, may be allowed provided in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. The structures are not intended for human habitation or supportive of human habitation; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 234/242
B. The structures will have low flood damage potential; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
C. The structures will, insofar as possible, be located on ground higher than the surrounding ground and as far from the channel as possible; (ARM
36.15.602(9))
D. The structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal obstruction to flood flows; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
E. Only those wastewater disposal systems that are approved under health and sanitation regulations are allowed;
F. Service facilities within these structures such as electrical, heating and plumbing are flood proofed according to the requirements in chapter 10 of this
title; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
G. The structures are firmly anchored to prevent flotation; (ARM 36.15.602(9))
H. The structures do not require fill and/or substantial excavation;
I. The structures or use cannot be changed or altered without permit approval; and
J. There is no clearing of riparian vegetation within fifty feet (50') of the mean annual high water mark. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-12: CONSTRUCTION OF OR MODIFICATIONS TO SURFACE WATER DIVERSIONS:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that the design is reviewed and approved by an engineer and
includes:
A. Measures to minimize potential erosion from a base flood; and (ARM 36.15.603(3)(b))
B. Designs and plans that demonstrate any permanent structure in the stream is designed to safely withstand up to the base flood considering the forces
associated with hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressures including flood depths, velocities, impact, ice buoyancy, and uplift forces associated with the
base flood. (ARM 36.15.603(3)(c)) (CFR 60.3(a)(3)) (CFR 60.3(d)(3)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-13: FLOOD CONTROL AND STREAM BANK STABILIZATION MEASURES:
May be allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that the design is reviewed and approved by an engineer and
constructed to substantially resist or withstand the forces associated with hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressures, including flood depths, velocities,
impact, ice, buoyancy, and uplift associated with the base flood. The design must also show compliance with the following applicable criteria: (CFR 60.3(a)
(3)) (CFR 60.3(d)(3)) (ARM 36.15.606)
A. Levee And Floodwall: Construction or alteration:
1. Must be designed and constructed with suitable fill and be designed to safely convey a base flood; (ARM 36.15.606(1)(a))
2. Must be constructed at least three feet (3') higher than the elevation of the base flood unless the levee or floodwall protects agricultural land only;
(ARM 36.15.606(2)(a))
3. Must meet State and Federal levee engineering and construction standards and be publicly owned and maintained if it protects structures of more
than one landowner; and (ARM 36.15.505(1)(c)(ii) and (iii))
4. For any increase in the elevation of the base flood, an alteration of the regulated flood hazard area requires approvals pursuant to chapter 4 of this
title.
B. Stream Bank Stabilization, Pier And Abutment Protection Projects:
1. Must be designed and constructed using methods and materials that are the least environmentally damaging yet practicable, and should be
designed to withstand a base flood once the project's vegetative components are mature within a period of up to five (5) years or other time as
required by the Floodplain Administrator. Once vegetation is mature and established it should not require substantial yearly maintenance after the
initial period;
2. Materials for the project may be designed to erode over time but not fail catastrophically and impact others. Erosion, sedimentation, and transport of
the materials may be designed to be at least similar in amount and rate of existing stable natural stream banks during the base flood;
3. Must not increase erosion upstream, downstream, across from or adjacent to the site in excess of the existing stable natural stream bank during the
base flood; and (ARM 36.15.606(1)(b))
4. Materials for the project may include but are not limited to riprap, root wads, brush mattresses, willow wattles, natural woody debris or combinations
of analogous materials.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 235/242
C. Channelization Projects: Where the excavation and/or construction of a channel is for the purpose of diverting the entire or a portion of the flow of a
stream from its established course, the project must:
1. Not increase the magnitude, velocity, or elevation of the base flood; and
2. Meet the requirements of subsection B of this section. (ARM 36.15.101(7)) (ARM 36.15.606(1)(c))
D. Dams:
1. The design and construction shall be in accordance with the Montana Dam Safety Act and applicable safety standards; and
2. The project shall not increase flood hazards downstream either through operational procedures or improper hydrologic/hydraulic design. (ARM
36.15.606(1)(d)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-9-14: STREAM AND BANK RESTORATION:
Projects intended to reestablish the terrestrial and aquatic attributes of a natural stream and not for protection of a structure or development may be
allowed provided, in addition to the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter, that:
A. The project will not increase velocity or erosion upstream, downstream, across from or adjacent to the site; (ARM 36.15.606(1)(b))
B. Materials may include but are not limited to boulders, rock cobble, gravel, native stream bed materials, root wads, brush mattresses, willow wattles,
natural woody debris or combinations of analogous materials and that reasonably replicates the bed and bank of the natural stream;
C. Erosion, sedimentation, and transport of the materials are not more than the amount and rate of existing natural stream banks during the base flood;
and
D. The project may be designed to allow vegetative materials to mature within a period up to five (5) years or other time as required by the Floodplain
Administrator. Once vegetation is mature and established it should not require substantial yearly maintenance after the initial period. (Ord. 829, 12-5-
2016)
14-9-15: EXISTING RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN THE FLOODWAY:
Any alteration or substantial improvement to an existing building must meet the requirements of section 14-9-2 of this chapter and the applicable
requirements in chapter 10 of this title for residential or non-residential buildings. (MCA 76-5-404(3)(b)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 10
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOOD FRINGE OR REGULATED FLOOD
HAZARD AREA WITH NO FLOODWAY
14-10-1: USES REQUIRING PERMITS:
All uses allowed by permit in the floodway shall also be allowed by permit within the flood fringe or regulated flood hazard area with no floodway. Such
uses are subject to the requirements in chapter 9 of this title, with the exception of the encroachment limit of subsection 14-9-2B of this title. Instead, such
uses are subject to the encroachment limits of subsection 14-10-2I of this chapter.
Except for prohibited artificial obstructions in section 14-6-2 of this title, all other artificial obstructions including new construction, substantial
improvements, alterations to residential, and nonresidential structures including manufactured homes, and related suitable fill or excavation shall be
allowed by permit and are subject to the requirements in this section and general requirements of section 14-9-2 of this title, with the exception of the
encroachment limit of subsection 14-9-2B of this title. (ARM 36.15.701(2)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-10-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a floodplain permit must demonstrate or meet the following applicable requirements:
A. Base Flood Elevation: Where necessary to meet the appropriate elevation requirement in these regulations, the base flood elevation(s) must be
determined by an engineer and utilized in the design and layout of the project demonstrating the design and construction criteria herein are met. For
regulated flood hazard areas that do not have computed and published base flood elevations in the adopted flood hazard study referenced in chapter 4
of this title, a base flood elevation must be determined or obtained from a reliable source, utilizing appropriate engineering methods and analyses;
B. Flood Damage: Structures must be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage and structures must be reasonably safe from
flooding; (44 CFR 60.3(a)) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(iii))
C. Surface Drainage: Adequate surface drainage must be provided around structures;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 236/242
D. Materials: Structures must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; (44 CFR 60.3(a)) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(ii))
E. Artificial Obstructions: Structures, excavation or fill must not be prohibited by any other statute, regulation, ordinance, or resolution; and must be
compatible with subdivision, zoning and any other land use regulations, if any; (ARM 36.15.701(3)(a)) (ARM 36.15.701(3)(b))
F. Anchoring: All construction and substantial improvements must be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3))
G. Certification: Certification by an engineer, architect, land surveyor, or other qualified person must accompany the application where required including
for an encroachment analysis, adequacy of structural elevations, base flood elevation determinations, flood-proofing, enclosure flood openings and
design and construction to withstand the hydrodynamic forces and hydrostatic pressures of flood depths, velocities, impact, buoyancy, uplift forces
associated with the base flood and surface drainage. A certification is not intended to constitute a warranty or guarantee of performance, expressed or
implied; (ARM 36.15.606(1)) (ARM 36.15.702(2)(c)) (ARM 36.15.801(3)(b)) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(3 and 4)) (44 CFR 60.3(d)(3))
H. Access: Structures must have safe access during times of flooding up to the base flood for ordinary and emergency services provided there are no
reasonable alternate locations for structures;
I. Encroachment Analysis:
1. All applications in the regulated flood hazard area without a floodway must be supported by an encroachment analysis of the proposed use, a
thorough hydrologic and hydraulic analysis except as provided in subsection I4 of this section, prepared by an engineer to demonstrate the effect of
the structure on flood flows, velocities and the base flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.604) (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3))
2. The maximum allowable encroachment is certified to be at or less than 0.5 foot increase to the base flood elevation unless approval of an alteration
of the regulated flood hazard area pursuant to chapter 4 of this title and an approved FEMA conditional letter of map revision occurs before permit
issuance; (ARM 36.15.604) (ARM 36.15.505) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(13))
3. An encroachment analysis is not required for any development in the flood fringe where an accompanying floodway has been designated within the
regulated flood hazard area; and
4. Although all other development standards herein apply, a minimal or qualitative encroachment analysis may be accepted when the project or
development does not require a structure, alteration of the floodplain, involve fill, grading, excavation or storage of materials or equipment and also is
certified by an engineer to not exceed the allowable encroachment;
J. Electrical Systems Flood Proofing: All electrical service materials, equipment and installation for uses in a regulated flood hazard area must be certified
to meet the following requirements:
1. All incoming power service equipment including all metering equipment, control centers, transformers, distribution and lighting panels and all other
stationary equipment must be located at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.901(1)(a))
2. Portable and movable electrical equipment may be placed below the base flood elevation, provided that the equipment can be disconnected by a
single plug and socket assembly of the submersible type; (ARM 36.15.901(1)(b))
3. The main power service lines must have automatically operated electrical disconnect equipment or manually operated electrical disconnect
equipment located at an accessible remote location outside the regulated flood hazard area or two feet (2') above the base flood elevation; and
(ARM 36.15.901(1)(c))
4. All electrical wiring systems installed below the base flood elevation must be suitable for continuous submergence and may not contain fibrous
components; (ARM 36.15.901(1)(d))
K. Heating And Cooling Systems Flood Proofing: Heating and cooling systems for uses in a regulated flood hazard area must be certified to meet the
following requirements:
1. Float operated automatic control valves must be installed so that fuel supply is automatically shut off when floodwaters reach the floor level where
the heating and cooling systems are located; (ARM 36.15.902(1)(a))
2. Manually operated gate valves must be installed in gas supply lines. The gate valves must be operable from a location above the base flood
elevation; (ARM 36.15.902(1)(b))
3. Electrical systems flood proofing must be met; and (ARM 36.15.902(1)(c))
4. Furnaces and cooling units must be installed at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and the ductwork installed above the base flood
elevation;
L. Plumbing Systems Flood Proofing: Plumbing systems for uses in the regulated flood hazard area must be certified to meet the following requirements:
1. Sewer lines, except those to a buried and sealed vault, must have check valves installed to prevent sewage backup into permitted structures; and
(ARM 36.15.903(1)(a))
2. All toilets, stools, sinks, urinals, vaults, and drains must be located so the lowest point of possible floodwater entry is at least two feet (2') above the
base flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.903(1)(b))
M. Structural Fill Flood Proofing: Fill used to elevate structures, including but not limited to residential and non-residential buildings must be certified to
meet the following requirements:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 237/242
1. The fill must be a minimum of 0.5 feet above the base flood elevation and extend at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the structure in all directions;
2. Fill material must be suitable fill, that is stable, compacted, well graded, and pervious, not adversely affected by water and frost, devoid of trash or
similar foreign matter, tree stumps or other organic material; and is fitting for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent structure;
(ARM 36.15.101(22))
3. The fill must be compacted to minimize settlement and compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of the maximum density. Compaction of earthen fill
must be certified by an engineer;
4. No portion of the fill is allowed within the floodway;
5. The fill slope must not be steeper than one and one-half (11/2) horizontal to one vertical unless substantiating data justifying a steeper slope is
provided and adequate erosion protection is provided for fill slopes exposed to floodwaters; and
N. Wet Flood Proofing: Building designs with an enclosure below the lowest floor must be certified to meet the following:
1. Materials used for walls and floors are resistant to flooding to an elevation two feet (2') or more above the base flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.702(2)
(a))
2. The enclosure must be designed to equalize hydrostatic forces on walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Opening designs must either be
certified by an engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following:
a. Automatically allow entry and exit of floodwaters through screens, louvers, valves, and other coverings or devices;
b. Have two (2) or more openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area below the lowest
floor, except if the enclosure is partially subgrade, a minimum of two (2) openings may be provided on a single wall; and
c. Have the bottom of all openings no higher than one foot (1') above the higher of the exterior or interior adjacent grade or floor immediately below
the openings; (44 CFR 60.3(c)(5)) (NFIP Insurance Manual, rev., May 2013)
O. Dry Flood Proofing: Building designs that do not allow internal flooding must be certified according to these regulations to meet the following:
1. Building use must be for non-residential use only and does not include mixed residential and non-residential use;
2. Be flood proofed to an elevation no lower than two feet (2') above the base flood elevation;
3. Be constructed of impermeable membranes or materials for floors and walls and have water tight enclosures for all windows, doors and other
openings; and
4. Be designed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and hydrodynamic forces resulting from the base flood and the effects of buoyancy; (ARM
36.15.702(2)(b)) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(3))
P. Elevation Of The Lowest Floor: Elevating the lowest floor may be by either suitable fill, foundation wall enclosure, stem walls, pilings, posts, piers,
columns or other acceptable means; (MCA 76-5-402(2)(b)) (44 CFR 60.3(b)(8)) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(6))
Q. Crawl Spaces: Crawl space foundation enclosures including subgrade crawlspace enclosures below the lowest floor must meet the wet flood proofing
requirements and be designed so that the crawl space floor is at or above the base flood elevation. Crawl space foundations must have an inside
dimension of not more than five feet (5') from the ground to the top of the living floor level and a subgrade crawlspace must also have the interior
ground surface no more than two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent ground surface on all sides. A subgrade foundation exceeding either
dimension is a basement;
R. Manufactured Home Anchors: For new placement, substantial improvement or replacement of manufactured homes for residential or nonresidential use
including additions, the chassis must be secure and must resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by anchoring with anchoring components
capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds and as follows:
1. For manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long, over-the-top ties to ground anchors are required at each of the four (4) corners of the home,
with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations; or
2. For manufactured homes more than fifty feet (50') long, frame ties to ground anchors are required at each corner of the home with five (5) additional
ties per side at intermediate points; (CFR 60.3(b)(8)) (CFR 60.3(c)(6))
S. Access: Access for emergency vehicles is provided. For manufactured homes, access for a manufactured home hauler is also provided. (Ord. 829, 12-
5-2016)
14-10-3: RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, EXCEPTIONS OR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
New construction, alterations, and substantial improvements of residential dwellings, manufactured homes, including replacement of manufactured homes,
must be constructed such that:
A. Elevation Of The Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the building including an attached garage or basement must be two feet (2') or more above the base
flood elevation; (ARM 36.15.701(3))
B. Enclosure: Enclosures of elevated buildings cannot be dry flood proofed. Use for an enclosure is limited to facilitating building component access. The
enclosure including a crawlspace must be wet flood proofed and the enclosure floor must be at or above the base flood elevation. An attached garage
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 238/242
floor must be two (2) or more feet above the base flood elevation;
C. Recreation Vehicles: Recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days or not ready for highway use must meet the
requirements for manufactured homes for residential use. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-10-4: NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, EXCEPTIONS OR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
New construction, alterations, and substantial improvements of non-residential including agricultural, commercial and industrial buildings and residential
and non-residential accessory buildings must be constructed such that:
A. Elevation Of The Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the building must be elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation or adequately dry flood
proofed according to this section. The lowest floor may be wet proofed provided the use is limited to only parking, loading and storage of equipment or
materials not appreciably affected by floodwater; (ARM 36.15.702(2)) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(3)(ii)) (44 CFR 60.3(c)(3) and (4))
B. Enclosure: Enclosures below the lowest floor on elevated buildings must be wet flood proofed and the use must be limited to parking, access or storage
or must be adequately dry flood proofed according to this section;
C. Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes proposed for use as non-residential buildings cannot be dry flood proofed; and
D. Agricultural Structures: Agricultural structures not intended to be insurable, used solely for agricultural purposes, having low flood damage potential,
used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities including raising of livestock, and
not intended for human habitation are exempt from the elevation requirement, dry or wet flood proofing, but shall:
1. Be located on higher ground and as far from the channel as possible;
2. Offer minimal obstruction to flood flows;
3. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or collapse;
4. Where electrical, heating and plumbing systems are installed, meet the flood proofing requirements in subsections 14-10-2J, K, and L of this chapter;
and
5. Meet the elevation or dry flood proofing requirements if the structure is an animal confinement facility. (ARM 36.15.602(9)) (ARM 36.15.701(3)(e))
(ARM 36.15.702(2)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 11
EMERGENCIES
14-11-1: GENERAL:
A. Emergency repair and replacement of severely damaged artificial obstructions and development in the regulated flood hazard area, including public
transportation facilities, public water and sewer facilities, flood control works, and private projects are subject to the permitting requirements of these
regulations. (ARM 36.15.217)
B. The provisions of these regulations are not intended to affect other actions that are necessary to safeguard life or structures during periods of
emergency. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-11-2: EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. The property owner and/or the person responsible for taking emergency action must notify the Floodplain Administrator prior to initiating any emergency
action in a regulated flood hazard area normally requiring a floodplain permit. An Emergency Notification Form must be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator within five (5) days of the action taken as a result of an emergency.
B. Unless otherwise specified by the Floodplain Administrator, within sixty (60) days of initiating the emergency action, a person who has undertaken an
emergency action must submit a floodplain permit application that describes what action has taken place during the emergency and describe any
additional work that may be required to bring the project in compliance with these regulations.
C. A person who has undertaken an emergency action may be required to modify or remove the project in order to meet the permit requirements. (Ord.
829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 12
VARIANCES
14-12-1: GENERAL:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 239/242
A variance from the minimum development standards of these regulations may be allowed. An approved variance would permit construction in a manner
otherwise as required or prohibited by these regulations. (44 CFR 59.1) (ARM 36.15.218) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-12-2: VARIANCE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prior to any consideration of a variance from any development standard in these regulations, a completed floodplain permit application and required
supporting material must be submitted.
B. Additionally, supporting materials in a variance application specific to the variance request including facts and information addressing the criteria in this
chapter must be submitted.
C. If the floodplain permit application and variance application is deemed not correct and complete, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the applicant
of deficiencies within a reasonable time not to exceed sixty (60) days. Under no circumstances should it be assumed that the variance is automatically
granted. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-12-3: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOODPLAIN VARIANCE APPLICATION:
Public notice of the floodplain permit application and variance application shall be given pursuant to section 14-8-2 of this title. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-12-4: EVALUATION OF VARIANCE APPLICATION:
A. A floodplain permit and variance shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum allowance necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief from these regulations and provided all of the following criteria are met:
1. There is a good and sufficient cause. Financial hardship is not a good and sufficient cause; (44 CFR 60.6(a)(3))
2. Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; (44 CFR 60.3(a)(3) and ARM 36.15.218(b))
3. Residential and nonresidential buildings are not in the floodway except for alterations or substantial improvement to existing buildings. Residential
dwellings including basements and attached garages do not have the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation;
4. Any enclosure including a crawl space must meet the requirements of subsection 14-10-2N, "Wet Flood Proofing", of this title if the enclosure interior
grade is at or below the base flood elevation;
5. Granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights to existing buildings, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other existing local laws or ordinances; (44 CFR 60.6(a)(3) and ARM
36.15.218(a))
6. The proposed use is adequately flood proofed; (ARM 36.15.218(c))
7. The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; (44 CFR 60.6(a)(4))
8. Reasonable alternative locations are not available; (MCA 76-5-406(3) and ARM 36.15.218(d))
9. An encroachment does not cause an increase to the base flood elevation that is beyond that allowed in these regulations; and (44 CFR 60.6(a)(1))
10. All other criteria for a floodplain permit besides the specific development standard requested by variance are met.
B. An exception to the variance criteria may be allowed as follows:
1. For either new construction of a structure outside of the floodway only or for substantial improvements or an alteration of a structure, on a lot of onehalf
(1/2) acre or less that is contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation; or (44 CFR
60.6(a))
2. For historic structures - variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum relief necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure. The historic nature of the building must be designated as a preliminary or historic
structure by U.S. Secretary of Interior or an approved State or local government Historic Preservation Program. (44 CFR 60.6(a)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-
2016)
14-12-5: DECISION:
A. The Shelby City Council acting as the Board of Adjustment shall:
1. Evaluate the floodplain permit application and variance application using the criteria in section 14-12-4 of this chapter, and the application
requirements and minimum development standards in chapters 9 and 10 of this title.
2. Make findings, and approve, conditionally approve or deny a floodplain permit and variance within sixty (60) days of a complete application.
3. If approved, attach conditions to the approval of floodplain permit and variance including a project completion date and inspections during and after
construction.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 240/242
4. Notify the applicant that the issuance of a floodplain permit and variance to construct a structure not meeting the minimum building requirements in
these regulations may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and that flood insurance premiums are determined by actuarial risk and
will not be modified by the granting of a variance. (44 CFR 60.6(a))
5. Submit to the Floodplain Administrator a record of all actions involving a floodplain permit and variance, including the findings and decision and send
a copy of each variance granted to DNRC. (44 CFR 60.6(a)(6) and MCA 76-5-405) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-12-6: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person or persons aggrieved by the floodplain permit and variance decision may appeal such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 829,
12-5-2016)
Chapter 13
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
14-13-1: GENERAL:
An administrative appeal may be brought before the Board of Adjustment for review of the Floodplain Administrator's order, decision to grant, condition or
deny a floodplain permit or interpretation of the regulated flood hazard area boundary. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-13-2: APPEALS REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions apply to administrative appeals:
A. An appeal shall include the basis of the appeal and supporting information including specific findings and conclusions of the Floodplain Administrator's
decision being appealed;
B. An appeal may be submitted by an applicant and/or anyone who may be aggrieved by the Floodplain Administrator's decision or order;
C. Appeals must be received within sixty (60) days of the date of the decision or order of the Floodplain Administrator; and
D. Additional information specific to the appeal request may be requested by the review panel. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-13-3: NOTICE AND HEARING:
A. Notice of the pending appeal and hearing shall be provided pursuant to section 14-8-2 of this title. The Floodplain Administrator may notify DNRC and
FEMA of pending appeals.
B. A public hearing on the appeal must be held within sixty (60) days of the notice unless set otherwise. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-13-4: DECISION:
A judgment on an appeal shall be made within sixty (60) days of the hearing unless set otherwise. The decision may affirm, modify, or overturn the
Floodplain Administrator's decision. A decision on an appeal of a permit cannot grant or issue a variance. A decision may support, reverse or remand an
order or determination of a boundary of the regulated flood hazard area by the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-13-5: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision on an administrative appeal may appeal such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 829, 12-
5-2016)
Chapter 14
ENFORCEMENT
14-14-1: INVESTIGATION REQUEST:
An investigation to determine compliance with these regulations for an artificial obstruction or nonconforming use within the regulated flood hazard area
may be made either on the initiative of the Floodplain Administrator or on the written request of three (3) titleholders of land which may be affected by the
activity. The names and addresses of the persons requesting the investigation shall be released if requested. (MCA 76-5-105(2)) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 241/242
14-14-2: NOTICE TO ENTER AND INVESTIGATE LANDS OR WATERS:
The Floodplain Administrator may make reasonable entry upon any lands and waters for the purpose of making an investigation, inspection or survey to
verify compliance with these regulations. (MCA 76-5-105(1))
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall provide notice of entry by mail, electronic mail, phone call, or personal delivery to the owner, owner's agent, lessee,
or lessee's agent whose lands will be entered.
B. If none of these persons can be found, the Floodplain Administrator shall affix a copy of the notice to one or more conspicuous places on the property.
C. If the owners do not respond, cannot be located or refuse entry to the Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator may initiate a search
warrant. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-14-3: NOTICE TO RESPOND AND ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION:
When the Floodplain Administrator determines that a violation may have occurred, the Floodplain Administrator may issue written notice to the owner or an
agent of the owner, either personally or by certified mail. Such notice shall cite the regulatory offense and include an order to take corrective action within a
reasonable time or to respond by requesting an administrative review by the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-14-4: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The order to take corrective action is final, unless within five (5) working days or any granted extension, after the order is received, the owner submits a
written request for an administrative review by the Floodplain Administrator. A request for an administrative review does not stay the order. (Ord. 829, 12-
5-2016)
14-14-5: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION:
Within ten (10) working days or any granted extension of receipt of the Floodplain Administrator's decision concluding the administrative review, the
property owner or owner's agent may appeal the decision pursuant to chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-14-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION:
If the owner fails to comply with the order for corrective action, remedies may include administrative or legal actions, or penalties through court. (Ord. 829,
12-5-2016)
14-14-7: OTHER REMEDIES:
This chapter does not prevent efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through warning, conference, or any other appropriate means. Action under this
chapter shall not bar enforcement of these regulations by injunction or other appropriate remedy. (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 15
PENALTIES
14-15-1: MISDEMEANOR:
Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of the requirements, including failure to obtain permit approval prior to
development in the regulated flood hazard area except for an emergency, shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be treated as a public nuisance.
Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days or both. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. (MCA 76-5-110) (Ord. 829, 12-5-2016)
14-15-2: DECLARATION TO THE FEDERAL FLOOD INSURANCE ADMINISTRATOR:
Upon finding of a violation and failure of the owner to take corrective action as ordered, the Floodplain Administrator may submit notice and request a 1316
violation declaration to the Federal Insurance Administrator. The Federal Insurance Administrator has the authority to deny new and renewal flood
insurance for a structure upon finding a valid violation declaration. (44 CFR 73.3)
The Floodplain Administrator shall provide the Federal Insurance Administrator the following:
A. The name(s) of the property owner(s) and address or legal description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity and location;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=658 242/242
B. A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation or ordinance;
C. A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
D. Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
E. A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended. (Ord. 829,
12-5-2016)