CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ASHEVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ASHEVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kenneth M. Michalove 
Mayor 
____________ 
Eugene Ellison 
Barbara Field 
William G. Moore 
Chris J. Peterson 
Joseph Carr Swicegood 
Charles R. Worley 
City Council 
____________ 
Douglas O. Bean 
City Manager 
____________ 
William F. Slawter 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sarah Patterson Brison 
Assistant City Attorney 
____________ 
Martha Walker-McGlohon 
Associate City Attorney 
____________ 
William F. Wolcott, Jr. 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1965 Code, as supplemented through December 16, 1986, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CDB:1 
CDC:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. William F. Slawter, City Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2024 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Asheville; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Asheville That: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Asheville, North Carolina" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 21, and Appendices A through C, each inclusive, is adopted, with the following revisions: 
a.  Subsection (a) of Section 19-137 of the Code of Ordinances shall read as follows: 
"(a) It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or with the direction of a police office or traffic signal: 
(1)  Within an intersection. 
(2)  On a crosswalk. 
(3)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless otherwise indicated by signs or marks. 
(4)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of the driveway or entrance to any fire station. 
(5)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(6)  In front of any private driveway. 
(7)  On any sidewalk. 
(8)  On any curb. 
(9)  On any median strip. 
(10)  On any landscaped or planted area within the right-of-way of any street, highway or roadway. 
(11)  Alongside of or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping or parking shall obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street, highway or roadway, except in such instances as double parking may be allowed by the regulations of this chapter. 
(13)  At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting standing or parking. 
(Code 1945, sec. 742; Ord. No. 1161, sec. 2, 4-3-80)" 
b.  Section 19-14 of the Code of Ordinances shall read as follows: 
"Section 19-14. Penalties. 
Civil Penalties as set forth in Appendix B of this Code shall be assessed for the violation of the provisions of Section 19-137, 19- 138, 19-139, 19-140, 19-143, and 19-144 of this chapter. All other violations of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00." 
c.  Subsection A of the Schedule of Civil (Appendix B) follows: 
"A. Stopping, standing and parking violations established by Sections 19-137, 19-138, 19-139, 19-140, 19-143, and 19-144 of the Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  Overtime parking at metered or nonmetered space ..... $ 5.00 
Provided, however, a second or subsequent violation within a 24-hour period shall be subject to a civil penalty of ..... $8.00. 
(2)  All other violations ..... $10.00 
(3)  Parking violations included in this section shall be delinquent after the 15th day from the issuance of the citation; thereafter the following civil penalties shall apply to the foregoing parking violations, in addition to the stated penalty: 
Delinquent Period Additional Penalty 
(a)  15 or more days delinquent on $5.00 or $8.00 penalty ..... $10.00 
(b)  15 or more days delinquent on $10.00 penalty ..... $15.00" 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 29, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another is penalty expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished as provided in N.C. Gen. Stat. Sec. 14-4. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 29, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Read, Approved and Adopted this 27th Day of April, 1993. 
/s/ William F. Wolcott, Jr. 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
	/s/ Kenneth M. Michalove 
      Mayor 
 	 
Approved as to form: 
/s/ William F. Slawter 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS  
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter as set forth in Chapter 121 of the Private Laws of 1931 and ratified by referendum in April of 1931. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
The original article numbers and headings and section numbers have been retained, but the section catchlines were added by the editor. 
The Charter originally provided for a council of nine members. Chapter 114, § 1, Private Laws of 1935, amended the Charter by changing the word "nine" to "seven" wherever it occurs in relation to the number of councilmen. The same act changed "one-ninth" to "one-seventh" wherever used in regard to "referendum and recall or other elections." These changes have been made throughout the Charter. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Municipality continued; general corporate powers. 
The inhabitants of the City of Asheville shall continue to be as they have heretofore been, a body politic and corporate under the name of "City of Asheville" and under that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with; may acquire, hold, manage, control, lease and dispose of property, real and personal, and may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at pleasure.  
Sec. 2. - Property rights continued. 
All property, real and personal or interests therein, of whatsoever character and description and wheresoever situate, now owned, held, controlled or used by the City of Asheville for any purpose or held, controlled or used for its benefit and any and all judgments, liens, right of liens and causes of action of any and all kinds in favor of said City of Asheville shall upon the adoption of this act [Charter] be and remain vested in the City of Asheville in the same manner and to the same extent as heretofore.  
Sec. 3. - General grant of power. 
The City of Asheville shall have and possess all of the powers given and conferred by this act [Charter], as well as all of the powers given to municipal corporation by general law in this state and all such other powers, rights and privileges as may be useful and/or necessary to carry on the government of the City of Asheville, in the manner set out in this act [Charter].  
Sec. 4. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Asheville shall be those existing for the City of Asheville at the time of the passage of this act [Charter]. 
Editor's note— Ordinances annexing territory to the city are not included in this Charter, but are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 5. - Powers vested in mayor, council and manager. 
The corporate powers of the City of Asheville shall be vested in and exercised by a mayor, city council and city manager, as hereinafter provided, subject to such limitations as may be hereinafter imposed, and the executive and administrative powers, authority and duties are distributed as hereinafter set out.  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference— City council, § 2-31. 
 
Sec. 6. - Composition; qualifications and terms of members. 
(a)  Except as otherwise herein provided in this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in a council of a mayor and six council members, all nominated and elected from the city at large in the manner hereinafter provided. The mayor and members of the council, and all other officers, elected under the provisions of this Charter, shall at the time of their election be qualified electors of the City of Asheville. Elections for mayor and councilmembers shall be held on a nonpartisan basis in even-numbered years on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, beginning in 2020 and biennially thereafter. The names of the candidates shall be printed on the ballots without reference to any party affiliation, and any qualified voter residing in the City shall be entitled to vote on such ballots. Results shall be determined using the nonpartisan primary and election method in accordance with G.S. 163-294. The primary and election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the general laws governing primaries and election for county officers. Except as otherwise provided herein, the election shall be conducted according to the provisions of Subchapter III of Chapter 163A of the General Statutes then governing elections. The county board of elections under the direction of the State Board of Elections shall make necessary provisions for elections for mayor and councilmembers. 
(b)  The term of the mayor and councilmembers shall begin at the first regular meeting of the city council in December of even-numbered years. The term of office of the mayor and six council members shall be four years, and shall be so staggered that the terms of office of three council members shall expire every two years. In the election of 2020, those three persons elected to council will serve four year terms to expire in 2024. In the election of 2022, the three persons elected to council will serve four year terms to expire in 2026. Commencing with the 2020 election, all terms of office for council members shall be four years. 
(c)  The person elected as mayor at the 2017 election shall serve a five-year term of office commencing in 2017 and expiring in 2022. Beginning with the 2022 election, all terms of office for the mayor shall be four years. The mayor shall be nominated and elected from the City at-large. 
(d)  A mayor or member of council ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section shall immediately forfeit office. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 2, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 2385, § 1, 6-24-97; Session Law 2018-123, § 1(a), 6-29-18; Ord. No. 4774, §§ 1—4, 10-22-19; Ord. No. 4775, § 1, 10-22-19)  
Sec. 7. - Filling of vacancies. 
Any vacancy in the office of mayor or council shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term from the qualified electors of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 3, 3-19-85)  
Sec. 8. - Meetings generally; member's oath. 
On its first regular meeting date in December following a regular municipal election, the council shall meet at the usual place for holding its meetings, and the newly elected mayor and councilmembers shall assume the duties of office. Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the newly elected mayor and councilmen shall severally make oath before the retiring mayor, city clerk or some person authorized by law to administer oaths to perform faithfully the duties of their respective offices. Thereafter the council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, but not less frequently than once each week. Special meetings shall be called by the clerk upon written request of the mayor or of the city manager or of three members of the council. No less than 12 hours' notice of special meetings shall be given to each member of the council at such address, within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, as he shall designate and such notice shall be published at least once prior to the meeting in a daily newspaper of the city. The notice must state the subject or subjects to be considered at the meeting and no other subject or subjects may be there considered. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 4, 3-19-85)  
Sec. 9. - Meetings to be open; opportunity of citizens to be heard. 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public and the council, by rules, must provide for giving citizens reasonable opportunity to be heard at its meetings in regard to matters thereunder consideration.  
Sec. 10. - Selection of mayor and mayor pro tem; general powers of mayor. 
The mayor, in addition to the other powers conferred on him by this Charter, shall have the rights, privileges, requirements, and immunities of a member of the council. He shall preside at meetings of the council and be recognized as head of the city government for ceremonial purposes, by the courts for service of civil process and by the government for purposes of military law. He shall vote on all issues before the council except when excused from voting as provided by law. 
At its first meeting following a regular municipal election, the council shall choose from its number a vice-chairman to act as mayor pro tem in absence of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 5, 3-19-85; Session Laws 1985, ch. 228, § 1)  
Sec. 11. - Selection of clerk and other officers and employees; duties of clerk; rules and order of business. 
The council shall choose a city clerk and such other officers and employees of its own body as it deems necessary all of whom shall serve during the pleasure of the council. The clerk shall keep records of the proceedings of the council and all final votes of the council involving appropriations, expenditures of money or the enactment of ordinances shall be by yeas and nays and entered on the records. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business.  
Sec. 12. - Quorum; disqualification to vote. 
A majority of the members elected to the council, including the mayor, shall constitute a quorum but a less number may adjourn and compel the attendance of absent members. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution or vote, except that a vote to adjourn or regarding the attendance of absent members may be adopted by a majority of the members present. No member, including the mayor, shall be disqualified from voting except on matters involving his own official conduct or financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 6, 3-19-85)  
Sec. 13. - Exercise of legislative powers, functions and duties. 
The council has and shall exercise all legislative powers, functions and duties conferred upon the city or its officers.  
Sec. 14. - Ordinances and resolutions—Introduction; subject matter; reading. 
Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the council only in written or printed form. All ordinances, except those relating to appropriations and/or budgets or codifying existing ordinances, shall be confined to one subject and the subject shall be expressed in the title. Ordinances relating to appropriations shall be confined to that subject. The final reading of an ordinance shall be in full unless a copy thereof shall have been furnished each member of the council present prior to the reading. 
(Ord. No. 1501, § 7, 3-19-85; Session Laws 1993, ch. 228, § 11)  
Sec. 15. - Same—Effective date. 
Ordinances and resolutions shall take effect at the time indicated therein. 
(Sessions Laws, 1981, ch. 25, § 1)  
Sec. 16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of ch. 25 of Session Laws 1981 repealed section 16 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to emergency measures for ordinances and resolutions.  
Sec. 17. - Ordinances and resolutions—Authentication and recordation. 
Upon final passage, ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and clerk and shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. Authentication and registration of an ordinance or resolution as herein provided shall be essential to its validity.  
Sec. 17A. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of ch. 397 of Session Laws 1983 repealed section 17A of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to the publication of ordinances and resolutions and had been enacted by ch. 186, § 1, Private Laws 1931.  
Sec. 18. - Ordinances and resolutions—Revision or amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution or section thereof shall be revised or amended except by a new ordinance or resolution containing the entire ordinance, resolution or section as revised or amended and repealing the original ordinance, resolution or section.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 19. - Appointment, qualifications, term and removal of manager; acting manager. 
The council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the chief executive officer of the city. The manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city or state. The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and shall be removable at the pleasure of the council. No member of the council shall, during the time for which elected, be chosen city manager. Before the manager may be removed by the council he shall, if he so demands, be given a written statement of the reasons alleged for his removal and given the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the council prior to the final vote on the question of his removal. Pending and during such hearing, the council may suspend the manager from office. The action of the council in suspending or removing the manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the council. In case of the absence or disability of the manager, the council may designate some qualified person, not a member of the council, to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability.  
Sec. 20. - Responsibility of manager to council; appointment and removal of officers and employees generally. 
The manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city placed in his charge and to that end, subject to the provisions of article X hereof, he shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. The manager may authorize the head of a department or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. All appointments made by or under the authority of the manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. All such appointments shall be without definite term unless for temporary service not to exceed 60 days.  
Sec. 21. - Further authority for removal; report of appointments and removals. 
Officers and employees appointed by the city manager or under his authorization may be removed by him or by the officer by whom appointed at any time. The decision of the manager or other officer in any such case shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other officer, body or court whatsoever. The manager shall report each appointment and removal in the administrative service of the city to the council at its first meeting following such appointment or removal except appointments to and removals from office or positions of those classes which the council may by resolution provide need not be so reported.  
Sec. 22. - Council not to request or take part in appointments or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from office by the city manager or by any head of a department or officer authorized by such manager to make such appointment, nor shall the council or any of its committees or members take any part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city, other than the city manager.  
Sec. 23. - Council to deal with administrative service through manager. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with that portion of the administrative service for which the manager is responsible through the manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give an order to any city employee in the administrative service of the city, other than the city manager, relating to any matter in the line of his employment. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a member of the council shall be a misdemeanor, conviction of which shall immediately forfeit the office of the member so convicted.  
Sec. 24. - General duties of manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city; to supervise the administration of the affairs of the city; to see that the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state are enforced therein; to make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as may seem to him desirable; to keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city; to prepare and submit to the council budget estimates; to prepare and submit to the council such reports as may be required by that body and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by ordinance or resolution of the council.  
Sec. 25. - Right of manager and other officers to seats in council and participation in council discussions. 
The city manager, the heads of all departments and such other officers of the city as may be designated by vote of the council shall be entitled to seats in the council but shall have no vote therein. The manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council and the heads of departments and any other officers having seats in the council shall be entitled to take part in all discussions of the council relating to their respective departments and offices.  
Sec. 26. - Departments generally. 
The city council, after hearing recommendations by the city manager, shall by resolution establish and designate departments of the city and may, from time to time, upon the recommendation of the city manager, abolish, redesignate, reorganize, restructure, reestablish and otherwise change such departments to promote efficiency in the administration of the city government. Nothing in this section shall prevent the council, by a two-thirds vote of its members, from authorizing and directing the execution of a contract with Buncombe County for the joint performance of similar administrative duties and functions of said county and city by consolidating the agencies thereof by which such functions are, at the time of making such an agreement, being performed and authorizing their subsequent joint operation as one agency at joint expense, or for the performance of said administrative functions for the benefit of both said city and Buncombe County by one of such agencies at joint expense, whenever in the judgment of the council such action is deemed for the best interest of the City of Asheville. 
(Session Laws 1955, ch. 791, § 1; Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 1)  
Sec. 27. - Department heads. 
The head of each department of the administrative branch of the city government shall be known as the director thereof. He shall be appointed by the city manager and shall have supervision and control of his department and all of the activities thereof. The manager may assign to one person the powers and duties of director of more than one department and/or office and may himself assume and perform the powers and duties of director of one or more departments or offices and/or perform himself or delegate to another any one or more functions or duties assigned to a department or office. Each director shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter and/or ordinances passed in pursuance thereof for the conduct of the officers and employees of the department of which he is in charge, for the distribution and transaction of its business and for the custody of the books, records, papers and property under its control. 
(Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 2)  
Sec. 28. - Investigation of departments and offices. 
The council or the manager or any person or committee authorized by either of them shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs and, for such purpose or purposes, may provide for an examination or audit of the accounts of any department, office or officer of the city, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence.  
Sec. 29. - Rules and regulations governing finances. 
The council shall, by ordinance or resolution, make such rules and regulations as it shall deem wise governing the receipt and handling of moneys payable to the City of Asheville from any and all sources and the deposit of such moneys in designated depositories, provided that all such moneys shall be collected and received by an officer or employee of the department of finance authorized to receive the same or paid to such officer or employee by such other officer or employee of the administrative services of the city as shall collect and receive the same. Such ordinances or resolution shall also provide for such audits and examinations of the books and accounts of all departments and of all officers and employees of the administrative service of the city who receive or may receive or disburse money as to the council shall deem wise. Such audits and examinations may be made by a regular employee of the administrative service of the city or otherwise as the council may direct and the council may, by ordinance or resolution, direct such publication of the results of such examinations and audits as it shall deem best. Except as in this Charter provided, sections 2686 and 2687 of the Consolidated Statutes shall not apply to the City of Asheville.  
Sec. 30. - Limitation on indebtedness. 
Except as provided in the Municipal Finance Act or other general law or as provided in this act [Charter] or as provided in public, public-local or private acts passed at that session of the legislature at which this act [Charter] is adopted, the council shall not have power to create or contract any indebtedness in any amount not covered by an appropriation ordinance or resolution for the current fiscal year, passed or adopted as now or hereafter provided by law.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of ch. 27 of Session Laws 1981 repealed section 31 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to corporation council and assistants.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of ch. 27 of Session Laws 1981 repealed section 32 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to powers and duties of director of department of finance and assistants.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 33, 34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 33 and 34 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to general powers and duties and duty relative to engineering service of the director of the department of public works, were repealed by Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 3.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 35, 36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Article VII, consisting of sections 35 and 36 and relating to the department of public welfare, was repealed by Session Laws 1955, ch. 791, § 2.  
ARTICLE VIII. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Code reference— Police, ch. 13. 
 
Secs. 37, 38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 37 and 38 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to the powers and duties of the director and the reenactment of part of the 1923 act, were repealed by Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 3.  
Sec. 38A. - Special police. 
The council shall have power to authorize the appointment by the city manager or by the director of the police department of special police receiving no compensation from the city for preservation of the peace, happiness and welfare of the inhabitants thereof, and of property therein. Such special police shall not belong to the classified service of the city. 
(Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 4)  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 39 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931, which pertained to the powers and duties of the director of the department of motor transport, was repealed by Session Laws 1981, ch. 27, § 3.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 40—64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Article X, entitled "Department of Civil Service" and consisting of sections 40—64, was repealed by chapter 1 of the Private Laws of 1935. Such chapter 1 enacted new provisions relative to civil service, which have been omitted as superseded by Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, which is included in the Related Laws as sections 31—52.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 65 through 82-C of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931 on the subject of elections were repealed by Session Laws 1993, ch. 228, § 1(a)(1). Subsection (b) provides that nothing in this section affects the provisions of Ordinance No. 1501 of the City of Asheville, adopted May 19, 1985, under Part 4 of Article 5 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, concerning the manner of election of the mayor. The mayor shall continue to be elected separately by the qualified voters of the City of Asheville. Further, it should be noted that Ord. No. 2139, adopted Sept. 20, 1994, amended Section X of Ord. No. 1501 to provide for direct election of the mayor by all qualified voters of the city. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 2155, adopted Nov. 15, 1994, repealed Ord. No. 2139 and provided: 
"Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina. Beginning in 1995, elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis, using the "nonpartisan primary and election" method, as provided in N.C. Gen Stat. sec. 163-294. The mayor shall continue to be elected directly by the people and to have all of the rights and responsibilities of a member of council, including the right to vote on all issues before the council." 
Said Ord. No. 2155, shall take effect upon adopting and shall govern municipal elections beginning with the 1995 primary and election. 
 
Secs. 65—82C. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Sec. 83. - Initiative. 
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the city council by a petition signed by 15 percent of the number of registered voters of the City of Asheville. The signatures, residence, addresses, verifications, filings, authentications, inspections, certifications, amendments and submission of such petition shall be the same as hereinafter provided in this article for petitions for the recall of officials. If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by the requisite number of voters and contains a request that said ordinance be passed or submitted to a vote of the electors if not passed by the council, such board shall within 15 days after such petition is submitted to it, either: 
(a)  Pass such ordinance without alteration, or 
(b)  Submit the ordinance to the qualified voters at a special election called for that purpose and held not more than 90 days after the date of such call or at a general election occurring within 90 days after the date of the certificate of the chairman of the board of elections. 
The ballots used when voting upon such ordinance shall state briefly the general nature of the ordinance and contain the words "for the ordinance" and "against the ordinance." If the majority of the voters voting on a proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall become a valid and binding ordinance of the city from the date when the result of such vote is officially declared. No ordinance becoming effective as in this section provided shall be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the people. 
Any member [number] of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this article, but there shall not be more than one such special election in any period of six months for such purpose. The council may submit a proposition for the repeal of any such ordinance or for amendment thereto to be voted upon at any succeeding general city election and should any such proposition so submitted receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election such ordinance shall thereby be repealed or amended accordingly as of the date when the result of such vote is officially declared. Whenever any ordinance or proposition is required pursuant to this article to be submitted to the voters of the city at any general or special election the city shall cause such ordinance or proposition to be published once in the daily newspaper published in the city having the largest circulation and once in the daily newspaper published in the city having the second largest circulation and in all copies of the edition of each of said newspapers having the largest circulation in said city. Such publication shall be made not more than 20 nor less than five days before the submission of such proposition or ordinance to vote as aforesaid. Any question submitted by petition as provided under this section cannot be resubmitted to referendum by petition within a three-year period from the date of the election at which said question was first voted on. 
(Session Laws 1969, ch. 313, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 84. - Referendum. 
If, after the passage of any ordinance by the council and before the same goes into effect a petition be submitted as herein provided signed by registered voters of the city equal to the number prescribed herein to be signed to a petition requesting the submission of a proposed ordinance as specified in section 83 hereof protesting against a passage of such ordinance, the operation of such ordinance shall thereupon be suspended and it shall be the duty of the council to again consider such ordinance and if the same is not entirely repealed at the next regular meeting of the council following the submission of such petition the council shall submit to the voters the question of the repeal of such ordinance at an election to be held for that purpose in the manner and under the conditions in this article provided for reference to voters of the question of the adoption of an ordinance. The signatures, residence, addresses, verifications, filings, authentications, inspections, certifications, amendments and submission of such petition shall be the same as provided in this article for petitions for the removal of officers. If, upon such election the majority of the votes cast shall be in favor of such ordinance the same shall upon the result of such election being officially declared thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the city, otherwise such ordinance shall be deemed not an ordinance of the city.  
Sec. 85. - Recall—Generally. 
The holder of any elective office under the city Charter may be removed at any time by the voters qualified to vote for a successor of such incumbent. The procedure to effect the removal of an incumbent of the elective office shall be as follows: 
A petition, signed by 15 percent of the number of registered voters of the City of Asheville, demanding an election of a successor of the person sought to be removed, shall be filed with the chairman of the city board of elections, and the petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence, giving the street and number. One of the signers of each paper shall make oath before an officer competent to administer oaths that the statements thereon made are true, as he believes and that each signature to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Within ten days from the date of filing such petition the city board of elections shall examine and from the registration books used at the next preceding municipal election held in the city ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. Such registration books shall for that purpose be made available to the city board of elections by the officer or board in whose custody they may be. The chairman of the board of elections shall attach to said petition his certificate, showing the result of such examination as determined by the board of elections. If by such certificate the petition is shown to be insufficient it may be amended within ten days from the date of such certificate. The board of elections shall within ten days after such amendment make a like examination of the amended petition and if the certificate of the chairman of the board of elections which shall be made thereafter in accordance with the decision of the board of elections on the matter shall show the petition to be insufficient, such petition shall be returned to the person filing the same without prejudice to the filing of a new petition to the same effect. If the petition shall be deemed sufficient by the board of elections, the chairman of said board shall forthwith so certify and shall submit the petition to the council at its next regular meeting. If the petition shall be found to be sufficient the council shall order and fix a date for holding an election for the election of a successor to the elective officer sought to be removed. In the event a primary election is held in connection with the election of members of the council under the provisions of this Charter or any amendment thereto, then in effect, then the date of such primary or in the event none is to be held, the date of such election shall be fixed not less than 15 or more than 30 days from the date of the certificate of the chairman of the board of elections to the council that a sufficient petition is filed. A petition filed as aforesaid may demand the election of a successor to more than one elective officer of the city. An officer elected at a recall election as aforesaid, shall hold office for the unexpired term of the officer whom he succeeds. 
(Session Laws 1969, ch. 313, § 4)  
Sec. 86. - Same—Officer sought to be removed as candidate to succeed himself. 
Any elective officer sought to be removed as aforesaid shall be eligible to succeed himself unless ineligible for some other reason contained in this Charter or under the general law of the state and each such elective officer so sought to be removed shall, unless within three days after the ordering of an election or primary as aforesaid, he files with the chairman of the board of elections a written refusal to be candidate to succeed himself, be considered a candidate to succeed himself and shall be treated as such in the same manner as if he had become a candidate for such office in the manner provided in this Charter.  
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 86A, 87, 88, 89, 91, 93 and 94 of ch. 121 of Private Laws 1931 were repealed by Sessions Laws 1993, ch. 228, §§ 2, 3(1), 3(3), 4, 5(1), 6(1), 7 and 8. 
Code reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Secs. 86A—89. - Reserved.  
Sec. 90. - Reenactment of provisions relative to actions and claims against city. 
Sections 243 to 246, both inclusive, of chapter 16 of the Private Laws of 1923, relating to actions and claims against the city and all acts amendatory thereof, and/or relating to the same subject matter insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with any other provision of this act [Charter] shall be and remain in full force and are hereby reenacted, except that wherever the words "board of commissioners" are used, they shall be changed to read "council" and wherever the words "secretary-treasurer" are used, they shall be changed to read "treasurer."  
Sec. 91. - Reserved.  
Sec. 92. - Reenactment of provisions relative to taxation. 
Sections 385 to 391, both inclusive and section 414 of chapter 16 of the Private Laws of 1923, relating to taxation for municipal purposes and all acts amendatory of said sections or any of them or relating to the same subject matter insofar as applicable and where not inconsistent with the other provisions of this chapter [Charter] shall be and remain in full force and are hereby reenacted, except that wherever the words "board of commissioners" are used they shall be changed to read "council" and wherever the word "mayor" or words "mayor commissioner" are used, the same shall be changed to read "city manager" and where the words "secretary-treasurer" are used the same shall be changed to read "city manager." 
Editor's note— Sections 388 and 414 of chapter 16, Private Laws 1923, are included in the Related Laws as sections 3 and 4. The other sections mentioned in section 92 above have been omitted as either obsolete or superseded by subsequent statutes.  
Secs. 93, 94. - Reserved.  
Sec. 95. - Continuation of ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Except as inconsistent with the provisions of this act [Charter], all ordinances of the City of Asheville now in full force and effect shall remain in full force and effect as ordinances of such city until repealed by the council or in some manner authorized by this act [Charter] and all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the government of the city now in force and effect shall remain in full force and effect unless and until repealed by the council or superseded in whole or in part by rules and regulations made by the council or by the city manager as in this act [Charter] provided.  
Sec. 96. - Continuation of offices. 
All persons holding administrative offices at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made in accordance with this Charter for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such offices. The powers conferred, the duties imposed upon any officer, commission, board or department of the city by law, shall if such office, commission, board or department be abolished by this Charter be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office or department designated by the council unless otherwise provided herein.  
Sec. 97. - Oath of officers. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will obey the Constitution and laws of the United States and the Constitution and laws of North Carolina, and that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the Charter of the City of Asheville and the ordinances of the City of Asheville and faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ___________."  
Sec. 98. - Bond of officers. 
The city manager, the director of the department of finance and all employees of the city whose duties require them to handle any funds of the city and such other officers and employees of the city as the council may by resolution determine shall give bonds for the faithful performance of their duties and the council by resolution shall require the giving and maintenance of all such bonds in amounts adequate to protect the city from loss. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city.  
Sec. 99. - Repealer. 
All acts and parts of acts in conflict with this act [Charter] be and the same are hereby repealed and the following acts, whether in conflict with the present act or not, are hereby repealed: 
(a)  Chapter 16 of the Private Laws of 1923 except as brought forward and reenacted in article 13 hereof. 
Chapter 138 of the Private Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 120 of the Private Laws of 1923 except such portions as may have been brought forward and reenacted in article 13 hereof. 
Chapter 26 of the Private Laws of 1925. 
Chapter 139 of the Private Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 125 of the Private Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 101 of the Private Laws of 1927, but all of the powers and duties conferred or imposed by this act [Charter] on the park commission therein created shall be possessed and performed by the council or by such administrative officer or department of the city as the council may by resolution direct. 
Chapter 136 of the Private Laws of 1923. 
Chapter 24 of the Private Laws, Extra Session of 1924. 
Chapter 61 of the Private Laws of the Extra Session of 1924. 
Chapter 101 of the Private Laws of 1925. 
Chapter 123 of the Private Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 181 of the Private Laws of 1925. 
Chapter 58 of the Private Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 413 of the Public-Local Laws of 1927. 
Chapter 141 of the Public Laws of 1929. 
(b)  The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
Section 1.(a) The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Sections 65 through 82-C of the Charter of the City of Asheville, being Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Section 2 of Chapter 143, Private Laws of 1931; 
(3)  Chapter 223, Private Laws of 1933; 
(4)  Chapters 30 and 135, Private Laws of 1935; 
(5)  Chapter 132, Public-Local Laws of 1937; 
(6)  Chapter 240, Public-Local Laws of 1939; and 
(7)  Chapters 114 and 790, Session Laws of 1955. 
(b) Nothing in this section affects the provisions of Ordinance No. 1501 of the City of Asheville, adopted May 19, 1985, under Part 4 of Article 5 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, concerning the manner of election of the mayor. The mayor shall continue to be elected separately by the qualified voters of the City of Asheville. 
Sec. 2. Section 86 of Article XIII of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931 (also known as Section 86A of that act), is repealed. 
Sec. 3. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Section 87 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Sections 181, 181A, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 195, 197, 198, 200, and 201 of Chapter 16, Private Laws of 1923; and 
(3)  Section 3 of Chapter 791, Session Laws of 1955. 
Sec. 4. Section 88 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931, is repealed. 
Sec. 5. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Section 89 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Sections 239, 240, 241, and 242 of Chapter 16, Private Laws of 1923; and 
(3)  Chapter 23, Private Laws of 1925. 
Sec. 6. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Section 91 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Sections 285 through 384 of Chapter 16, Private Laws of 1923; 
(3)  Sections 34, 35, and 36 of Chapter 120, Private Laws of 1923; 
(4)  Section 1 of Chapter 104, Private Laws of 1927; 
(5)  Section 9 of Chapter 123, Private Laws of 1927; and 
(6)  Chapter 58, Private Laws of 1927. 
Sec. 7. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Section 93 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Chapter 169 of Public-Local Laws, Extra Session of 1921, as to the City of Asheville only; and 
(3)  Chapter 17, Public-Local Laws of 1923, as to the City of Asheville only. 
Sec. 8. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Section 94 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931; 
(2)  Chapter 149, Session Laws of 1943; 
(3)  Chapter 1101, Session Laws of 1959; and 
(4)  Chapter 329, Session Laws of 1969. 
Sec. 9. The following laws are repealed: 
(1)  Chapters 174 and 184, Private Laws of 1931; and 
(2)  Chapter 24, Session Laws of 1981. 
Sec. 10. Sections 243 and 244 of Chapter 16, Private laws of 1923, are repealed. 
Sec. 11. The fourth sentence of Section 14 of Chapter 121, Private Laws of 1931, as amended by Section VII of Ordinance No. 1501 of the City of Asheville, adopted March 19, 1985, under Part 4 of Article 5 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, is repealed. 
Sec. 12. Nothing in this act revives any act repealed by any act repealed by this act. 
Sec. 13. This act is effective upon ratification, except that Section 11 of this act becomes effective with respect to ordinances voted on for the first time after the date of ratification of this act. 
(Session Laws 1993, ch. 228, §§ 1—13)  
Sec. 100. - Prior Charter continued. 
All provisions of the present Charter of the City of Asheville and the acts amendatory thereof not in conflict with this act [Charter] are continued in full force and effect. 
Editor's note— The "present charter" referred to above was ch. 16, Private Laws 1923, which was specifically repealed, with certain exceptions, by section 99. The provisions of ch. 16 which were excepted from the repeal and reenacted by this Charter are included in the Related Laws, as indicated by notes following the reenacting sections. All other provisions of ch. 16 have been omitted.  
Sec. 101. - Severability of Charter. 
If any provisions of this Charter are held unconstitutional, the remainder shall stand.  
Sec. 101A. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to N.C. Gen Stat. sec. 160A-64, at the request of the city, § 101A, which pertained to salaries, has been deleted.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of any amendments of the basic Charter being Private Laws of 1931, Chapter 121 as set out in Subpart A of Part I. 
PRIVATE LAWS 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section 
this Charter 
1931 	143 	3 	101A 
	186 	3 	101A 
 
SESSION LAWS 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section 
this Charter 
1955 	791 	1 	26 
1969 	313 	1—3 	83 
		4 	85 
1981 	27 	1, 2 	26, 27 
		4 	38A 
1985 	228 	1 	10 
1993 	228 	1—11 	99(b) 
2018 	123 	1(a) 	6 
 
Ordinance 
Number 	 Date 	Section 	  Section 
this Charter 
1501 	 3-19-85 	2—4 	6—8 
		5 	10 
		6 	12 
		7 	14 
2139 	 9-20-94 		Art. XI(note) 
2155 	11-15-94 		Art. XI(note) 
2385 	 6-24-97 	1 	6 
4774 	10-22-19 	1—4 	6 
4775 	10-22-19 	1 	6 
  
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This subpart consists of certain acts relating to the city, but not enacted as specific amendments or additions to the Charter. This is not a complete compilation of all such acts, but only of those which were deemed to be of such general interest and importance as to warrant inclusion herein. Also included herein, as indicated by appropriate notes, are those sections of the former Charter (Private Laws 1923, ch. 16) which were specifically reenacted by the present Charter. 
The article headings and section numbers and catchlines were added by the editor and sections of the acts containing formal provisions, such as repealing clauses and effective dates, have been omitted. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing at the end thereof in parentheses. Formal citations should be to the original act, and not to this compilation. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Charter reference— City council generally, §§ 6—18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1. - Terms of councilmen. 
The mayor and all members of the city council shall be elected for terms as established in Section 6 of the City Charter, and shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Session Laws 1963, ch. 861, § 1; Session Laws 1969, ch. 165, § 2; Ord. No. 1501, § 11, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 2385, § 2, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 2. - Joint performance of city-county administrative functions. 
(a)  The governing body of Buncombe County and the governing body of the City of Asheville are authorized and empowered, whenever in their judgment they deem it for the best interests of said county and city, to provide by written agreement for the joint performance of similar administrative duties or functions of said county and city by a consolidation of the agencies of said city and said county by which such administrative functions are at the time of making such agreement being performed and their subsequent joint operations as one agency at joint expense or by the performance of such administrative functions for the benefit of both said city and county by one of such agencies then existing at joint expense. 
(b)  The administrative functions which may be so carried on by agreements are any and/or all of those now being performed by the following departments, agents or agencies of the city and county, respectively: the bookkeeping and auditing department, the engineering department, the welfare department, the purchasing agent, the jails, the garages and such other functions as said governing bodies from time to time decide may be economically and efficiently performed as aforesaid. 
(c)  Any and all powers and authority now or hereafter vested in Buncombe County or any agency thereof and/or in the City of Asheville or any agency thereof may and shall in the event of the consolidation of any such agencies as aforesaid be exercised and performed by such resulting agency to the same extent that such powers and authority may be exercised by the respective agencies before such consolidation. 
(d)  No such agreement shall be made by the governing body of the county or city for a period of more than one year from the date thereof, but such agreement may be renewed from year to year. 
(Public-Local Laws 1931, ch. 267, §§ 1—4) 
Charter reference— Joint performance of administrative functions, § 26.  
Sec. 3. - Authority to levy and collect privilege taxes. 
In addition to the other subjects listed for taxation in said city, the council thereof may levy, and cause to be laid, taxes on all trades, occupations, business and amusements, by whatsoever name called, the amount of which, when laid, shall be collected by the city manager of said city immediately, and if the same be not paid on demand they may be recovered by suit or by seizure and sale of the articles on which they were severally imposed or of any other property of the owner in said County of Buncombe, in the same manner as personal property is sold for taxes. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, § 414) 
Editor's note— This section and § 4 are derived from sections of the former Charter which were reenacted by § 92 of the present Charter. In accord with § 92, the term "board of commissioners" has been changed to "council" and the term "mayor-commissioner" has been changed to "city manager."  
Sec. 4. - Business licenses generally. 
Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in any business on which a tax or special license tax is levied, he, they, or it shall apply to the council for a license to carry on such business, and said council may grant such license or may, for good cause connected with the character of the applicant, or for any other good cause in the discretion of said council, deny a license to any such applicant, and the city manager shall not issue any such license until such applicant has received favorable action by said council authorizing the issue of said license. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, § 388) 
Note— See editor's note following § 3.  
Sec. 5. - Acquisition of land for airport purposes. 
(a)  The City of Asheville, a municipal corporation in Buncombe County, is hereby authorized to exercise the power of eminent domain in the acquisition of any land for the purpose of constructing and improving airports and landing fields for the use of airplanes and other aircraft and constructing improvements thereon, within or without or partly within and partly without the limits of said city, in either Buncombe County or Henderson County or both said counties, and within or partly within the limits of any other municipality in either of said counties with the consent of such municipality, and said City of Asheville is hereby vested with all the power of eminent domain as set forth and provided by chapter 40 of the General Statutes of North Carolina for the purpose of acquiring any such land by condemnation; provided, however, that the powers herein granted shall not be subject to the restrictions contained in section 40-10 of said chapter 40. Before any proceedings for condemnation hereunder shall be instituted, the city council of said City of Asheville shall adopt an ordinance describing in general terms the lands so to be acquired and ordering that proceedings be had to condemn the same as provided by law. For the purpose of making a survey, said City of Asheville may enter upon the lands described and proposed to be acquired in such ordinance provided that such survey shall be conducted in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the owners of such lands. 
(b)  Any proceeding pursuant hereto to condemn land shall be brought in the county where the land is situated, and the court shall allow reasonable attorneys' fees to be recovered by the landowner as a part of the cost of the proceeding. 
(c)  The powers granted by this act [section] are in addition to and not in substitution for existing powers of the City of Asheville. 
(Session Laws 1957, ch. 806, §§ 1, 1A, 2) 
Editor's note— Chapter 40 of the General Statutes of North Carolina was repealed by Session Laws 1981, ch. 919, § 1, effective January 1, 1982. Present provisions relating to eminent domain are contained in Chapter 40A. 
Charter reference— General authority of city to acquire real property, § 1.  
Sec. 6. - Annexation of Asheville Airport to the City of Asheville. 
(a)  The following described property, known as the Asheville Airport, is hereby annexed to the City of Asheville and the territory and its citizens and property shall be subject to all debts, laws, ordinances and regulations in force in the City of Asheville and shall be entitled to the same privileges and benefits as other parts of the municipality. The territory annexed shall be liable for taxes for the fiscal year as provided in G.S. 160A-49(f): 
 Beginning at a point in the right-of-way of Interstate 26, thence S 16-14 E for 195.30 feet, thence S 16-42 E for 491.90 feet, thence S 19-31 E for 138.00 feet, thence S 28-03 E for 85.50 feet, thence S 37-33 E for 137.90 feet, thence S 40-36 E for 41.60 feet, thence S 18-31 W for 117.80 feet, thence S 79-24 E for 245.50 feet, thence S 34-08 W for 385.00 feet, thence S 28-48 W for 154.00 feet, thence S 20-35 W for 92.56 feet, thence S 89-30 E for 10.00 feet, thence S 11-43-29 W for 230.85 feet, thence S 89-30 E for 349.00 feet, thence S 03-50 W for 188.20 feet, thence S 86-24 E for 703.60 feet, thence S 13-01 E for 100.00 feet, thence S 30-07 E for 562.40 feet, thence S 14-54 E for 584.80 feet, thence S 13-49 E for 331.00 feet, thence S 72-50 W for 910.65 feet, thence S 48-51 W for 51.00 feet, thence S 41-47 W for 65.00 feet, thence S 31-44 W for 50.00 feet, thence S 01-42 W for 50.00 feet, thence S 02-29 E for 650.00 feet, thence N 84-52 E for 1301.80 feet, thence S 13-35 E for 328.00 feet, thence S 09-48 W for 648.10 feet, thence S 12-25 E for 400.90 feet, thence S 44-33 E for 183.54 feet, thence S 04-14 W for 950.00 feet, thence N 86-02 W for 1140.00 feet, thence S 70-18 W for 515.60 feet, thence S 19-42 E for 2250.00 feet, thence S 70-18 W for 150.00 feet, thence N 19-42 W for 2250.00 feet, thence S 70-18 W for 802.00 feet, thence N 32-26 W for 694.40 feet, thence N 86-02 W for 1196.17 feet, thence N 52-24 W for 668.60 feet, thence N 50-00 W for 420.00 feet, thence N 40-50 E for 1331.00 feet, thence N 49-13 W for 347.14 feet, thence N 22-33 E for 70.00 feet, thence N 33-27 E for 900.00 feet, thence N 55-54 E for 61.50 feet, thence N 77-51 E for 124.10 feet, thence S 84-08 E for 100.00 feet, thence N 19-42 W for 1990.00 feet, thence N 19-42 W for 1369.40 feet, thence N 88-10 W for 798.05 feet, thence N 04-40 E for 314.00 feet, thence N 04-00 E for 700.00 feet, thence N 03-30 E for 816.75 feet, thence N 03-30 E for 800.25 feet, thence N 03-00 E for 990.00 feet, thence S 87-00 E for 1122.00 feet, thence S 03-00 W for 825.00 feet, thence S 86-30 E for 1100.00 feet, thence S 21-12 E for 335.00 feet, thence S 26-25 E for 1165.00 feet, thence S 23-49 E for 176.50 feet, thence S 24-27 E for 643.80 feet, thence N 32-34-15 W for 266.80 feet to the point of beginning and containing 814 acres. 
 Beginning at a point in the right-of-way of Airport Road (S.R. 3526), thence S 88-00 E for 286.00 feet, thence S 06-00 W for 113.06 feet, thence N 88-00 W for 253.90 feet, thence N 10-07 W for 115.35 feet to the point of beginning and containing 0.70 acres. 
 Beginning at a point in the right-of-way of Interstate 26, thence N 51-10 W for 426.90 feet, thence N 43-12 W for 191.10 feet, thence N 37-10 W for 117.00 feet, thence N 27-34 W for 196.40 feet, thence N 24-14 W for 244.00 feet, thence S 85-03 E for 880.40 feet, thence S 05-18 W for 737.80 feet, thence S 49-28 W for 99.70 feet, thence N 20-45-08 E for 22.92 feet to the point of beginning and containing 10.69 acres and being recorded in the Buncombe County Register of Deeds Office in Deed Book 815, page 573; Deed Book 791, page 497 and Deed Book 790, page 30. 
(b)  The boundaries set forth in section 1 [subsection (a)] of this act [section] shall not be deemed a part of the city's corporate limits for the purposes of extraterritorial land use regulation pursuant to G.S. 160A-360 or abatement of nuisances pursuant to G.S. 160A-193, or annexation pursuant to part 3 of article 4A of chapter 160A of the General Statutes [G.S. 160A-45]. This exception shall not apply to lands acquired for airport purposes by the City of Asheville. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 256, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 7. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8. - Amendment of General Statutes relative to sale, lease, etc., of parks and recreation property. 
(a)  General Statutes of North Carolina, section 160A-353 [G.S. 160A-353], is amended by adding a new subdivision [subsection] to read: 
"(4a) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, by action of the governing board, to discontinue the operation of or close parks, playgrounds, recreational centers and other recreational programs and facilities, and dispose of such facilities and property by gift, grant, sale, lease or by any other lawful method." 
(b)  This act [section] applies only to the City of Asheville. 
(Session Laws 1981, ch. 23, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 9. - Amendment of General Statutes relative to sale or lease of property to further the purposes of urban development action grants. 
(a)  General Statutes of North Carolina, section 160A-457 [G.S. 160A-457], as the same appears in the 1977 Cumulative Supplement to Volume 3D, is amended by deleting the word "and" at the end of the subdivision [subsection] (2) and adding the following new subsections at the end to read as follows: 
"(4) To enter into contracts or agreements with any person, association or corporation to undertake and carry out specified activities in furtherance of the purposes of urban development action grants authorized by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-128). Such contracts may be negotiated and entered into prior to the actual acquisition or redevelopment of any real property obtained for the purposes authorized by this part, and such contracts shall be binding legal commitments for accomplishing the purposes set forth therein; and 
(5)  In addition to the powers granted in subsection (3) above, to convey or lease at a private transaction to any person, firm, corporation, or governmental unit particular properties within a redevelopment area where it finds the proposed redeveloper is the only known available, qualified and willing redeveloper for the contemplated use and makes one or more of the following findings, which said findings shall be verified and approved by the governing body of the municipality after a public hearing, notice of which shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper published in the municipality and by posting such notice at four public places in the municipality, said notice to be published the first time, or posted, not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for said hearing: 
(a)  That the proposed use or redevelopment is necessary in order to facilitate the relocation of persons or firms displaced by an urban development action grant project or other governmental action; 
(b)  That the proposed use or redevelopment is reasonably necessary in order to assure development which will have the desired beneficial effect upon neighboring property, the project area, and the community as a whole, as contemplated by the redevelopment plan; 
(c)  That the proposed use or redevelopment will assure that the property will not remain unused for an unduly long period and will result in a return to the local ad valorem tax rolls at a substantially earlier date than uses or redevelopments obtainable by other methods of disposition. 
Such conveyance or lease shall be for such consideration as may be agreed upon by the city and the redeveloper and approved by the governing body of the municipality, which shall not be less than the fair, actual value of the property as determined by the governing body of the municipality, based on competent evidence. All conveyances made under the authority of this subsection shall contain restrictive covenants limiting the use of the property so conveyed to the designated purpose for which the conveyance is made, provided, that the disposition of property at private sale or lease as authorized in subsection (5) shall be expressly limited to property used in connection with urban development action grants and for no other purpose under this part." 
(b)  If any provision of this act [section] is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the act [section]. 
(c)  This act [section] shall apply only to the City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 81, §§ 1—3; Session Laws 1981, ch. 632, § 1)  
Sec. 10. - Land sales by Asheville City Council and Asheville Housing Authority. 
(a)  In addition to the authority granted by article 12 of chapter 160A of the General Statutes [G.S. 160A-265 et seq.], the City of Asheville is authorized to dispose of real property in accordance with provisions of subsections (b) or (c) of this act [section] by sale or lease. All references hereafter in this act [section] or uses of the words "convey," "sale," "conveyances," "conveyance," "sold," or "sell" shall be deemed to read and shall be defined as "convey or lease," "sale or lease," "conveyances or leases," "conveyance or lease," "sold or leased," or "sell or lease," as the same is applicable thereto. 
(b)  The city council may convey at private sale to a prospective developer particular properties in excess of $5,000.00 in valuation where it finds that the proposed developer is the only known available, qualified and willing developer for the contemplated use of the property which may have been specified or designated by council, provided that one or more of the following findings are made and verified after a public hearing, notice of which shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper published in the municipality, said notice to be published the first time not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for said hearing: 
(1)  That the proposed use or development is reasonably necessary in order to ensure development which will have the desired beneficial effect upon neighboring property, the project area, and the community as a whole; 
(2)  That the proposed use or development will ensure that the property will not remain unused for an unduly long period and will result in a return to the local ad valorem tax rolls at a substantially greater assessed valuation and at an earlier date than uses or redevelopment obtained by other methods of disposition. 
Conveyances made in this manner shall be for such consideration and conditions as may be agreed upon by the council and the developer which shall not be less than the fair, actual value of the property, as determined by the council, based on competent evidence. 
(c)  (1) 
After a public hearing advertised in accordance with the provisions of General Statutes of North Carolina, section 160A-364 [G.S. 160A-364], the city council may determine that in the best interest of the municipality certain property should be developed for one purpose only, said purpose and terms of sale or conveyance being designated by city council. The city council shall advertise such property and invite redevelopment proposals by public notice, by publication once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality, and shall make available all pertinent information to any person interested in undertaking a purchase of such property and the redevelopment of such property or any part thereof. Any property sold in accordance with this subsection shall be sold by negotiated offer, advertisement, and upset bid for cash at a price not less than the fair market value thereof as fixed by the city council. All conveyances made under the authority of this subsection shall contain restrictive covenants limiting the use of property conveyed to the designated purpose for which the conveyance is made. 
(2)  In addition to the provisions of the preceding paragraph the city council may reject the highest responsible bid and accept a lesser bid where it makes the following specific findings: The general public welfare and proper development of the community will be better served by the bid which was accepted than by the higher bid or bids which were rejected, for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The proposed use or development of the land under the successful bid will result in an assessed valuation for ad valorem taxation greater than that of the use or uses proposed by the higher bidders; 
b.  The proposed use or development of the land under the successful bid will have a substantially greater beneficial effect upon neighboring property, the project area, and the community as a whole than the use or uses proposed by the higher bidder and will tend to induce greater investment in development of other property in the area. 
(d)  The Asheville Housing Authority shall be authorized to sell or otherwise dispose of property within redevelopment areas designated by the city council of the City of Asheville under the provisions and conditions set forth in subsections (b) or (c) herein, provided that final approval of the sale and/or conveyance is approved by the city council of the City of Asheville. 
(e)  This act [section] shall apply only to the City of Asheville. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 317, §§ 1—5; Session Laws 1981, ch. 631, § 1)  
Sec. 11. - Supplying water outside city limits—Generally. 
(a)  Generally. The City of Asheville, through its governing body, is authorized and empowered to enter into a contract or contracts with Buncombe County and with municipal corporations in Buncombe County, North Carolina, including water districts and water and sewer districts and with persons, firms and private corporations of said county for the sale and distribution for consumption in said county, outside of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville and either directly to the consumer or for resale to the consumer, of water from the municipal water supply of said city; any such contract to be for such period of time and on such terms and conditions as the contracting parties may agree; provided that the provisions of this act [section] shall not be construed to limit or affect the power of the City of Asheville as now or hereafter conferred by general law to sell and dispose of water outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The City of Asheville, through its governing body, is authorized and empowered to enter into a contract or contracts with Buncombe County and with municipal corporations in Buncombe County, North Carolina, including water districts and water and sewer districts and with persons, firms and private corporations of said county for the construction, replacement, extension and maintenance of water lines in said county outside of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, which said city is using or proposes to use for the sale and distribution of water from its municipal water supply; any such contract to be for such period of time and on such terms and conditions as the contracting parties may agree. 
At the time of the execution of any contract or thereafter, the City of Asheville is authorized and empowered to enter into a contract with the owner of any sewer system located in Buncombe County, North Carolina, outside of the City of Asheville, using or proposing to use water sold by the City of Asheville, under the terms of such contract, for the construction, replacement, extension or maintenance of such sewer system. 
(c)  The commissioners of Buncombe County, North Carolina, as the trustees of any water district or water and sewer district in said county, are fully authorized and empowered to contract with the City of Asheville for the sale and distribution of water by said city in any such water district or water and sewer district through the use of the water distribution system of any such district or otherwise; such sale of water to be for such period of time and on such terms and conditions as the parties may agree. 
(d)  The commissioners of Buncombe County, North Carolina, are authorized to enter into a contract or contracts with the City of Asheville for the sale through a water distribution line or lines belonging to said county, either directly to consumers or for resale to consumers, of water from the water supply of the City of Asheville; any such contract to be for such length of time and on such terms and conditions as the parties may agree. 
(e)  The commissioners of Buncombe County, North Carolina, are authorized and empowered to enter into a contract or contracts with the City of Asheville for the construction, replacement, extension or maintenance of any water or sewer distribution system or systems, line or lines in Buncombe County, outside of the City of Asheville, belonging to Buncombe County or belonging to any water district or water and sewer district in the county of which said commissioners constitute the trustees, or with respect to which said commissioners as such, or as trustees of any such district, are charged with any duties of maintenance; any such contract to be for such period of time and on such terms as the parties may agree. 
(Session Laws 1951, ch. 618, §§ 1—5)  
Sec. 12. - Same—Limitation on rates; shutting off service; waste of water, etc. 
(a)  From and after the passage of this act it shall be unlawful for the City of Asheville, or any of the governing authorities, agents, or employees thereof, to charge, exact, or collect from any resident of Buncombe County, whose property is now connected or may hereafter be connected with the main of any water district which has paid or issued bonds for the payment of the expense of laying such main, a rate for water consumed higher than that charged by the City of Asheville to persons residing within the corporate limits of said city. 
(b)  The City of Asheville is hereby specifically authorized and empowered, through its officers, agents and employees, to cause any user of water who shall fail to pay promptly his water rent for any month to be cut off, and his right to further use of water from the city system to be discontinued until payment of any water rent arrearages. 
(c)  It is the purpose and intent of this act [section] to declare that persons residing outside of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville shall be entitled to the use of Asheville surplus water only, and the governing body of the City of Asheville is authorized and empowered to discontinue the supply of water to any districts, or persons, out of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville at any time that there may be a drought or other emergency, or at any time the governing body of the City of Asheville may deem that the city has use for all of its water supply. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the county commissioners of Buncombe County and/or the trustees of the different water districts operating outside of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, in Buncombe County, to maintain the water lines in proper repair in order that there may not be a waste of water by leakage. 
(e)  The city may use up to five percent (5%) of utility revenues for street and sidewalk improvements associated with waterline improvements. 
(Public-Local Laws 1933, ch. 399, §§ 1—4; Session Law 2009-114 (702 (H.B.)), § 1)  
Sec. 12.1. - Water rates in Buncombe County—Sullivan Act II. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of this act, it shall be unlawful for the City of Asheville, or any of the governing authorities, agents, or employees thereof, to charge, exact, or collect from any water consumer in Buncombe County currently or hereafter connected to the waterlines currently maintained by the Asheville/Buncombe Water Authority, and replacements, extensions, and additions thereto a rate for water consumed higher than the rate charged for the same classification of water consumer residing or located within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. Classification of water consumer as referred to herein means the type of facility to which the water is provided (e.g., single-family residence, multiple-family residence, retail, commercial, industrial) without regard to geographic location within Buncombe County. 
(b)  The City of Asheville may, through its officers, agents, and employees, cause any user of water who shall fail to pay promptly his water rent for any month to be cut off and his right to further use of water from the city system to be discontinued until payment of any water rent arrearages, all consistent with G.S. 160A-314(b). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners of Buncombe County and/or the trustees of the different water districts operating outside of the corporate limits of the City of Asheville in Buncombe County to maintain the waterlines owned by the County of Buncombe and such water districts in proper repair in order that there may not be a waste of water by leakage. 
(Session Law 2005-140 (1065 (H.B.)), §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 12.2. - Operation of public enterprises by the city—Sullivan Act III. 
1.  [G.S.] 160A-312. Authority to operate public enterprises. 
(a)  A city shall have authority to acquire, construct, establish, enlarge, improve, maintain, own, operate, and contract for the operation of any or all of the public enterprises as defined in this Article to furnish services to the city and its citizens and other areas and their citizens located outside the corporate limits of the city. Subject to Part 2 of this Article, a city may acquire, construct, establish, enlarge, improve, maintain, own, and operate any public enterprise outside its corporate limits, within reasonable limitations. 
(b)  A city shall have full authority to protect and regulate any public enterprise system belonging to or operated by it by adequate and reasonable rules. The rules shall be adopted by ordinance, and shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  The rules shall apply equally to the public enterprise system both within and outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The rules may not apply differing treatment within and outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  The rules shall make access to public enterprise services available to the city and its citizens and other areas and their citizens located outside the corporate limits of the city equally. 
(4)  The rules may prioritize the continuation of the provision of services based on availability of excess capacity to provide the service. 
(5)  The rules may be enforced with the remedies available under any provision of law. 
(c)  A city may operate that part of a gas system involving the purchase and/or lease of natural gas fields, natural gas reserves and natural gas supplies and the surveying, drilling or any other activities related to the exploration for natural gas, in a partnership or joint venture arrangement with natural gas utilities and private enterprise. 
(d)  A city shall account for a public enterprise in a separate fund and may not transfer any money from that fund to another except for a capital project fund established for the construction or replacement of assets for that public enterprise. Obligations of the public enterprise may be paid out of the separate fund. Obligations shall not include any other fund or line item in the city's budget." 
2.  G.S. 160A-31(a): 
"(a) The governing board of any municipality may annex by ordinance any area contiguous to its boundaries upon presentation to the governing board of a petition signed by the owners of all the real property located within such area. The petition shall be signed by each owner of real property in the area and shall contain the address of each such owner and a statement that the owner's petition for annexation is not based upon any representation by the municipality that a public enterprise service available outside the corporate limits of that municipality would be withheld from the owner's property without the petition for annexation." 
3.  G.S. 160A-58.1(c): 
"(c) The petition shall contain the names, addresses, and signatures of all owners of real property within the proposed satellite corporate limits (except owners not required to sign by subsection (a)), shall describe the area proposed for annexation by metes and bounds, and shall have attached thereto a map showing the area proposed for annexation with relation to the primary corporate limits of the annexing city. The petition shall also contain a statement from the owner that the owner's petition for annexation is not based upon any representation by the municipality that a public enterprise service available outside the corporate limits of that municipality would be withheld from the owner's property without the petition for annexation. When there is any substantial question as to whether the area may be closer to another city than to the annexing city, the map shall also show the area proposed for annexation with relation to the primary corporate limits of the other city. The city council may prescribe the form of the petition. 
(Session Law 2005-139 (1064 (H.B.)), §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 13. - Regulation of taxicab, bus, etc., fares. 
The board of aldermen, the city commissioners, the city council or any other governing body of the City of Asheville, Buncombe County, in the State of North Carolina, shall be permitted and have the authority and is hereby granted the authority to regulate the fares, charges or rates which shall be charged for the carrying of passengers for hire by jitney buses, taxicabs or other similar motor vehicles, operating for passenger hire, while such vehicles are operated on the streets and within the corporate limits of said city; and provided, further, that such motor vehicles are not otherwise regulated by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the North Carolina Public Utilities Commission. 
(Public and Private Laws 1939, ch. 149, § 1)  
Secs. 14., 15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 14 and 15 which derived from Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, §§ 243 and 244, relating to demand and notice as prerequisites to actions for damages against the city were repealed by Session Laws 1993, ch. 228, § 10.  
Sec. 16. - Debts of city to be discharged by taxation; city not liable to execution. 
All debts and liabilities of said city heretofore or hereafter contracted or incurred, shall be paid and discharged alone by taxation upon subjects properly taxable by it to the extent allowed by law, and no such debt or liability shall be subject to be levied upon or collected by execution against said city or any property, real or personal, held by it, and no execution therefor shall issue against said city on any judgment obtained thereon. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, § 245) 
Note— See editor's note following § 14.  
Sec. 17. - Officers and employees not to purchase claims, etc., against city. 
It shall be unlawful for any officer, officers, appointee or appointees, employee or employees of said city to speculate in or purchase at a discount any claim, paper, or evidence of indebtedness, whether allowed or disallowed, of said city or of the County of Buncombe. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person and to every person employed in any capacity by said city, and shall hold good throughout the entire period of such employment, and for six months after the termination thereof, and any violation of this section shall cause the forfeiture of every such claim, paper and evidence of indebtedness which shall have been so speculated in or purchased at a discount, and the payment thereof by said city and by said county. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, § 246) 
Note— See editor's note following § 14.  
Sec. 18. - Expenditure of funds for local development. 
(a)  The provisions of chapter 158 of the General Statutes of North Carolina [G.S. ch. 158] are hereby made applicable to the City of Asheville, the County of Buncombe and all municipalities therein. The City of Asheville, the County of Buncombe and all municipalities therein, shall not appropriate or expend any public funds for economic and local development or for the advancement and development of the resources of said county and municipality except as authorized in chapter 158 of the General Statutes [G.S. ch. 158] or other general laws of the state. 
(b)  Chapter 34, Private Laws of 1909; chapter 605 Public-Local and Private Laws 1919; chapter 930, Session Laws of 1953; chapter 607, Session Laws of 1957; chapter 1043, Session Laws of 1959; chapter 94, Session Laws of 1967; chapter 436, Session Laws of 1969, are hereby repealed, and all other private, local and special laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act [section] are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  This act [section] shall be effective July 1, 1973. 
(Session Laws 1973, ch. 7, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 19. - Filing of housing code notices or orders in the notice of lis pendens. 
(a)  G.S. 160A-443 is amended by adding a new subdivision to read: 
"(7) That the complaint and notice issued pursuant to subdivision [subsection] (2) or the order issued pursuant to subdivision [subsection] (3) may be filed in the notice of lis pendens in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county where the property is located. From the date of recording of such complaint and notice or order, it shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the owner of the dwelling. The ordinance may authorize the public officer to cancel the notice of lis pendens in specified circumstances." 
(b)  This act applies only to the Cities of Asheville, Brevard, Charlotte, Greensboro, and Hendersonville, and the Counties of Buncombe and Transylvania. 
(Session Laws 1987, ch. 221, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 20. - Exemption of Buncombe County from certain procedural requirements on disposal of land as an industrial park. 
Section 3 of chapter 137 of the 1981 Session Laws, as amended by chapters 405 and 939 of the 1983 Session Laws, is further amended by adding immediately before the word "Cherokee," the word "Buncombe." 
(Session Laws 1987, ch. 420, § 1)  
Sec. 21. - Cemeteries. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to establish any cemetery or to enlarge the area of any existing cemetery, or to use for burial or cemetery purposes any land not now actually included within the enclosure of an existing cemetery and now actually used for the interment of the dead, within the City of Asheville or within one mile of the limits of said city, as now or hereafter established, except with the permission of the council of the city first had. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the council to grant permission to any person, firm or corporation, to do any of the acts or things regarding cemeteries, except upon application to said council, in writing and upon proof duly verified, that notice of such application has been published at least once each week for four successive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation published in said city, and by notice posted at the front door of the city hall of said city, for 20 days next preceding the filing of said application, said application and said notices to contain a full description of the land proposed so to be used, and any person, firm or corporation, violating any provision of this subsection and the foregoing section [subsection], shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment or both, in the discretion of the court; and any corporation convicted hereunder, shall thereby forfeit its charter. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, §§ 193, 193A)  
Sec. 22. - Removal of garbage. 
The council of said city shall have the authority to select the place or places to which the garbage of the city shall be removed, and the manner of its disposition. It shall have authority to make contracts or procure means for the removal of said garbage. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, § 194)  
Sec. 23. - Nuisances. 
(a)  The council shall have authority, and power is hereby expressly given it, to declare sanitary nuisances, and to require and compel the abatement and prevention of any and all sanitary nuisances in the City of Asheville, so far as in its judgment may be necessary for the convenience and preservation of the public health, and shall specify a reasonable time within which its orders in reference thereto shall be complied with; and in the event that the owner, agent or occupant of the premises on or in connection with which any nuisances shall be committed or are about to be committed, shall refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any order of said council to remove, abate, prevent, or discontinue the same within the time in such order required, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for each offense, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $50.00, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, and the said council may at any time proceed to remove, abate, prevent or discontinue such nuisances, and the cost of so doing shall be charged upon such premises and constitute a lien thereon paramount to all liens, except those for taxes and assessments of said city, from the time of so doing, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner in all respects as liens for the expense of constructing sidewalks in said city. 
(b)  The council may require and compel the abatement of all nuisances in said city, other than sanitary nuisances, at the expense of the person causing the same, or the owner or tenant of the land whereon any such nuisance shall be or may itself abate the same or cause the abatement thereof; it may also prevent any such nuisance; it may also prohibit or license and regulate the establishment within said city of any house for the storage of any explosive, unhealthy, dangerous or noxious substances, or the storage of any such substances, in any quantities whatever in said city, or within 100 yards of its corporate limits, or the exercise therein of any dangerous, noxious, offensive or unhealthy trade, business or employment. 
(c)  If the owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any premises in said city on or in connection with which any nuisance shall be committed, or about to be committed, shall refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any order of said council to remove, abate, prevent or discontinue the same within the time in such order required, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for each offense, upon conviction, fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days; and said council may at any time proceed to remove, abate, prevent or discontinue, or cause to be discontinued such nuisance, and the costs of so doing shall be charged upon such premises and constitute a lien thereon paramount to all liens, except taxes or assessments of said city, from the time of so doing, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner, in all respects, as liens for the expense of constructing sidewalks, as hereinbefore provided. 
(Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, §§ 196, 199, 199A)  
Secs. 24—30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— S.B. 532 amended Chapter 757 of the 1953 Session Laws in its entirety to read as set out herein in Article II. 
Code reference— Personnel, § 2-186. 
 
Sec. 31. - Department established. 
There is hereby established as a part of government of the City of Asheville, a Civil Service Board which shall have the powers and perform the duties specified in this Act with respect to the classified service of the City of Asheville as defined in this Act. The city manager shall recommend, and the city council shall approve, funding for the operational needs of the Civil Service Board in the city's annual budget. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 1, Session Law 1999-303, § 1; Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 1)  
Sec. 32. - Civil service board generally. 
(a)  The civil service board shall consist of five members as follows: (i) two members who shall be chosen by the city council at a meeting of the Council and they shall serve at the pleasure of the council; (ii) two members who shall be elected by the members of the classified service of the city, as defined in this Act, at an election held for that purpose and on a normal city workday not less than ten nor more than 30 days after written notice of the date of the election is provided to each member of the classified service; and (iii) one member who shall be selected by majority vote of the four other members already selected or elected at a meeting held within 30 days after the members elected by the classified service have taken office. If a member is not elected by majority vote of the four other members, the city council shall appoint a member to the board. Members of the board shall serve two-year terms. All members of the board shall be eligible for successive terms, in the same manner in which they were initially selected or elected and may serve beyond the end of their respective terms until their successors take office. The chair of the civil service board shall be appointed annually by the city council, or more often as needed, from among the membership of the board. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses pursuant to policies adopted by the city. 
The city council shall by ordinance not inconsistent with this act, establish the procedure for the election of the representatives of the employees in the classified service, and provide for meeting the expense for such elections. The members of the civil service board must all be qualified voters of the City of Asheville, not employed by the city or serving on the city council. In the event of a vacancy on the Board, such vacancy shall be filled by the body or group, choosing the member, a successor to whom is to be chosen, and in the manner herein provided for the selection of such member. 
(b)  Former employees of the City of Asheville shall be eligible to serve as a member of the Asheville Civil Service Board provided they have been separated from city employment for a period of not less than seven consecutive years prior to becoming a member of the board. No person shall be eligible to serve as a civil service board member if such person directly, or indirectly through any corporation, partnership, or other entity, or contract, subcontract, or otherwise benefits financially from a business relationship with the city, or if such person has an immediate family member or spouse of the immediate family member who directly, or indirectly through any corporation, partnership, or other entity, or contract, subcontract, or otherwise benefits financially from a business relationship with the city. No person shall engage or benefit directly or indirectly from any contractual work or employment with the city for a period of not less than two years following the expiration date of that person's term of office as a member of the civil service board. The foregoing restrictions shall not be retroactively applied to the current term of anyone currently serving on the board at the time this subsection is enacted. 
(c)  The Asheville City Clerk or the clerk's designee shall be the civil service board secretary and shall perform all required ministerial functions and duties for the board including, but not limited to, the electronic recording of and the preparation of minutes of all civil service board meetings and hearings, the custody of all board records and the posting and issuing of meeting notices to board members and to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Law, Article 33C of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes. The secretary shall distribute the agenda for regular meetings and the approved minutes for all regular meetings to all city employees. Posting the agenda and minutes on an electronic bulletin board or similar location accessible to all employees shall be sufficient compliance with this requirement. To assist the secretary in performing the functions and duties, all civil service board meetings shall be electronically recorded and transcripts thereof made available to the board members upon request without charge. All other persons shall be entitled to the civil service board's recordings and records upon request made pursuant to the Public Records Act, Chapter 132 of the General Statutes, except for those items to which disclosure is prohibited by G.S. 160A-168, the Personnel Privacy Act, or other laws governing the privacy or confidentiality of employee or personnel records. 
(d)  The board shall meet in January of each year to adopt a regular meeting schedule. The deadline for receiving items for the regular board's meetings shall be seven days prior to the meeting. Special meetings may be called by the chair and shall be called upon written request signed by two or more board members and submitted to the board secretary not less than seven days prior to the date of the requested special meeting. The notice for all meetings shall contain a meeting agenda which shall include a section for other business to hear and consider any other matters related to the board's function and duties and which may be addressed by any member of the board and by any person in attendance. Within a reasonable time after a meeting, the board shall supply the director of human resources with notification of any actions, reports, or recommendations made by the board, and the human resources department shall notify affected members of the classified service of actions, reports, and recommendations made by the board. 
(e)  No uniform employees of the City of Asheville shall be prohibited, directed, or discouraged in any manner by a supervisor from wearing that employee's uniform while in attendance at any civil service board meeting. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 2; Session Law 1999-303, § 2; Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 2)  
Sec. 33. - Composition of classified service. 
The classified service of the city shall include all officers and employees of the City of Asheville, except officers elected by the people, the city manager, directors of departments, as defined in the city charter, assistant directors of departments, (by whatever title designated) as described in the city's organizational plan, and members of advisory boards appointed by directors, the city clerk, or any deputy clerk of the City of Asheville, and members of any board or commission appointed by the council, and employees of independent boards now choosing their own employees. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 3; Session Law 1999-303, § 3; Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 3)  
Sec. 34. - Rules of civil service board. 
(a)  The civil service board shall make, and may amend substantive rules for promoting efficiency in the classified service of the city as provided in section 5 of this act. Such rules and any amendment thereto, shall be submitted to the council for approval, and shall be open to public inspection, when filed with the council for approval. The city council, after giving members of the classified service and citizens of Asheville an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing, shall act upon such proposed rules and amendments, and such rules or amendments, when approved by a majority vote of the council, shall be in full force and effect. The civil service board shall also make, and may amend, procedural rules for the conduct of its official proceedings and functions as provided for by this act. The council may, before approval, amend the rules or amendments thereto, submitted to it for approval. 
(b)  Such rules as authorized in section 4 [section 34] of this act, among other things, may provide: 
(1)  For the standardization and classification of all positions and employment in the classified service of the city. Such classification into groups and subdivisions shall be based upon and graded according to duties and responsibilities, and so arranged as to promote the filling of the higher grades, so far as practicable, through promotions. The city manager or his or her designee shall consult representative employee in the police and fire departments to establish criteria to be used to fill each position within those respective departments, including lateral entry positions. If only one respective employee is consulted, he or she shall be a representative chosen by the employees of the respective departments. If a group of two or more employees is established for purposes of this subdivision, at least one-half of the employees shall be chosen by the employees of the respective department. The civil service board shall have the authority to approve any criteria established and the criteria shall apply only to persons promoted or hired after the effective date of the approval. This provision shall not apply to hiring or promotional processes initiated prior to the effective date of this act. 
(2)  For temporary or part-time employment to meet the transitory or seasonal needs of the city, except no temporary or part-time employment may occur or continue in violation of applicable state or federal law. 
(3)  For the establishment of a probationary period for new city employees prior to employees becoming members of the classified service, except not probationary period or any extension thereof may exceed one year in the aggregate. 
(4)  For suspension for purpose of discipline, with or without pay, for not longer than 90 days. 
(5)  For discharge or reduction in rank or compensation after the person to be discharged or reduced has, if he or she so requests, been presented by the person responsible for his or her appointment with the reasons therefore specifically stated in writing and has been given an opportunity to be publicly heard in his or her own defense by the civil service board, in accordance with section 8 of this act. The written reasons for the discharge or reduction and any reply in writing thereto by any such officer or employee shall be filed with the director of human resources. 
(6)  For investigation and keeping a record of the efficiency of officers and employees in the classified service, and for requiring markings and reports relative thereto from appointing authorities. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, §§ 4, 5; Session Law 1999-303, §§ 4, 5; Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), §§ 4, 5)  
Sec. 35. - Authority to review and approve promotions. 
The civil service board shall have the authority, exercisable by any of its members, to review and approve all promotional processes in the police and fire departments and may review any promotional decision in accordance with section 7 [subsection 36] of this act [article] but no promotional decision may be changed except in accordance with section 8 [subsection 38] of this act. This section shall not apply to promotional processes initiated prior to the effective date of this act.  
Sec. 36. - Investigations. 
The council by majority vote of the total membership of the council, the city manager, or the civil service board by majority vote of the total membership of the board, may make official investigations concerning the facts in respect to the operation and enforcement of the provisions of this act and of the rules established thereunder, and concerning the condition of the civil service of the city or and branch thereof and may refer such matters to the civil service board for hearing in accordance with section 8 of this act, or for further investigation as appropriate. Any person or body making any investigation authorized or required by this section, shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses. A copy of the report of the investigation shall be filed with the city clerk and be open for public inspection, subject to the provisions of the Personnel Privacy Act or other laws governing the disclosure of records in this state. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 13; Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 6)  
Sec. 37. - Layoffs, suspensions and removals. 
(a)  Whenever any member of the classified service of the city is discharge, suspended, reduced in rank, transferred against his or her will, or is denied any promotion or raise in pay which he or she would be entitled to, that member shall be entitled to a hearing before the civil service board to determine whether or not the action complained of is justified. The board may also conduct hearings on such matters as may be referred to it pursuant to section 7 of this act. 
(b)  Any member of the classified service of the city who desires a hearing shall file his or her request for hearing with the city clerk within ten days after learning of the act or omission of which her or she complains but not before the member shall have exhausted his or her remedy provided by the grievance procedures established by ordinance or policy of the city and the grievance procedure shall be concluded within 30 days. If the grievance procedure is not concluded with 30 days, the member may proceed as provided in this section. Upon receipt of notice as required in this section, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the civil service board at a date not less than five nor more than 15 days from the clerk's receipt of such notice. Except for the time for filing the initial request for hearing with the board, the board may extend the time for taking action under this section for cause or by agreement of the parties to the proceeding. 
(c)  Any member of the classified service of the city who requests a hearing pursuant to the act shall be entitled to be represented by its attorney at any such hearing. 
(d)  For such hearings, the board is authorized to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents. 
(e)  At such hearing, the burden of proving the justification of the act or omission complained of shall be upon the city and the member requesting the hearing shall be entitled to inspect and copy any records upon which the city plans to rely at the hearing if the records are requested in writing by the member or his or her attorney prior to the day set for the hearing. 
(f)  The civil service board shall render its decision in writing within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the board determines that the act or omission complained of is not justified, the board shall order to rescind whatever action the board has found to be unjustified and may order the city to take such steps as are necessary for a just conclusion of the matter before the board. Such decision shall contain findings of fact and conclusions, and shall be based on competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Upon reaching its decision, the board shall, in writing, immediately inform the city clerk and the member requesting the hearing of the board's decision. 
(g)  Within ten days of the receipt of notice of the decision of the board, either party may appeal to the Superior Court Division of the General Court of Justice for Buncombe County for a trial de novo. The appeal shall be effected by filing with the clerk of the superior court of Buncombe County a petition for trial in superior court, setting out the fact upon which the petitioner relies for relief. If the petitioner desires a trial by jury, the petition shall so state. Upon the filing of the petition, the Clerk of the Superior Court shall issue a civil summons as in regular civil action, and the sheriff of Buncombe County shall serve the summons and petition on all parties who did not join in the petition for trial. It shall be sufficient service upon the city for the sheriff to serve the petition and summons upon the clerk of the city. Therefore, the matter shall proceed to trial as any other civil action. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 14; Session Laws 1977, ch. 415, §§ 1—6; Session Laws 1977, ch. 530, § 1(b); Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 7)  
Sec. 38. - Political activities prohibited. 
No person about to be appointed to any position in the service of the city shall sign or execute a resignation dated or undated, in advance of such appointment. No person in the service of the city shall discharge, suspend, lay off, reduce in grade or in any manner change the official rank or compensation of any person in such service, or promise or threaten to do so, for withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service or any valuable thing for any political purpose. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, §§ 19—21)  
Sec. 38.1. - [Designation of legal counsel.] 
By a majority vote of those members present and voting at any of its official meetings, the Asheville Civil Service Board may designate independent legal counsel of its choice to advise or represent the board, or both, on such occasions and in such matters as the majority of those board members present and voting deem to be appropriate and necessary. The civil service board shall establish a roster of attorneys from which it may select counsel for the purpose of advising the board during or in connection with grievance hearings held pursuant to section 8. Said list shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney as to qualifications and fees. The city shall be responsible for the payment of such professional legal services. The use of independent counsel for matters other than grievance hearings held pursuant to section 8 shall be limited to 20 hours per year. In order to avoid the appearance of any possible conflict of interest, the office of the city attorney shall serve as legal advisor to or attorney for the board, or both, only for those matters or proceedings when specifically requested to do so in a writing that has been signed by no fewer than four members of the board. 
(Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 8)  
Sec. 39. - Administration of article; violations. 
It shall be the duty of the civil service board to supervise the execution of the foregoing civil service provisions of this act and of the rules made thereunder, and it shall be the duty of all persons in the service of the city to comply with such rules and to aid in their enforcement. Willful or deliberate violation of the Asheville Civil Service Law (this act) or Civil Service Rules by any person shall result in the city taking appropriate disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. Any city employee or any city official who threatens or intimidates other employees from exercising their rights under the Asheville Civil Service Law (this act) or Civil Service Rules shall be subject to the city taking appropriate disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(Session Law 2009-401 (556 (S.B.)), § 9)  
Sec. 40. - Application of article to incumbents. 
Any and all employees of the classified service as defined in this act [article], who are members of the classified service as defined in this act [article] at the time of the effective date of this act [article], shall be deemed to hold and occupy such position as an employee of the civil service of the city, as established by this act [article], subject only to layoff, suspension, or removal therefrom, as provided in this act [article], and all of the provisions of this act [article] shall be applicable to any and all such employees. 
(Session Laws 1953, ch. 757, § 24)  
Secs. 41—65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 66—190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 191—194 which derived from Private Laws 1923, ch. 16, §§ 239—242 relating to franchises were repealed by Session Laws 1993, ch. 228, § 5(2). 
 
Secs. 191—215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 18 of the General Statutes of North Carolina was repealed by Session Laws 1971, ch. 872, § 3. Chapter 18A was repealed by Session Laws 1981, ch. 412, § 1. Regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages are presently contained in Chapter 18B of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
 
Sec. 216. - Election to authorize operation of liquor store; subsequent elections. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Asheville may, on its own motion, and shall upon a petition to said council signed by at least 15 percent of the registered and qualified voters of the municipality, order an election to be held on the question of whether or not a city liquor control store may be operated in the City of Asheville and if a majority of the votes cast in such election shall be for the operation of such a store, it shall be legal for a liquor control store to be set up and operated in said city, but if a majority of the votes cast in said election shall be against the operation of a city liquor control store, no such store shall be set up or operated in said city under the provisions of this act [article]. 
(b)  In calling for such special liquor election, the said council shall give at least 20 days' public notice of the same prior to the opening of the registration books, and said registration books shall remain open for the same period of time before such special liquor election as is required by law for them to remain open for a regular election. A new registration of voters for such special liquor election shall not be necessary and all qualified electors who are properly registered prior to registration for the special election and those who register in said special election shall be entitled to vote in said election. In said election a ballot shall be used upon which shall be printed on separate lines for each proposition, "for city liquor control store," "against city liquor control store." Those favoring setting up and operating liquor store in the City of Asheville shall mark in the voting square to the left of the words "for city liquor control store" printed on the ballot, and those opposed to a city liquor control store shall mark in the voting square to the left of the words "against city liquor control store." Except as otherwise herein provided, the special election authorized shall be conducted under the same statutes, rules, and regulations applicable to elections for members of the general assembly. 
(c)  If a subsequent election shall be held and at such election a majority of the votes shall be cast "against city liquor control store," the city liquor control board shall, within three months from the canvassing of such votes and the declaration of the result thereof, close said store and shall thereafter cease to operate the same, and within said three months the city control board shall dispose of all alcoholic beverages on hand, all fixtures, and all other property in the hands and under the control of said board and convert the same into cash and turn the same over to the city treasurer. Thereafter, all public, public-local, and private laws applicable to the sale of intoxicating beverages within said City of Asheville in force and effect prior to the authorization to operate city liquor control store shall be in full force and effect the same as if such election had not been held until and unless another election is held under the provisions of this act [article] in which a majority of the votes shall be cast "for city liquor control store." No election shall be called and held in the City of Asheville under the provisions of this act [article] within three years from the holding of the last election thereunder. It shall be the duty of the city council of the City of Asheville to order the special liquor election herein authorized within 60 days after a sufficient petition has been filed requesting the same. But no election under this act [article] shall be held on the day of any biennial, county, or City of Asheville general election or primary election, or within 30 days of any such election. 
(Session Laws 1945, ch. 1083, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— The election authorizing the operation of liquor stores was held in November 1947.  
Sec. 217. - Establishment of additional liquor stores. 
The governing body of the City of Asheville may in its discretion authorize the establishment and operation of additional [liquor] stores within the corporate municipalities, if in its discretion the necessity therefor exists. 
(Session Laws 1947, ch. 1083, § 7)  
Sec. 218. - Establishment, composition, chairman, etc., of board of alcoholic control. 
If the operation of a city liquor control store is authorized under the provisions of this act [article], the mayor and city council of the City of Asheville shall immediately create a city board of alcoholic control to be composed of a chairman and two other members who shall be well-known for their character, ability, and business acumen. Said board shall be known and designated as "The City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control." The chairman of said board shall be designated by the mayor and governing body of the city and shall serve for his first term a period of three years, and one member shall serve for his first term a period of two years, and the other member shall serve for a period of one year; and all terms shall begin with the date of their appointment, and after the said terms shall have expired, their successors in office shall serve for a period of three years. Their successors, or any vacancy occurring in the board shall be named or filled by the mayor and the governing body of the city. 
(Session Laws 1947, ch. 1083, § 4)  
Sec. 219. - General powers and duties of board. 
The said City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control shall have all of the powers and duties imposed by section 18-45 of the General Statutes on county boards of alcoholic control and shall be subject to the powers and authority of the state board of alcoholic control the same as county boards of alcoholic control as provided in section 18-39 of the General Statutes. The said City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control and the operation of any city liquor store authorized under the provisions of this act [article] shall be subject to and in pursuance with the provisions of article 3 of chapter 18 of the General Statutes, except to the extent which the same may be in conflict with the provisions of this act [article]. Wherever the word "county" board of alcoholic control appears in said article, it shall include City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control. 
(Session Laws 1947, ch. 1083, § 5)  
Sec. 220. - Jurisdiction in county of law enforcement officers employed by board. 
The law enforcement officers employed and appointed by the City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control shall have the same powers and authorities within the County of Buncombe as are conferred by subsection (o) of G.S. 18-45 upon the officers employed and appointed by the various county boards of alcoholic control. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as in any manner abridging the powers, authorities, and duties otherwise vested by law in the sheriff of Buncombe County, and the law enforcement officers employed and appointed by the City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control shall fully cooperate with, assist, and work in close harmony with the sheriff of Buncombe County in the performance of their duties. 
(Session Laws 1949, ch. 771, § 1)  
Sec. 221. - Expenditure of funds for education as to effects of use of alcoholic beverages. 
The City of Asheville Board of Alcoholic Control is authorized, in its discretion, to expend from its law enforcement funds, an amount not to exceed five percent of said funds for the purpose of education as to the effects of the use of alcoholic beverages. 
(Session Laws 1957, ch. 730, § 1)  
Sec. 222. - Division of net profits from liquor store. 
The net profits derived from the operation of liquor control store in the City of Asheville shall be divided as follows: 75 percent shall be turned over to the governing body of the City of Asheville and 25 percent to the governing body of the County of Buncombe, such net profits shall be subject to appropriation by the governing bodies of the said City of Asheville and County of Buncombe for any lawful purpose. 
(Session Laws 1947, ch. 1083, § 6)  
Secs. 223—240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Code reference— Asheville Downtown Commission, § 2-76. 
 
Sec. 241. - Downtown development projects. 
(a)  Definition. In this section, "downtown development project" means a capital project in the city's central business district, as that district is defined by the city council, comprising one or more buildings and including both public and private facilities. By way of illustration but not limitation, such a project might include a single building comprising a publicly owned parking structure and publicly owned convention center and a privately owned hotel or office building. 
(b)  Authorization. If the city council finds that it is likely to have a significant effect on the revitalization of the central business district, the city may acquire, construct, own, and operate or participate in the acquisition, construction, ownership, and operation of a downtown development project or of specific facilities within such a project. The city may enter into binding contracts with one or more private developers with respect to acquiring, constructing, owning, or operating such a project. Such a contract may, among other provisions, specify the following: 
(1)  The property interests of both the city and the developer or developers in the project. 
(2)  The responsibilities of the city and the developer or developers for construction of the project. 
(3)  The responsibilities of the city and the developer or developers with respect to financing the project. 
Such a contract may be entered into before the acquisition of any real property necessary to the project. 
(c)  Property acquisition. A downtown development project may be constructed on property acquired by the developer or developers, on property directly acquired by the city, or on property acquired by the city while exercising the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission pursuant to G.S. 160A-505 or G.S. 160A-456. 
(d)  Property disposition. In connection with a downtown development project, the city may convey interests in property owned by it, including air rights over public facilities, as follows: 
(1)  If the property were acquired while the city was exercising the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission, the city may convey property interests pursuant to the "Urban Redevelopment Law" or any local modification thereof. 
(2)  If the property were acquired by the city directly, the city may convey property interests pursuant to G.S. 160A-457 and any local modification thereof. Except for local modifications, article 12, chapter 160A of the General Statutes [G.S. 160A-265 et seq.] does not apply to such dispositions. 
(e)  Construction of the project. The contract between the city and the developer or developers may provide that the developer or developers shall be responsible for construction of the entire downtown development project. If so, the contract shall include such provisions as the city council deems sufficient to assure that the public facility or facilities included in the project meet the needs of the city and are constructed at a reasonable price. A project constructed pursuant to this paragraph is not subject to article 8, chapter 143 of the General Statutes [G.S. 143-128 et seq.]. 
(f)  Operation. The city may contract for the operation of any public facility or facilities included in a downtown redevelopment project by a person, partnership, firm or corporation, public or private. Such a contract shall include provisions sufficient to assure that any such facility or facilities are operated for the benefit of the citizens of the city. 
(g)  Grant funds. To assist in the financing of its share of a downtown project, the city may apply for, accept and expend grant funds from the federal or state governments. 
(h)  [Boundaries.] As used in this section, the term "central business district" means the following areas: 
(1)  That area bounded by Patton Avenue and College Street on the south, Haywood Street from College Street to Battery Park Avenue and Battery Park Avenue from Haywood Street to Otis Street and Otis Street from Battery Park Avenue to Patton Avenue; and 
(2)  That area bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of North Lexington Avenue and College Street in downtown Asheville, thence westerly with the center of College Street to its intersection with the center of Haywood Street; thence northerly with the center of Haywood Street to its intersection with the center of Battery Park Avenue; thence westerly with the center of Battery Park Avenue to its intersection with the center of O'Henry Avenue; thence northerly with the center of O'Henry to its intersection with the center of Haywood Street; thence easterly with the center of Haywood to its intersection with the center of Flint Street; thence northerly with the center of Flint Street to its intersection with the center of Hiawassee Street; thence easterly with the center of Hiawassee Street to its intersection with the center of Lexington Avenue; thence southerly with the center of Lexington Avenue to the place of beginning. 
(Session Laws 1985, ch. 721, § 1; Session Laws 1989, ch. 569)  
Sec. 242. - Applicability. 
This act [article] applies to the City of Asheville only. 
(Session Laws 1985, ch. 721, § 2)  
Secs. 243—260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 261. - Creation of the Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission authorized. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Asheville and the Board of Commissioners of Buncombe County may jointly adopt ordinances to create an Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission. The Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission shall have jurisdiction to enforce the State Fair Housing Act, chapter 41A of the General Statutes [G.S. 41A-1 et seq.], in the City of Asheville and in areas of Buncombe County not in the corporate limits of a city as defined by G.S. 160A-1, and shall have jurisdiction over the subject matter of any complaint filed under G.S. 41A-7 relating to property located in the City of Asheville and in areas of Buncombe County not in the corporate limits of a city as defined by G.S. 160A-1, or to an unlawful discriminatory housing practice occurring in the City of Asheville and in areas of Buncombe County not in the corporate limits of a city as defined by G.S. 160A-1. Such jointly adopted ordinances may provide for the abolition of the Asheville Fair Housing Commission and the transfer of all proceedings pending before it to the Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission, or merely for the redesignation of the Asheville Fair Housing Commission as the Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission with the expanded jurisdiction provided by the [this] subsection and section 2(b) of this act [section]. 
(b)  The Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission shall have the same powers and duties as are granted to the North Carolina Human Relations Council in chapter 41A of the General Statutes. 
(Session Laws 1985, ch. 776, §§ 1, 2; Session Laws 1989, ch. 213, §§ 1, 2)  
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of local legislation not included in the Charter as set out in Subpart B of Part I. 
PRIVATE LAWS 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section this 
Related Laws 
1923 	16 	193, 193A 	21 
		194 	22 
		196, 199, 199A 	23 
		245—246 	16, 17 
		388 	4 
		414 	3 
 
PUBLIC-LOCAL 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section this 
Related Laws 
1931 	267 	1—4 	2 
1933 	399 	1—4 	12 
 
PUBLIC-PRIVATE 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section this 
Related Laws 
1939 	149 	1 	13 
 
SESSION LAWS 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Section this 
Related Laws 
1945 	1083 	1—3 	216 
1947 	1083 	4, 5 	218, 219 
		6 	222 
		7 	217 
1949 	771 	1 	220 
1951 	618 	1—5 	11 
1953 	757 	1—3 	31—33 
		4, 5 	34 
		6—10 	35—39 
		11—15 	41—45 
		16 	47 
		17 	46 
		18 	48 
		19—21 	49 
		22—24 	50—52 
		25 	40 
1957 	730 	1 	221 
	806 	1, 1A, 2 	5 
1963 	861 	1 	1 
1969 	165 	2 	1 
1973 	7 	1—3 	18 
1977 	415 	1—6 	44 
	530 	1(b) 	44 
1979 	81 	1—3 	9 
	256 	1, 2 	6 
	317 	1—5 	10 
1981 	23 	1, 2 	8 
	631 	1 	10 
	632 	1 	9 
1985 	721 	1, 2 	241, 242 
	776 	1, 2 	261 
1987 	221 	1, 2 	19 
	420 	1 	20 
1989 	213 	1, 2 	261 
	569 		241 
1999 	303 	1—25 	31—40 
2005 	139 	1—3       Added 	12.2 
2005 	140 	1—3       Added 	12.1 
2009 	114 	1 	12 
2009 	401 	1—5 	31—34 
		6, 7 	36, 37 
		8       Added 	8.1 
		9 	39 
 
Ordinance 
Number 	Date 	Section 	Section this 
Related Laws 
1501 	 3-19-85 	11 	1 
2385 	 6-24-1997 	2 	1 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, G.S. 160A-77; pleading and proving city ordinances, G.S. 160A-79; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 160A-174. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Asheville, North Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Asheville City Code." 
(Code 1965, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Charter means the Charter of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, as printed in part I of this volume. 
City means the City of Asheville, in the County of Buncombe and the State of North Carolina. 
City council means the city council of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, including six councilmembers and the mayor. 
City limits means the legal boundary of the City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Code means the Code of Ordinances, City of Asheville, North Carolina as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code or by order of court, the day of the act, event, default or publication after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. Eastern Standard Time shall be the official time except during that period when what is commonly known as "daylight saving time" is in effect, through adoption by the city council or otherwise. 
County means the County of Buncombe in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
Daytime, nighttime. Daytime is the period of time between sunrise and sunset, and nighttime is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
Governor means the Governor of North Carolina. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Manual of fees and charges means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Asheville. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, department, board, commission or other municipal agent, agency or representative, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Asheville," except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," if the sense requires it. "And" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner, applied to building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property includes every species of property except real property as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property includes real and personal property. 
Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall; may. "Shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State means the State of North Carolina. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to G.S. 160A-77, it shall be construed to refer to the General Statutes of North Carolina, section 160A-77, as amended, or whatever section is cited. 
Street means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant or occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and the present. 
Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of the City of Asheville, North Carolina." 
Writing, written include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year means calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar rules of statutory construction, G.S. 12-3.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1965, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific references to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Asheville, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Asheville, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: _______." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of the Code desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1965, § 1-4) 
Revision or amendment of ordinances, § 18.  
Sec. 1-5. - General penalty; civil remedies; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance shall subject the offender to the remedies provided in this section, except that where the General Statutes of North Carolina provide specific civil remedies for violations of provisions of this Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such remedies available to the city for enforcement of this Code shall be in addition to the remedies stated in this section. 
(b)  Violations of all provisions of this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code and/or specifically enumerated in appendix B of this volume, shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by N. C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions enumerated in appendix B of this volume shall subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for such violation as provided in this section. The civil penalty, if not paid to the city finance director within 15 days of the issuance of a citation, may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt. Unless otherwise provided by a specific provision of this Code, such civil penalties shall be in the amount of $50.00 for each violation, and each day any single violation continues shall be a separate violation. The provisions of this Code which shall subject the offender to a civil penalty are as enumerated in appendix B of this volume. 
(d)  In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law. 
(e)  In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision occurs, the city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and rule 65 in particular. 
(f)  In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that: 
(1)  Buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; 
(2)  Fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; 
(3)  Grass and weeds be cut; 
(4)  Improvements or repairs be made; or 
(5)  Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code or such ordinance. 
If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. 
(g)  The provisions of this Code and any other city ordinances may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section, except that any provision, the violation of which incurs a civil penalty, shall not be enforced by criminal penalties. 
(h)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing violation of any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(i)  Any ordinances adopted by the mayor and council, the violation of which shall incur a penalty, shall specify whether the enforcement shall be pursuant to the civil penalty or criminal penal provisions of this section. 
(j)  Unless provided otherwise in this Code, upon determination of a violation of any section of this Code, the penalty for which is a civil penalty, the city shall cause a civil citation to be issued to the violator. A civil citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the city and either served directly on the violator or his duly designated agent or registered agent, if a corporation, in person or posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained in the records of the city or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of such citation. Unless provided otherwise in this Code, the citation shall direct the violator to appear before the city clerk, located in the city hall, within 15 days of the date of the citation or alternatively to pay the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid; otherwise, further citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated. 
(k)  Unless provided otherwise in this Code, if the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its issuance and pay the penalty prescribed therein, the city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the state general court of justice for the collection of the penalty. 
(Code 1965, § 1-5; Ord. No. 2585, § 2, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 4393, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-15) 
Cross reference— Schedule of civil penalties, app. B.  
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this section; 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(16)  Any personnel ordinance; 
nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section.  
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred on any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal, G.S. 12-2.  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Charter reference— Continuation of ordinances, rules and regulations, § 95.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intent of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1965, § 1-7)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative service, art. III; general administrative provisions, art. XIII. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Financial reports, copy of audit required from organizations receiving donations from city. 
It shall be the duty of the chief executive or financial officer of all eleemosynary corporations, civic organizations or other organizations by whatsoever name called, to which an appropriation or donation of public funds is made from the city treasury, for any purpose whatsoever, to prepare and provide to the city periodic financial reports showing all receipts and disbursements of the organization. No appropriation or donation shall be made to any organization which shall not agree to have its financial records audited annually, and such organization shall provide the city with a copy of its annual audited financial report as soon as such report is available. 
(Code 1965, § 2-2) 
Charter reference— Rules and regulations governing finances, § 29.  
Sec. 2-2. - State of emergency; authority of mayor; imposition of restrictions. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, for any reason, city public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property. 
(b)  If an existing or threatened state of emergency occurs endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions authorized in this section. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized and empowered to limit by proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the city and to specific hours of the day or night and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal, on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(d)  The mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the city council. 
(e)  During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof. 
(2)  Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind and their possession or consumption off one's own premises. 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property. 
(4)  Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances. 
(5)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof. 
(6)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment and any other places of public assembly. 
(f)  Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation. 
(g)  During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this section. 
(Code 1965, § 2-4) 
State Law reference— Authorization of municipalities to enact ordinances to deal with states of emergency, G.S. 14-288.12; local emergency authorizations, G.S. 166A-8.  
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Council, art. II. 
State Law reference— General powers of mayor and council, G.S. 160A-67. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  Preparation. The city manager is directed to prepare a consent agenda for each city council meeting. The consent agenda shall contain routine, noncontroversial items that require city council action but need little or no deliberation. 
(b)  Contents. The consent agenda shall be comprised of but not limited to the following items and shall be given to the city council members prior to each regularly scheduled meeting: 
(1)  Awarding of bids. 
(2)  Authorization for the city attorney, city clerk or city manager to perform specific tasks, draft ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
(3)  Setting public hearing dates and authorizing the advertisement of ordinances. 
(4)  Annual appointments. 
(5)  Approval of leases and contracts. 
(6)  Approval of minutes. 
(c)  Procedures. The following procedures and rules shall govern the use by the city council of the consent agenda: 
(1)  The consent agenda shall be placed on the city council agenda as an item of general business. 
(2)  A motion to approve the consent agenda shall not be debated. 
(3)  At the request of any individual member of the city council, an item shall be removed from the consent agenda and placed upon the regular agenda for discussion. 
(4)  The consent agenda shall only be adopted by a unanimous vote of those city council members present at the meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-6) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to determine its own rules and order of business, § 11; general duties of manager, § 24. 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of manager, G.S. 160A-148.  
Secs. 2-32—2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-51—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASHEVILLE AREA CIVIC CENTER COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Auditoriums, coliseums and convention centers, G.S. 160A-489. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Creation; composition; terms of office; meetings; authority. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of nine voting members. The city manager the city finance director and the civic center director, and the Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce's Director of Convention and Marketing Sales, the Asheville Buncombe Regional Sports Commission Director and the Asheville Symphony Director, shall be non-voting ex officio members. 
The commission shall be composed of nine voting members. The city manager, the city finance director and the civic center director, and the Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce's Director of Convention and Marketing Sales, shall be non-voting ex officio members. 
(b)  Seven voting members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council, and two voting members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Buncombe County. Members shall serve three-year terms, and shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the appointing body. 
The term of the county's initial appointments shall be deemed to commence on July 1, 2010. 
Any vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filled by appropriate board, which appointments shall be for the purpose of fulfilling the unexpired term. 
(c)  The commission shall establish a schedule of regular meetings, which shall be no less frequent than quarterly. Special meetings may be called upon request of a majority of the membership of the commission, or by the city council. In addition to the notices required by law, the civic center director and the city manager shall be notified of any special meeting or continuation thereof. 
(d)  The commission shall adopt rules or by laws which shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Subject to the limitations and requirements of this article, the rules or by laws may provide for a schedule of regular meetings, the order of business on an agenda, offices and duties of officers, the manner of amending the by laws, and such other matters as may be appropriate. 
(e)  The commission shall have a chair, to be elected by vote of a majority of the entire membership of the commission, including vacant seats, not later than 60 days after adoption of this article and annually thereafter by the same method. The chair shall preside over meetings of the commission and may vote on all questions before the commission. The commission shall also have a secretary, who shall be the civic center director. The commission may provide in its by laws for such other officers as may be necessary or expedient. All officers (other than the secretary) shall be appointed or selected after May 31 of any year and at or before the first meeting of the commission that occurs after May 31 of that year. 
(f)  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the entire voting membership of the commission (less any members who are disqualified from voting) shall be required to constitute action of the commission. 
(g)  The commission is authorized to appoint committees from its membership or the community at large. The commission may in its by-laws provide for committees whose functions shall be fixed by the commission at the time of appointment. Such committees may be standing or ad hoc committees and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the commission. Notice of meetings of committees shall be given as required by law, and the city manager and civic center director shall be notified of any such meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-56; Ord. No. 1975, §§ 1, 2, 6-16-92; Ord. No. 2040, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2129, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2286, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 3139, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 3891, §§ 1a, b, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4452, §§ 1a, b, 9-22-15)  
Sec. 2-62. - Duties and functions. 
The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To review and make recommendations to the civic center director, city manager and city council on programming goals and objectives for each venue in the civic center. 
(2)  To establish a method for the handling of customer service complaints. To this end, the commission may hear and recommend the disposition of such complaints. Such recommendations shall be made to the civic center director, who shall report to the commission as to actions taken on the commission's recommendation. The commission may not recommend the taking of personnel action under this provision. 
(3)  To designate individual members or to establish committees who, on the basis of responsibility, experience or expertise, may be consulted by the civic center director or staff on matters relating to the operational, programming or promotional needs of the civic center. 
(4)  To develop and make recommendations to the civic center director, city manager and city council regarding long range plans for the civic center to include, without limitation, capital improvements, new facilities and equipment, and to be available to the council for referral or study of such matters. 
(5)  To review and make recommendations on administrative policies of the civic center prior to adoption (except personnel policies). 
(6)  To review and make recommendations to the civic center director, city manager and city council on proposals for changes in the fees and charges for use of civic center facilities. 
(7)  To accept gifts to the civic center, subject to approval of the city council, and to recommend the appropriate use of such gifts, where not otherwise specified. 
(8)  To encourage the promotion of sports, recreation, entertainment and cultural events and activities, and to facilitate the use of the services and facilities of the civic center. 
(9)  To perform such other tasks and functions as the city council may direct. 
(10)  To meet and confer with city council at least once a year and at such other times as may be requested by city council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-57; Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 73-32, adopted March 29, 1973, adopted a rental schedule to be used in connection with the civic center. Resolution No. 73-44, adopted May 10, 1973, adopted regulations for the administration of the civic center. Official copies of the resolutions as well as the rental schedule and regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 2-63. - Review of budget; limitations. 
The commission will annually provide its recommended goals and objectives to the civic center director for consideration in his development of the annual budget. The commission or appointed individuals or committees may be consulted by the civic center director in the preparation of the civic center budget proposal. The commission shall be provided with a copy of the proposed civic center budget within five working days after submission to the city council. The commission may submit commentary to city council on the civic center budget. The commission shall have no authority to make or enter into contracts or to authorize the expenditure of funds. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 2-64. - Appeal and review. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or determination of the area civic center commission shall have the right of appeal and review thereof to the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-58)  
Secs. 2-65—2-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ASHEVILLE DOWNTOWN COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; zoning, app. A. 
Related Laws reference— Downtown development projects, § 241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Downtown development projects, G.S. 160A-458.3. 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Creation; composition; terms of office; organization. 
(a)  Creation. It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the city will best be served by establishing and maintaining a commission for the sustainability and continued development of downtown, a vital urban center of western North Carolina's economic, cultural and visitor activity. To that end, there is hereby created and established a commission of the city to be known as the Asheville Downtown Commission, referred to in this division as "commission." 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall consist of 11 members, except as provided in subsection (c) below. The appointed composition will be as follows: 
(1)  Two members appointed by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  One member of the city council appointed by the city council, except as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(3)  Seven members appointed by the city council from the private sector of the community. 
(4)  A member of the board of directors or the executive director of the Asheville Downtown Association. 
The members appointed by the city council and county commissioners from the private sector of the community shall represent various segments of the greater downtown community such as, but not limited to, property owners, merchants, residents, businesses and institutions; and shall have a willingness to participate actively in commission efforts; and shall possess expertise and interest in the sustainability and development of downtown. 
Members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their service, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses in connection with their official duties. 
(c)  Terms of office. Members of the commission shall serve staggered, three-year terms, with the exception of the city council member, and the person serving in the position allocated for the Asheville Downtown Association, each of whom will serve according to the length of their respective terms of office; provided that the two council members serving on the commission as of the effective date of this amendment may continue to serve until their service on the city council ends, or until one of them resigns, at which time the total membership of the commission shall be eleven, and city council member appointees shall be reduced to one. In the event that a county commissioner is appointed to the commission, her/his term on the commission shall coincide with her/his term of office. At-large members will be eligible for reappointment for one term. 
(d)  Selection of officers. The commission shall select annually from its members a chair and a vice-chair. 
(e)  Meetings. The commission shall establish its meeting schedule. Special meetings may be called by the chair or, in her/his absence, by the vice-chair, and special meetings shall be called upon the request of a majority of the members of the commission. 
(f)  Attendance. The failure of any commission member to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings of the commission held during a 12-month period, without an excused absence being approved by the chair, may be grounds for removal. Removal from the commission shall be at the discretion of the city for its appointees and the discretion of the county for its appointees. 
(g)  Voting. A quorum shall be constituted by a simple majority of commission members, excluding vacancies. The chair or the presiding member of the commission shall vote on all matters of business considered by the commission. 
(h)  Transaction of business. The commission shall act as a body in the transaction of all business, unless a committee or member is duly authorized by the commission for a specific purpose. The committee is to be discharged upon the completion of the duties assigned to it, unless it is a permanent committee. 
(i)  Appointment of committees. The commission is authorized to appoint committees from its membership or the community at large. Committee functions shall be fixed by the commission at the time of appointment. Committees may be standing or ad hoc in nature and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
(j)  Periodic reviews. There will be periodic reviews by the city council of the progress of the commission as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-101; Ord. No. 1687, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 1884, § 2-101, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 1962, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 2078, §§ 1, 2, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 2287, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 2630, § 1, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 4059, § 1, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4567, § 1, 3-28-17)  
Sec. 2-77. - Purposes and powers. 
(a)  Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city, the commission shall be embodied for the following purposes: 
(1)  Recommend to city council an overall policy for the continued development and sustainability of downtown. 
a.  Develop and recommend to the city council a comprehensive strategic plan and other plans for downtown. Conduct regular evaluations and updates for the comprehensive strategic plan and all other downtown plans. 
b.  Recommend to the city council appropriate land development policies for the downtown. 
c.  Recommend to the city council what assistance, if any, is needed from professional consultants for downtown efforts. 
d.  Recommend and monitor implementation of downtown planning efforts. 
(2)  Provide recommendations for effective management of the public resources for downtown and actively pursue and assist private sector investment in the downtown area for the welfare of the citizens of Asheville. 
(3)  Carry out the powers and duties assigned to the commission regarding downtown design review as described in section 7-3-8 of this Code. 
(4)  Cooperate with and evaluate and represent the recommendations of other organizations, including, but not limited to, the Asheville Downtown Association, property owners, merchants, residents, businesses, tenants, institutions and other members of the downtown community. 
(5)  In order to accomplish subsections (1) through (4) above, the commission shall: 
a.  Develop financial tools for downtown development. 
b.  Evaluate existing plans and recommendations concerned with downtown development. 
c.  Identify appropriate uses for downtown and identify developers/investors for downtown development. 
d.  Coordinate downtown commercial and residential development with property owners, merchants, residents, businesses, tenants, and institutions within the downtown planning area as established by the commission. 
e.  Promote and facilitate the improvement of downtown infrastructure, including water, public safety, parks, parking, transportation, utilities, sidewalks, sewer, streetscape. 
f.  Promote and facilitate marketing programs that focus on the downtown area and meet the goals and mission statement of the commission. 
1.  Promote and facilitate a program to assist in business retention in the downtown. 
2.  Promote and facilitate a marketing program to increase sales, visitors and awareness of downtown. 
3.  Promote and facilitate downtown living. 
g.  Promote, facilitate and act as liaison to catalytic developments significantly affecting the downtown area. 
h.  Provide city council with representative community participation in preparing and implementing plans and reports concerning the development of downtown. 
(b)  To carry out the purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission shall have the powers as follows: 
(1)  Subject to limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city, perform those tasks necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes of the commission for the public welfare; 
(2)  Make studies which further the implementation of its plans; and 
(3)  Actively encourage and pursue the participation of the private sector and private capital in implementing approved projects. 
(Code 1965, § 2-102; Ord. No. 1884, § 2-102, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 2630, § 1, 10-27-99)  
Sec. 2-78. - Staffing. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for providing staff support for the commission. The city manager shall assign an appropriate city staff member who shall direct and carry out the annual work program of the commission and shall serve as secretary to the commission with no voting rights. 
(b)  Technical experts and consultants outside ordinary city staff available to perform such services needed to complete the approved work program elements shall be recommended by the commission to the city council in accordance with the state and federal law and city policy pertaining to such selection. 
(Code 1965, § 2-103; Ord. No. 1884, § 2-103, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2630, § 1, 10-27-99)  
Sec. 2-79. - Contracts. 
The downtown commission shall be authorized to enter into and to let contracts for necessary services provided to the commission in the manner provided by law for contracts by the city, but shall not commit the city without prior approval from the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-104; Ord. No. 1884, § 2-104, 2-18-91)  
Secs. 2-80—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4115, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2012, repealed Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-91—2-96, which pertained to Asheville-Buncombe Fair Housing Commission and derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-111—2-118; and Ord. No. 1876, §§ 1—7, adopted Sept. 18, 1990. 
 
Secs. 2-91—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS DISABILITY REVIEW BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Established. 
The city police officers and firefighters disability review board, referred to in this division as the disability review board, for former members of the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund and the Asheville Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund is established. The disability review board is established as of January 1, 1987, for former members of the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund for those members or survivors who became eligible for benefits on or after January 1, 1987. The provisions of this division shall apply to former members of the Asheville Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund, or their survivors, who become eligible for benefits on or after January 1, 1988. No benefits shall be paid for any period of time prior to January 1, 1987, for former members of the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund and for any period of time prior to January 1, 1988, for former members of the Asheville Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 1, 8-18-87; Ord. No. 1674, § 1, 1-26-88; Ord. No. 1738, § 1, 11-29-88)  
Sec. 2-112. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the disability review board shall be to determine when supplemental payments should be made to former members of the city policemen's or firemen's pension and disability fund or their survivors, when the disability or retirement payment from LGERS is less than the amount of the monthly benefit which they would have been entitled to under the city policemen's or firemen's pension and disability fund. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 2, 8-18-87; Ord. No. 1674, § 2, 1-26-88)  
Sec. 2-113. - Membership. 
Membership of the disability review board shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A member of the city council, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of city council and shall serve as chairman of the disability review board; 
(2)  A current member of the police department, elected by former members of the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund, who shall serve a two-year term; 
(3)  A current member of the fire department, elected by former members of the Asheville Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund, who shall serve a two-year term; 
(4)  A licensed medical doctor who practices within the corporate limits of the city, appointed by the city council, who shall serve a two-year term; 
(5)  The city manager or his designee; and 
(6)  Two members at large chosen by the city council, each of whom shall serve a two-year term. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 3, 8-18-87; Ord. No. 1674, § 3, 1-26-88)  
Sec. 2-114. - Request for hearing. 
Any retiree or surviving spouse of any retiree who may be entitled to benefits under this division shall serve notice upon the city of a claim for benefits pursuant to this division by filing with the personnel director a written request for a hearing before the disability review board. Upon receipt of such a request for hearing, the personnel director shall notify the members of the disability review board of a date for such hearing to take place. The requesting party will receive notification in writing no less than five days prior to the date for which the hearing is scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 4, 8-18-87)  
Sec. 2-115. - Appeals. 
Any member or survivor, his beneficiary or representative, whose claim for supplemental payments has been denied in whole or in part after review by the disability review board, shall have the right of appeal of that determination to the superior court of the county, with such appeal in the nature of certiorari. The appeal must be filed with the superior court of the county by the member or survivor, his beneficiary or representative within 30 days after receipt of written denial of all or part of the claim by the disability review board. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 5, 8-18-87; Ord. No. 1844, § 1, 4-4-90)  
Sec. 2-116. - Application date; appeal to superior court. 
This division shall be effective for all determinations made by the disability review board at any of the board hearings held after the April 5, 1990, hearing of the disability review board; provided, however, that any person claiming benefits under this division wishing to appeal from a determination made by the disability review board at any of the board hearings held on or before April 5, 1990, may waive his appeal to the city council, as formerly provided, and appeal directly to the superior court of the county from a determination of the disability review board. Such waiver of the right to appeal to the city council shall be in writing and filed by the claimant with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 5, 8-18-87; Ord. No. 1844, § 2, 4-4-90)  
Sec. 2-117. - Supplemental payments adjustments. 
Supplemental payments shall be periodically adjusted by the finance director as cost of living or other increases are granted to beneficiaries of the state retirement system. Further, such supplemental payments from the city shall cease at any time that monthly payments to former fund members or their survivors from the state retirement system equal or exceed the payments such member or survivor would have been entitled to under the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund. 
(Ord. No. 1650, § 6, 8-18-87)  
Sec. 2-118. - Effective date. 
This division shall be effective as of January 1, 1987, for former members of the Asheville Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund, and as of January 1, 1988, for former members of the Asheville Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund. 
(Ord. No. 1674, § 4, 1-26-88)  
Secs. 2-119—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4199, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed Div. 6, § 2-131, which pertained to Asheville Transit Commission. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 2-131—2-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ASHEVILLE TREE COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), Sept. 28, 1999, changed the designation of div. 7 from "Asheville Tree/Greenway Commission" to "Asheville Tree Commission." 
Cross reference— Historic preservation, ch. 8; parks and recreation, ch. 12; trees, ch. 20; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Conservation of natural resources, Const. N.C., art. XIV, § 5; trees on state roads, G.S. 136-93; administration of parks and recreation programs, G.S. 160A-354; financing parks and recreation, G.S. 160A-356; planning agency, G.S. 160A-361. 
 
Sec. 2-156. - Creation. 
It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the city will best be served by the establishment of a commission to foster the preservation, planting, replacement and removal of trees without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. To that end there is hereby created and established an advisory board of the city to be known as the Urban Forestry Commission, referred to throughout this division as "commission." Any and all references to the "Tree Commission" or the "Asheville Tree Commission" elsewhere in the City Code shall be understood to refer to the Urban Forestry Commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(a); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 4781, § 2, 11-26-19)  
Sec. 2-157. - Composition. 
The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. In addition, the executive director of Quality Forward, a representative of Carolina Power & Light and a representative of Metropolitan Sewerage District of Buncombe County shall serve as ex-officio voting members of the commission. A commissioner shall receive no compensation for his/her services. The commission members shall be in voluntary service to the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(b); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 2-158. - Terms of office. 
Members of the commission shall serve three-year staggered terms. In order to create staggered terms, three of the first members appointed shall serve three-year terms, two shall serve two-year terms and two shall serve a one-year term. All members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Any vacancies occurring shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(c); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 2-159. - Selection of officers. 
The commission shall select annually from among its members a chair and vice-chair. The public works director shall serve as secretary to the commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(d); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 2-160. - Rules. 
The commission shall adopt rules governing the time and place of meetings, voting requirements and the appointment of committees. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(e); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 2-161. - Staff support. 
The city manager shall appoint a staff person or persons specifically charged with the responsibility of carrying out the planning, implementation and coordination with other agencies and advisory boards of all projects undertaken by the commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2-91(i); Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 4781, § 2, 11-26-19) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 2-161 pertained to advisory functions and derived from Code 1965, § 2-91(i) and Ord. No. 1677, adopted Feb. 23, 1988; however Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), adopted Sept. 28, 1999, set out new provisions to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 2-162. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 2-162 pertained to staff resource and derived from Code 1965, § 2-91(i) and Ord. No. 1677, adopted Feb. 23, 1988; however, Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), adopted Sept. 28, 1999, moved the provisions of the former § 2-162 to § 2-161.  
Sec. 2-163. - Purpose and powers. 
(a)  Subject to such limitation as may be imposed by laws or regulations, the commission shall serve as an advisory board to the city council for the following purposes in order to further the public welfare: 
(1)  Facilitate the planting, growth and protection of trees within the city; 
(2)  Foster the communication and coordination among the citizens of the city that would provide the needed support for protection of trees within the city; 
(3)  Conduct continuing research, planning and feasibility assessments required to support the purposes stated in this section; 
(4)  Work with city staff to promote and enforce chapter 20 of this Code regarding the regulation of planting, protection, preservation and removal of trees. 
(b)  To carry out the purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission shall have the powers as follows: 
(1)  Appoint advisory task forces to make recommendations to the entire commission relative to specialized studies or projects which further the implementation of the purposes of the commission set forth in this division. 
(2)  Perform those tasks necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes of this commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2-92; Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 2-164. - Annual reports to city council. 
The commission shall submit to the city council an annual report of its activities and recommendations and shall file with the city clerk copies of its minutes and proceedings of its regular and special meetings. 
(Code 1965, § 2-93; Ord. No. 1677, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 2621, § 1(a), 9-28-99)  
DIVISION 8. - CITY BUSINESS AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-165. - Creation; composition; terms of office; organization. 
(a)  Creation. It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the city will be best served by establishing a commission to focus on issues related to business and development in our city and to promote the economic vitality of Asheville. To that end, there is hereby created and established a commission of the city to be known as the city business and development commission, referred to in this division as commission. 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall consist of two members appointed by the City Council of the City of Asheville and 13 other members, with one member being appointed by and representing each of the following groups: 
Advantage West; 
Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce; 
Asheville Downtown Association; 
Asheville Downtown Commission; 
Asheville Merchants Association; 
Biltmore Village Merchants Association; 
Buncombe County; 
Coalition of Asheville Neighborhoods; 
Council for Independent Business Owners; 
Eagle/Market Streets Development Corporation; 
Handmade in America; 
Minority Business Alliance; 
RiverLink; 
Tourism Development Authority; 
West Asheville Business Association. 
The members appointed to represent the groups listed above shall be appointed by those groups subject to the same policies and guidelines adopted by the Asheville City Council for their appointment. 
(c)  Terms of office. Members appointed by Advantage West, Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce, Asheville Downtown Association, Asheville Downtown Commission, and the Asheville Merchants Association shall be appointed initially for a one-year term beginning on October 1, 1996. Members appointed by Biltmore Village Merchants Association, Buncombe County, Coalition of Asheville Neighborhoods, Council for Independent Business owners, Tourism Development Authority, and one city council appointee shall be appointed initially for a two-year term beginning on October 1, 1996. Members appointed by Eagle/Market Streets Development Corporation, Handmade in America, RiverLink, West Asheville Business Association, Minority Business Alliance, and one city council appointee shall be appointed initially for a three-year term beginning on October 1, 1996. All subsequent appointments for each group shall be for three-year terms. All members shall be eligible for reappointments to one additional term. Those having initial one-year appointments will be eligible for three terms. 
(d)  Selection of officers. The city council shall select, from among the members of the city business and development commission, a chairman who shall serve at the pleasure of city council. The city business and development commission shall select annually from among its members a vice-chairman and secretary. 
(e)  Meetings. The commission shall establish its meeting schedule. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or, in his absence, by the vice-chairman, and special meetings shall be called upon the request of a majority of the members of the commission, subject to requirements of the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. 
(f)  Voting. A quorum shall be constituted by a simple majority of those appointed commission members. The chairman or presiding member of the commission shall vote on all matters of business considered by the commission. 
(g)  Transaction of business. The commission shall act as a body in the transaction of all business, unless a committee or a member is duly authorized by the commission for a specific purpose. Such a committee is to be discharged upon the completion of the duties assigned to it, unless it is a permanent committee. 
(h)  Appointment of committees. The commission is authorized to appoint committees from its membership or the community at large. Committee functions shall be fixed by the commission at the time of appointment. Committees may be standing or ad hoc in nature and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2309, § 1, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2334, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 2354, §§ 1, 2, 4-22-97)  
Sec. 2-166. - Purpose and powers. 
(a)  Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city, the city business and development commission shall be embodied for the following purposes: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council policies and strategies for the business and economic development of the city; 
(2)  Coordinate the development of city business districts working with property owners, merchants and interested agencies and organizations; 
(3)  Provide a mechanism for community participation for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council concerning plans and reports addressing city business and economic development; 
(4)  Promote and recommend the improvement of the infrastructure and urban design necessary to achieve the city's development objectives; 
(5)  Coordinate with other economic development entities in the area to accomplish city development objectives; 
(6)  Encourage and recommend appropriate marketing programs for the promotion of Asheville and its business opportunities/districts; and 
(7)  Assist in the development and promote the establishment of programs to assist in business retention and growth in the city. 
(b)  To carry out the purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Do all things, subject to limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city, necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes of the commission for the public welfare. 
(2)  Make studies which further the implementation of its plans; 
(3)  Make bylaws for the management and regulation of its affairs; and 
(4)  Actively encourage and pursue the participation of the private sector and private capital in implementing approved projects. 
(Ord. No. 2309, § 1, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 2-167. - Staffing. 
The city manager shall be responsible for providing staff support for the city business and development commission. The city manager shall assign appropriate staff who shall direct and carry out the annual work program of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2309, § 1, 8-13-96)  
Secs. 2-168—2-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Creation; composition; organization. 
(a)  Creation. It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the City of Asheville and County of Buncombe, North Carolina, will best be served by the establishment of a commission to uphold the sustainability and continued development of multimodal transportation as a means for reducing traffic congestion, improving air and water quality, supporting economic development, providing access to jobs, promoting public health, and improving and creating opportunities for active recreation. 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall consist of nine voting members and three ex-officio non-voting members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Asheville as follows: 
(1)  Two voting members representing transit interests; 
(2)  Two voting members representing greenway interests; 
(3)  Two voting members representing bicycle/pedestrian interests; 
(4)  Three at-large members; 
(5)  One ex-officio non-voting member of the planning and zoning commission; 
(6)  One ex-officio non-voting member of the sustainability advisory committee on energy and the environment; and 
(7)  One ex-officio non-voting member of the neighborhood advisory committee. 
(c)  Representation and appointment process. All members shall be appointed by city council with input from the commission. Members shall represent various modes of transportation to include, but not be limited to: transit, greenways, automobiles, bikes, pedestrians, etc. Members shall possess expertise and interest in the sustainability and development of multimodal transportation and demonstrate willingness to participate actively in commission efforts. 
(d)  Removal. Members of the commission shall be removed at the discretion of city council. 
(e)  Term of office. Members of the commission shall be appointed for three-year terms. In appointing the original members of the commission, the council may appoint certain members for less than three years to the end that thereafter, the terms of all members shall not expire at the same time. Members may serve up to two consecutive terms. 
(f)  Organization and general operation. 
(1)  Bylaws. Within 12 months from the date of adoption of the ordinance creating the commission, the commission shall adopt bylaws. 
(2)  Meetings. The commission shall adopt a regular meeting schedule. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or, in her/his absence, by the vice chairperson, and special meetings shall be called upon the request of a majority of the members of the commission. 
(3)  Selection of officers. The commission shall select annually from its members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. 
(4)  Staff support. The city manager will assign city staff to provide both technical and administrative support to the commission. 
(5)  Attendance. The failure of any commission member to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings of the commission held during a 12-month period, without an excused absence being approved by the chairperson of the commission, may be grounds for removal. 
(6)  Voting. A simple majority of commission members, excluding vacancies, shall constitute a quorum. The chair or the presiding member of the commission shall vote on all matters of business considered by the commission, unless recused by a majority vote of the commission. 
(7)  Transaction of business. The commission shall act as a body in the transaction of all business, unless a committee or member is duly authorized by the commission for a specific purpose. 
(8)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their service, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses in connection with their official and authorized duties. 
(9)  Appointment of committees. The commission is authorized to appoint committees from its membership or the community at large. Committee functions shall be fixed by the commission at the time of appointment. Committees may be standing or ad hoc in nature and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
(10)  Periodic reviews and dissolution procedure. Periodic reviews of the progress of the commission will occur as deemed necessary by the city council. The commission may be discharged or dissolved by ordinance of city council. 
(Ord. No. 4190, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 4314, § 1, 6-24-14)  
Sec. 2-172. - Purpose. 
(a)  Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city, the commission is created for the following purposes: 
(1)  Recommend policies for the development/integration of multimodal transportation planning and education to the city; 
(2)  Assist with the development of a multimodal transportation system; 
(3)  Assist the city with the implementation of best management practices for educating the public on the benefits on multimodal transportation; 
(4)  Assist in the sustainability, development and implementation of the multimodal transportation plan; 
(5)  Assist in the prioritization of the capital improvements plan as it relates to multimodal transportation projects; and 
(Ord. No. 4190, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 4314, § 2, 6-24-14)  
Secs. 2-173—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-176—2-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3453, adopted Mar. 20, 2007, deleted Div. 10, §§ 2-176—20-185, in its entirety. Former Div. 10, §§ 2-176—20-185, pertained to educational access channel commission and derived from Ord. No. 2554, §§ 1(1)—(9), adopted Mar. 9, 1999.  
DIVISION 11. - PUBLIC ART AND CULTURAL COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2609, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 1999, was intended to be included as a new div. 11, §§ 2-173—2-182. However, due to existing division and section designations, said ordinance was included as a new div. 11, §§ 2-185.1—2-185.10 at the editor's discretion. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4023, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2011, amended the title of Art. III, Div. 11 from Asheville Public Art Board to Public Art and Cultural Commission. 
 
Sec. 2-185.1. - Creation; definition of public art. 
It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the city will best be served by the establishment of a public art and cultural commission. To that end there is hereby created and established an advisory board of the city to be known as the public art and cultural commission, referred to throughout this division as board. 
"Public art" shall be defined as any permanent and temporary work of art created by artists or craftsmen and sited in a public space and accessible or visible for the public to experience. Public art does not include any architectural or landscape design except when developed by an artist. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 9-27-11)  
Sec. 2-185.2. - Composition. 
The board shall consist of nine members appointed by the city council. A majority of the board shall be arts professionals, hereby defined as an individual having outstanding knowledge of the arts and recognized by critics and peers as a professional practitioner in the visual, performing, or language arts or a combination thereof, as judged by the quality of that professional practitioner's body of work, educational background, experience past commissions, exhibition/performance record, publications, and production of artworks. An arts professional may be an artist, art historian, curator, arts administrator, arts educator, critic, architect, or landscape architect. A board member shall receive no compensation for his/her services. The board members shall be in voluntary service to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 2, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 2-185.3. - Terms of office. 
Members of the board may serve for a maximum of two three-year terms subject to reappointment. All members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Any vacancies occurring shall be filled by the city council for the duration of the member's unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3331, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 3893, § 3, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 2-185.4. - Selection of officers. 
The board shall annually select from among its members a chair and vice-chair or co-chairs as necessary and/or appropriate. The director of parks, recreation and cultural arts or his/her designee shall serve as secretary to the board. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 4, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 2-185.5. - Rules. 
The board shall adopt rules governing the time and place of meetings, voting requirements and the appointment of committees. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 2-185.6. - Advisory function. 
The board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council, the city manager and the director of parks, recreation and cultural arts on matters pertaining to or affecting public art within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 5, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 2-185.7. - Staff support. 
The director of parks, recreation and cultural arts or his/her designee shall serve as the city staff member specifically charged with the responsibility of implementing policy recommendations of the board and coordination with other municipal agencies and advisory boards for all projects undertaken by the public art board. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 6, 8-24-10)  
Sec. 2-185.8. - Purposes; responsibilities and powers. 
(a)  Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by laws or regulations, the board shall serve as an advisory board to the city council for the following purposes in order to further the public welfare: 
(1)  Facilitate public art in public buildings and public spaces. 
a.  Inform the residents of and visitors to Asheville about public art. 
b.  Advance the City of Asheville as an "arts destination" and engage public art as a major attraction for artists, cultural tourism, and economic development. 
c.  Advise staff and council on the site and content of public art. 
d.  Be responsible for developing a procedure for the selection of art and/or artists, which will include public input as well as appropriate staff review. The board shall follow its public art policy and implementation guidelines as modified and/or amended every five years. 
e.  Recommend to staff and city council the acceptance of works of art. 
(2)  Engage the creative sector as a major attraction for artists, cultural tourism, and economic development. 
(3)  Encourage public confidence for and appreciation of the arts in Asheville. 
(4)  Work to build partnerships and collaborations throughout Asheville's creative community. 
a.  Support relationships and shared resources and make use of existing strengths in public and cultural arts organizations. 
(5)  Aid in strengthening the organizational structure of public and cultural arts delivery. 
(b)  To carry out the purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, the board shall have the powers as follows: 
(1)  Appoint task forces to make recommendations to the entire board relative to specialized studies or projects that further the implementation of the purposes of this division. 
(2)  Perform those tasks necessary to implement agreed upon decisions of the board. 
(3)  Members appointed to task forces and ad hoc committees shall perform their duties in a manner that satisfies all conduct required of an appointed member of the board including restrictions on conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3893, § 7, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 9-27-11)  
Sec. 2-185.9. - Meetings. 
The board shall establish its meeting schedule. Notice of meetings shall be provided as required by the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 2-185.10. - Annual reports to city council. 
The board shall submit to the city council an annual report of its activities and recommendations and shall file with the city clerk copies of its minutes and proceedings of its regular and special meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2609, § 1, 9-14-99)  
DIVISION 12. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4198, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed Div. 12, §§ 2-185.11—2-185.19, which pertained to Asheville Greenway Commission. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 2-185.11—2-185.19. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - ASHEVILLE AREA RIVERFRONT REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-185.20. - Creation; geography; membership; organization. 
(a)  Creation. It is hereby declared that the public welfare and interest of the citizens of the City of Asheville and County of Buncombe, North Carolina, will best be served by establishing and maintaining a commission for the sustainability and continued development of the Riverfront District, a vital area of western North Carolina's economic, cultural and visitor activity. To that end, there is hereby created and established a commission of the city to be known as the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission, referred to in this document as "the commission." 
(b)  Definitions and geographic area defined. 
(1)  The Riverfront District is defined as the area within the City of Asheville's corporate boundary or extraterritorial jurisdiction adjacent to the French Broad or Swannanoa Rivers, including non-adjacent yet nearby land having characteristics or features directly impacting the economic climate of the Riverfront District. This area is fluid a may change over time. The Riverfront District, especially the areas outlined in the Wilma Dykeman Riverway Master Plan, shall be the primary focus of the commission's work. 
(2)  The Regional Riverfront includes any similarly described land lying outside the city's jurisdictions but within Buncombe County's boundary. The Regional Riverfront shall be the general study area of the commission. 
(3)  The River District Design Review Area, as referenced in subsection 7-3-10(a)(1) of the city's Unified Development Ordinance, is contained solely within the City of Asheville's jurisdiction, and is illustrated by the adopted River District Design Review Area Map on file with the Development Services Department of the City of Asheville. 
(c)  Membership. 
(1)  Composition. The commission shall consist of 14 voting members appointed by various community boards. Each appointing board shall ensure that at least one-half of their appointees are an owner of real property or an owner of a business in the Regional Riverfront; design professional required to be appointed by the City of Asheville shall not count toward or against the city's ownership requirement. The Town of Woodfin, having only one appointee, is exempted from the ownership requirement. The composition of the commission will be as follows: 
a.  Two members appointed by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners, with one being a county commissioner; 
b.  Five members appointed by the city council, with one being a council member; and one being a design professional who shall serve as chairperson of the Planning and Design Review Subcommittee, a standing body created and operated under the commission's adopted bylaws 
c.  Two members appointed by the Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce; 
d.  Two members appointed by RiverLink; 
e.  Two members appointed by the Council of Independent Business Owners; 
f.  One member appointed by the Woodfin Board of Alderman. 
(2)  Representation and appointment process. Appointed members shall represent various segments of the Regional Riverfront community such as, but not limited to, property owners, merchants, residents, businesses and institutions, landscape architects, civil engineers or related specialties; and shall have a willingness to participate actively in commission efforts; and shall possess expertise and interest in the sustainability and development of the Riverfront district. The process used to make appointments to the commission is at the discretion of the appointing boards. 
(3)  Removal. Members of the commission shall be removed at the discretion of their appointing board. Appointing boards shall follow the City of Asheville's attendance standard as grounds for removal. 
(4)  Terms of office. Members of the commission shall serve staggered, three-year terms, with the exception of the city council member and county commission member, each of whom will serve according to the length of their respective terms of office (ex-officio with voting privileges). 
Members are eligible to serve up to two consecutive terms; partial (less than three-year) terms served due to the initial, (staggered) appointment structure or to fill a vacant seat shall not count toward two full terms of service. 
(d)  Organization and general operation. 
(1)  Bylaws. The commission shall operate under bylaws adopted by their membership. The bylaws shall be reviewed on a regular basis and updated when appropriate. The commission shall clearly outline the role of the Planning and Design Review Subcommittee, in the River District Design Review Process as outlined in section 7-5-18 of the UDO, in their adopted bylaws. 
(2)  Meetings. The commission shall adopt a regular meeting schedule. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or, in her/his absence, by the vice-chairperson, and special meetings shall be called upon the request of a majority of the members of the commission. 
[(3)]  Selection of officers. The commission shall select annually from its members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. 
[(4)]  Attendance. The failure of any commission member to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings of the commission held during a 12-month period, without an excused absence being approved by the chairperson of the commission, may be grounds for removal. 
[(5)]  Voting. A quorum shall be constituted by a simple majority of commission members, excluding vacancies. The chair or the presiding member of the commission shall vote on all matters of business considered by the commission, unless recused by a majority vote of the commission. 
[(6)]  Transaction of business. The commission shall act as a body in the transaction of all business, unless a committee or member is duly authorized by the commission for a specific purpose. 
[(7)]  Compensation. Members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their service, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses in connection with their official and authorized duties. 
[(8)]  Appointment of committees. The commission is authorized to appoint committees from its membership or the community at large. Committee functions shall be fixed by the commission at the time of appointment. Committees may be standing or ad hoc in nature and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
[(9)]  Periodic reviews and dissolution procedure. Periodic reviews of the progress of the commission will occur as deemed necessary by the city council and the county commission. The commission may be discharged or dissolved by a joint resolution of city council and the county commission. 
(Res. No. 09-237, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 3886, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 2-185.21. - Purposes; powers; contracts. 
(a)  Purposes. Subject to such limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city and county, the commission shall be embodied for the following purposes: 
(1)  Recommend to the city and county an overall policy for the continued development and sustainability of the Regional Riverfront. 
a.  Develop and recommend to the city and county a comprehensive strategy as may be deemed appropriate for the Riverfront and Regional Riverfront districts. Conduct regular evaluations and updates for the City of Asheville comprehensive strategic plan, the Wilma Dykeman Riverway Master Plan and all other plans affecting the French Broad River and Swannanoa River areas within Buncombe County. Work toward the implementation of the city-adopted Wilma Dykeman Riverway Master Plan. 
b.  Recommend to the city and county appropriate land development policies for the Riverfront and Regional Riverfront districts. Conduct evaluations and updates for zoning, regulations and other policies for properties in the vicinity of both districts (including but not limited to watershed policies, floodway management and greenway acquisition). 
c.  Recommend to the city and county what assistance, if any, is needed from professional consultants for Riverfront and Regional Riverfront efforts. 
d.  Recommend and monitor implementation of planning efforts in both districts. Provide recommendations as a part of the regular project/permit review process as applicable for the benefit of city and county officials for projects in the districts. 
(2)  Carry out the River District Design Review powers and duties assigned to the commission under section 7-3-10 and as outlined in section 7-5-18 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(3)  Provide recommendations to the city and the county for effective management of the public resources for the districts and actively pursue and assist private sector investment in the districts for the welfare of the citizens of the city and county. 
(4)  Cooperate with, evaluate, and represent the recommendations of other organizations, including, but not limited to, property owners, merchants, residents, businesses, tenants, non-profits, institutions and other members of the Riverfront and Regional Riverfront district communities. 
(b)  Powers. In order to fulfill the purposes listed above, and subject to limitations as may be imposed by state law or by ordinance of the city and county, the commission shall perform those tasks necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes of the commission and public welfare, including: 
(1)  Develop financial tools for riverfront development. 
(2)  Evaluate existing plans and recommendations for riverfront development. 
(3)  Identify appropriate uses for the districts and identify developers/investors for development. 
(4)  Coordinate riverfront commercial, recreational and residential development with property owners, merchants, residents, businesses, tenants, and institutions within the riverfront district. 
(5)  Promote and facilitate the improvement of riverfront infrastructure, including but not limited to water, public safety, parks, parking, transportation, utilities, sidewalks, sewer, and streetscape. 
(6)  Promote and facilitate marketing and other programs that focus on the riverfront and meet the goals and mission statement of the commission, including: 
a.  Promote and facilitate a program to assist in business retention in the riverfront district. 
b.  Promote and facilitate a program to increase sales, visitors and awareness of the riverfront district. 
c.  Promote and facilitate riverfront district living. 
d.  Promote, facilitate and act as liaison to catalytic developments significantly affecting the riverfront areas. 
(7)  Assist city and county government with procuring representative community participation when plans and reports concerning the development of the riverfront districts are prepared or implemented. 
(8)  Make studies which further the implementation of its plans. 
(9)  Make recommendations to city council regarding the map geography and text description that defines the Riverfront, Regional Riverfront, and River District Design Review Area districts. 
(10)  Actively encourage and pursue the participation of the public sector and private capital in implementing approved projects. 
(c)  Contracts. The commission shall be authorized to enter into and to let contracts for necessary services provided to the commission in the manner provided by law for contracts, but shall not commit financial resources of either the city or county without prior approval from the funding agencies. 
(Res. No. 09-237, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 3886, § 2, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 2-185.22. - Staffing; resources. 
As the lead partner in the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission Initiative, staffing and other resources needed for the commission will be managed by the City of Asheville. The city recognizes that the study areas for the commission reach beyond Asheville corporate and extraterritorial boundaries; the promotion of a strong, regional, strategic partnership, including sharing the cost of staffing and resources, is required. 
(a)  Budget. An annual budget will be appropriated by the City of Asheville to achieve the mission and goals of the commission. Funding, in-kind services and other resources shall be provided by the strategic partners, including the City of Asheville, Buncombe County, Riverlink, Asheville Area Chamber of Commerce, the Town of Woodfin, Land-of-Sky Regional Council and private property owners. 
(b)  Staffing. The City of Asheville City Manager shall be responsible for providing staff support for the commission. The city manager shall assign an appropriate staff member who shall direct and carry out the annual work program of the commission and shall serve as secretary to the commission with no voting rights. 
(c)  Resources. Technical experts and consultants outside ordinary staff available to perform such services needed to complete the approved work program elements shall be recommended by the commission in accordance with the state and federal, state and municipal policy pertaining to such selection. 
(Res. No. 09-237, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 3886, § 3, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 1-14-14)  
DIVISION 14. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION OF ASHEVILLE 
 
Sec. 2-185.23. - Establishment and purpose. 
(a)  The Human Relations Commission of Asheville (or "HRCA") is hereby established, pursuant to the authority set forth in G.S. § 160A-492. 
(b)  The purpose of the Human Relations Commission of Asheville is to promote and improve human relations and achieve equity among all citizens in the city by carrying out the city's human relations program. The HRCA will prioritize racial equity and will work with city government and partner with communities and outside agencies, in an effort to encourage and ensure diversity, fairness, equity and inclusion throughout the city. In furtherance thereof, the HRCA should endeavor to identify and assist in addressing all forms of individual, institutional and community discrimination through education, advocacy and policy recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 4663, § 1, 4-10-18)  
Sec. 2-185.24. - Definitions. 
(a)  Human relations. Human relations shall mean those activities which promote human dignity, equitable opportunity and harmony among the many different residents who make up the population of the city. This definition shall include those activities and programs classified as promoting the general well-being of residents without regard to race, religion, national origin, disability, gender, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression in their daily activities. 
(b)  Human relations program. The city's human relations program is devoted to promoting human relations through the following: 
(1)  The study of problems in the area of human relations; 
(2)  The promotion of equality of opportunity for all citizens; 
(3)  The promotion of understanding, respect and goodwill among all citizens; 
(4)  The provision of channels of communication among the races; 
(5)  Dispute resolution; 
(6)  Encouraging the employment of qualified people without regard to race, religion, national origin, disability, gender, age, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression; and 
(7)  Encouraging youth to become better trained and qualified for employment. 
(Ord. No. 4663, § 1, 4-10-18)  
Sec. 2-185.25. - Duties, membership, and rules of procedure. 
(a)  Duties. The HRCA is charged with carrying out the human relations program in accordance with the authority set forth in the North Carolina General Statutes, and in doing so its duties will include, but will not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Make policy recommendations to the Asheville City Council which promote and improve human relations and advance equity in the city; 
(2)  Support the city's office of equity and inclusion in its duties and responsibilities; 
(3)  Provide a forum where residents can raise, and bring to the HRCA's attention, issues and complaints relating to human relations issues in the city; 
(4)  Engage the community and gather community input regarding the utilization of city-funded programs and policies for the promotion of human relations; 
(5)  Promote and improve human relations and advance equity in public safety; 
(6)  Promote and improve human relations and advance equity in educational, art and cultural opportunities; 
(7)  Promote and improve human relations and advance equity in economic development in the city, including but not limited to city-funded economic development programs and opportunities; 
(8)  Promote and improve human relations and advance equity in health and human services in the city, including but not limited to city-funded health and human services programs; and 
(9)  Promote and improve human relations and advance equity in housing in the city, including but not limited to working with the city and other agencies to enhance opportunities and programs related to affordable housing and to address issues related to gentrification. 
(b)  Membership and appointment. 
(1)  The HRCA shall be comprised of 15 members appointed by the Asheville City Council, for staggered two-year terms. All members must be residents of the city. Members may serve two full consecutive two-year terms. Members can be removed at the discretion of the city council for good cause. 
(2)  In appointing members to the HRCA, the council should endeavor to use the following criteria: 
a.  Members should have demonstrated an interest and experience in human relations; 
b.  Membership should reflect the groups of individuals that the human relations program is intended to assist and protect, including but not limited to, individuals from different races, ethnicities, sexual orientation and socioeconomic backgrounds. With the recognition that there will have to be members who meet more than one of the following, the city council should endeavor to appoint individuals meeting the following criteria: 
•  Six African Americans; 
•  Two Latinx individuals; 
•  Two members of the LGBTQ community; 
•  Two youth members between the ages of 18 and 25; 
•  Two to three individuals who live in public housing; 
•  Two individuals with a disability; and 
•  Three individuals who are recognized as community leaders. 
c.  Council shall appoint members who reside in all geographical areas of the city; i.e. , council should appoint at least one member from each of the following: north Asheville, south Asheville, west Asheville, east Asheville and the downtown area. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The HRCA shall adopt rules of procedure necessary for the proper discharge of its duties, which govern, among other things, the election of a chair, and the conduct and time of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 4663, § 1, 4-10-18)  
Secs. 2-185.26—2-185.28 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 13. 
Related Laws reference— Civil service, § 31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Personnel rules, G.S. 160A-164. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-186. - City policy of nondiscrimination. 
(a)  There is hereby established a policy of the City of Asheville to oppose any discrimination in the hiring, promotional and disciplinary practices of the city so as to prohibit discrimination against any person for any reason that is not related to bona fide occupational qualifications for the relevant job classification or job performance. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to establish an administrative policy in order to prohibit such discriminatory practices within the employment practices of the city. 
(c)  All citizens of the city, individual and corporate, are hereby requested and urged to use their power and influence to the end that this city shall be one of equal opportunity for all citizens. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the establishment and maintenance of a fair and uniform system of personnel administration which is consistent with the principles contained in this section and with the needs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2103, §§ 1—4, 5-17-94)  
Sec. 2-187. - Criminal history checks. 
In order to protect the citizens of the city and their properties, the procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal history checks on all final candidates for regular full and part-time positions in the city government. Subject to subsection (3) of this section, employment with the city may be denied for those persons convicted of any crime against a person, crimes against property where intent is an element, crimes of moral turpitude, crimes involving operating a motor vehicle while impaired or any drug, prostitution or gambling related offense. 
(1)  The human resources director, or designee, shall conduct an investigation of any final candidate for a permanent full-time or part-time position with the city government and it shall be a precondition of employment that an applicant for such a position shall, upon request, provide fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification including a birth certificate, social security number and drivers license, if available, so that the human resource director, or designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of local, state and national criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by use of one of the following databases the Division of Criminal Information Network (DCI), Administrative Office of the Courts and/or Police Information Network (PIN) or successor databases. 
(2)  The chief of police of the Asheville Police Department or his designee shall provide the findings from the use of the DCI to the human resources director, or designee, provided that all necessary agreements with the state bureau of investigations division of criminal information have been executed. 
(3)  An evaluation of any crime for purposes of employment will take into account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the time frame of the offense as it relates to the essential job functions or the position applied. 
(4)  Prior to denial or termination of employment based upon criminal history record information (CHRI), the Asheville Police Department shall verify the existence of a record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the criminal information and identification section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the individual. 
(Ord. No. 2728, § 1, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 3638, § 1, 7-22-08) 
State Law reference— Authorizes municipal governments to establish personnel rules by ordinance or policy, G.S. 160A-164.  
Secs. 2-188—2-201. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the act passed by the General Assembly of North Carolina at its 1953 session, known as House Bill 835, and being chapter 757 of the Session Laws of 1953 as now or hereafter amended. 
Election means an election held for the purpose of electing to the civil service board the representatives of the employees in the classified service of the city in accordance with such act. 
(Code 1965, § 2-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-203. - Compliance. 
The procedure for the election of the civil service board shall be substantially as provided in this division. 
(Code 1965, § 2-14)  
Sec. 2-204. - General duties of city manager. 
The city manager, in addition to the duties specifically prescribed, shall perform such other acts in connection with the election of the civil service board as may be necessary to ensure a fair and impartial election, not inconsistent with this division and not inconsistent with the act. 
(Code 1965, § 2-15)  
Sec. 2-205. - Notice of eligibility requirements for membership. 
The city manager, in calling the election of the members of the classified service of the city for the purpose of electing two members to the civil service board and in giving written notice of such election to each employee of the classified service, shall also advise in such notice that the members of the civil service board must all be qualified voters of the city and not employed by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-206. - List of eligible voters. 
The city manager shall make a list of the names of those persons who are employees of the city and who are in the classified service of the city, as defined in the act, and to whom notices are to be given of the election of the civil service board, and only those persons whose names appear on such list shall be qualified and entitled to vote in the election, but each person whose name does appear on such list shall be entitled to vote. 
(Code 1965, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-207. - Polling places. 
At each election of the civil service board, there shall be one polling place in the city hall building, one polling place in the municipal building housing the police and fire departments, and one polling place in the city garage on South Charlotte Street. 
(Code 1965, § 2-18)  
Sec. 2-208. - Superintendents. 
In the election of the civil service board, the city manager shall select two persons for each of the polling places who shall be known as superintendents of election for such polling places and who shall open the polls and superintend the polls until the close of the election. They shall keep poll books in which shall be entered the names of every person who shall vote, and at the close of the election, they shall certify the poll books over their proper signatures and deposit them with the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 2-19)  
Sec. 2-209. - Hours polls open. 
The polls shall be open on the day of election of the civil service board from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. until 5:00 p.m. and no longer. 
(Code 1965, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-210. - Ballots and method of voting generally. 
Two persons are to be elected as members of the civil service board and a single ballot shall be prepared having the names of all persons nominated placed thereon for the member of the classified service casting the ballot to mark his two choices of the candidates therefor, and the act of marking beside the name of such persons shall count as one vote for such person. No ballot shall be counted when a voter marks beside the names of three or more different persons. If a voter marks beside the name of the same person twice on the same ballot, that such ballot shall be counted as only one vote for such person. Each ballot shall have two blank spaces provided for the voter to write in the name of any person not duly nominated and listed on the ballot. The act of writing in the name of such person as a candidate shall count as one vote for each such person. 
(Code 1965, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-211. - Secret ballot required. 
Voting in any election governed by this division shall be by secret ballot. 
(Code 1965, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-212. - Counting of ballots. 
When an election under this division is completed, the superintendents of election shall open the boxes and count the ballots, and the counting of ballots shall be continued without adjournment until completed and the result thereof declared. 
(Code 1965, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-213. - Board of canvassers. 
The superintendents of election of each polling place shall appoint one of their number to attend the meeting of the board of canvassers as a member thereof and shall deliver to the member who shall have been so appointed the original returns of the result of the election in such polling place. The members of the board of canvassers who shall have been so appointed shall attend the meeting of the board of canvassers and shall constitute the board of canvassers for such election, and a majority of them shall constitute a quorum. The board of canvassers shall meet on the next day after the election at 10:00 a.m. in the city council chamber. 
(Code 1965, § 2-24)  
Sec. 2-214. - Canvassing, determination and certification of results. 
The board of canvassers of the election of the civil service board shall, at its meeting and in the presence of such persons whose names appear on the list referred to in section 2-206 as choose to attend, open, canvass and judicially determine the results of the election, shall make abstracts stating the number of ballots cast at each polling place, including the name of each person voted for and the number of votes given to each persons and shall sign such abstracts. The board of canvassers shall have power and authority to pass upon all the votes relative to the election and determine and declare the result of such election. In addition, it shall file two certified copies of such result, one copy of which shall be filed with the city manager and one with the city clerk, who shall present such certification to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-25)  
Sec. 2-215. - Persons receiving most of votes to be elected. 
The two persons receiving the highest number of votes in the election shall be elected as members of the civil service board. 
(Code 1965, § 2-26)  
Secs. 2-216—2-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that all employees be treated fairly and equitably in all respects. Employees who feel they have not been so treated have a right to present an individual or group grievance to appropriate management officials for prompt consideration and equitable decision. Employees may orally or in writing, formally or informally, present complaints to their supervisors, starting with their immediate supervisor and proceeding through supervisory channels to the department head and city manager. 
(b)  When more than one grievance is filed regarding the same subject matter, each person in a supervisory position, from the immediate supervisor to the city manager, who is charged with the responsibility of making a determination in the grievance procedure shall determine whether to hear such grievances jointly or separately. The determination regarding whether to proceed with the grievances jointly or separately may be based upon that person's determination of the most efficient manner in which to handle the grievances. If the supervisor or city manager shall determine that the rights of an employee who has filed a grievance would be prejudiced by a joint hearing, that employee's grievance shall be heard separately. 
(c)  Before presenting their complaints to their supervisors, employees who file a group grievance shall select no more than six employee representatives from among those filing the grievance. Each person in a supervisory position, from the immediate supervisor to the city manager, who is charged with the responsibility of making a determination in the grievance procedure shall hear such a grievance through the group representatives; however, nothing in this section shall prohibit a supervisor from hearing the grievance with the entire group of grievants. 
(d)  It is the intent of this section that employees and their representatives be unimpeded and free from restraint, coercion, discrimination or reprisal in exercising this right of appeal. The filing of a grievance by any employee will not be construed as reflecting unfavorably on his good standing, performance, loyalty or desirability for continued service with the city. Any employee may discuss any matter with his supervisor, other levels of supervision and the personnel department without invoking the formal grievance procedure outlined in this division. (See also section 1, Purpose of City of Asheville Personnel Policy, City of Asheville Personnel Policy.) 
(Code 1965, § 19A-1; Ord. No. 1731, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 1864, § 19A-1, 9-18-90)  
Sec. 2-227. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Grievance means a complaint or dispute of an employee relating to his employment. Examples of problems for which grievances may be filed include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Unfair interpretation or application of policies governing personnel practices; 
(2)  Unfair or inappropriate disciplinary actions; 
(3)  Unsafe physical facilities, surroundings, materials or equipment; 
(4)  Unfair or discriminatory disciplinary or supervisory practices; 
(5)  Unjust treatment by fellow workers; 
(6)  Unreasonable work requirements; 
(7)  Sexual or racial harassment; 
(8)  Safety or health matters; 
(9)  Acts of reprisal as the result of utilizing the grievance procedure; or 
(10)  Any other grievance related to conditions of employment. 
(See also section 66, Grievance Defined, City of Asheville Personnel Policy.) 
(Ord. No. 1864, § 19A-2, 9-18-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-228. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the grievance procedure include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Providing employees with a procedure by which their complaints can be considered promptly, fairly and without reprisal. 
(2)  Encouraging employees to express themselves about the conditions of work which affect them as employees. 
(3)  Promoting a better understanding of policies, practices and procedures which affect employees. 
(4)  Increasing the confidence that employees have that personnel decisions are in accordance with established, fair and uniform policies and procedures. 
(See also section 67, Purposes of Grievance Procedure, City of Asheville Personnel Policy.) 
(Ord. No. 1864, § 19A-3, 9-18-90)  
Sec. 2-229. - Procedures. 
The steps enumerated in this section shall be followed in all employee grievances. All grievances must be in writing, either in letter or memo form or using a city grievance form, dated and signed. Upon receipt of a written grievance, the supervisor shall immediately forward a copy of it and any subsequent decisions regarding the matter to the grievant's department head and personnel director. However, if an employee feels that he has been subject to sexual or racial harassment by his supervisor, the employee may refer the matter directly to the employee's department head or the personnel director. Prior to the first formal step of the grievance procedure, an employee and his supervisor are encouraged to discuss the problem and seek to resolve it informally. This meeting should be scheduled by the employee within 15 calendar days of the incident or action giving rise to the problem. 
(1)  Step 1. If an informal meeting does not resolve the problem, the employee may file a written grievance within ten calendar days of the initial discussion; provided, however, if an informal discussion of the grievance has not taken place, an employee shall file his written grievance within 15 calendar days of the incident or action giving rise to the complaint. Ongoing conditions are not subject to this deadline. The supervisor shall respond, in writing, within ten calendar days of receipt of the written grievance. In some cases, the supervisor may feel that a second meeting would be constructive. If so, the supervisor may schedule a meeting with the employee within seven calendar days after receiving the written grievance, fairly investigate the matter and render a written decision on the grievance within seven calendar days of the meeting. If an employee has filed a grievance with a supervisor who lacks authority to resolve it, the supervisor shall immediately forward the grievance to the employee's department head or other appropriate supervisor to ensure that the grievance is acted on in a timely manner. 
(2)  Step 2. If the employee is not satisfied with the step 1 decision, the employee may file an appeal with his division head within seven calendar days following receipt of the step 1 decision. The division head shall respond, in writing, within ten calendar days of the receipt of the written grievance. In some cases, the division head may feel that a second meeting would be constructive. If so, the division head may schedule a meeting with the employee within seven calendar days after receiving the written grievance, fairly investigate the matter and render a written decision on the grievance within seven calendar days of the meeting. If an employee has filed a grievance with a division head who lacks authority to resolve it, the division head shall immediately forward the grievance to the employee's department head to ensure that the grievance is acted on in a timely manner. 
(3)  Step 3. If the employee is not satisfied with the step 2 decision, the employee may file an appeal with his department head within seven calendar days following receipt of the step 2 decision. The department head shall within ten calendar days hold a meeting with the employee for the purpose of discussing the grievance fully. The department head will render a written decision within ten calendar days of the meeting. 
(4)  Step 4. If the employee is not satisfied with the step 3 decision, the employee may file a written appeal with the city manager within seven calendar days following receipt of the step 3 decision. Within 15 calendar days of receipt of such request, the city manager shall hear matters pertinent to the grievance. In so doing, the manager may appoint a grievance committee to assist him in resolving the grievance. The role of such a committee shall be advisory and not binding on the city manager. Within 30 calendar days of such hearing, the decision of the city manager shall be reduced to writing and transmitted to the aggrieved employee by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. The decision shall also be distributed to the aggrieved employee's department head and the personnel department. In cases where the employee has been discharged, suspended, reduced in rank, transferred against his will or denied any promotion or raise in pay to which he would be entitled to, the decision of the city manager may be appealed to the civil service board as specified in step 5. In all other cases, the decision of the city manager is final. 
(5)  Step 5. If the employee is not satisfied with the step 4 decision, the employee may appeal his grievance to the civil service board. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days following receipt of the step 4 decision. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the civil service board at a date not less than five and no more than 15 days from the clerk's receipt of such notice. If timely appealed, the civil service board shall only hear the grievance of a city employee who has been discharged, suspended, reduced in rank, transferred against his will or denied any promotion or raise in pay to which he would be entitled to determine whether or not the action complained of is justified. If the board determines that the act or omission complained of is not justified, the board shall order the city to rescind whatever action the board has found to be unjustified and may order the city to take such steps as are necessary for a just conclusion of the matter before the board. 
(6)  Step 6. If the employee is not satisfied with the step 5 decision, the employee may appeal his grievance to the county superior court for a trial de novo. Such appeal shall be filed with the clerk of superior court of the county within ten days of the receipt of the board's decision. 
(See also section 68, Procedures, City of Asheville Personnel Policy.) 
(Code 1965, § 19A-1; Ord. No. 1731, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 1864, § 19A-4, 9-18-90)  
Sec. 2-230. - Departmental predisciplinary conference. 
(a)  Purpose. A departmental predisciplinary conference shall be afforded any full-time permanent employee whose conduct or performance may result in his involuntary demotion, suspension without pay for more than ten consecutive work shifts or dismissal from the city service. At such conference, the employee shall be given the opportunity to respond to the alleged inappropriate conduct or unsatisfactory performance, and the information received from the employee shall be used by the department head in determining whether or not there are reasonable grounds to support the action of suspension, demotion or dismissal. 
(b)  Procedure. The employee shall be given a minimum of 48 hours' notice of the date, time, location and subject matter of the predisciplinary conference. The notice shall be written and acknowledged as received by the employee or by his department or division head in cases where the employee refuses to acknowledge receipt. The predisciplinary conference shall be attended by and limited to the following: 
(1)  The employee; 
(2)  The supervisor of the employee; 
(3)  The department head; and 
(4)  A representative from the personnel department when requested by the employee or department head. 
Such personnel representative shall be the director of personnel or his designee. In addition, either party may be represented by counsel. The conference shall be administrative in nature, and full opportunity will be afforded the employee to respond to the issues. At the conclusion of the conference, the employee will be advised as to when a decision will be made regarding the actions, if any, to be taken in the matter. The department head shall deliver a written decision to the employee within ten calendar days. 
(c)  Failure to appear. If the employee is duly notified and fails to appear for the predisciplinary conference, he shall forfeit the right to such a conference. 
(d)  Procedure for appeal to city manager. Any permanent full-time employee who is suspended without pay for more than ten consecutive work shifts, demoted or dismissed pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal directly to the city manager under the grievance procedure. Such an appeal shall be requested in writing within 12 calendar days of the departmental action being appealed. All provisions of the grievance procedure regarding appeal to the city manager and the civil service board shall be applicable. 
(See also section 69, Departmental Predisciplinary Conference, City of Asheville Personnel Policy.) 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 19A-5, 9-18-90)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3731, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 2009, repealed ch. 3 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 3 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3238, § 1, adopted May 24, 2005; and Ord. No. 3462, adopted Apr. 10, 2007. 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Regulation of domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the Asheville City Council to effectively enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-2. - Findings. 
The Asheville City Council makes the following findings to accomplish the objectives of vigorous and effective enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  That compliance with rabies vaccination laws as spelled out in the North Carolina General Statutes, Part 6 of Article 6 of Chapter 130A, is necessary for the protection of public health, for the protection of owners of the animals and to enable the animal control officer to accomplish his/her duties. The owner of an animal has a serious ownership obligation and duty to the citizens of Asheville to comply with the rabies vaccination laws. 
(2)  That the presence of a dog when off-premises in violation of article II of this chapter often creates substantial anxieties and concerns for the safety and free movement of people and, therefore, the owner has an obligation to the citizens of the city to effectively confine and physically control his/her dog. 
(3)  That the possibility of a dog bite causes serious anxiety for citizens of the city and, therefore, owners have an obligation to prevent the creation of that apprehension and concern. 
(4)  That a dog owner has a responsibility to be aware of any possible dangers to children under the age of seven years who, at that age, are unable to fully appreciate the possible danger presented by a dog and a dog's reaction to a young child. 
(5)  That a dog owner has a responsibility to be aware of any possible dangers to disabled and elderly persons who may not be able to physically ward off an aggressive dog. 
(6)  That the animal control officer must have sufficient authority to impose preventive measures, to seize animals, and, if necessary, to determine ownership rights. 
(7)  That the city must adopt civil penalties, fines and other sanctions as measures to protect the citizens of the city and to declare that the ownership of pets entails responsibility on the part of the owners. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-3. - Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to prohibit certain acts, omissions and conditions which interfere with the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city; to protect the public from unvaccinated, diseased, stray, roaming, or dangerous animals; to make unlawful acts of animals that interfere with the enjoyment of property or the peace and safety of the community; to protect animals from abuse or conditions harmful to their well-being; and to provide for the peace and dignity of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means to forsake or release an animal previously in the custody or possession of a person without providing for the adequate, continued care of the animal. 
Adult means a person 18 years of age or older who has not been judicially declared incompetent. 
Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate creature. Unless otherwise defined, the term animal includes, but is not limited to, dogs, cats, rabbits, fowl, chickens, horses, cows and goats. For the purposes of subsection 3-9(9) only, animal shall not include: 
(1)  Any small domesticated rodent such as a gerbil, guinea pig, hamster, rat or mouse; 
(2)  Any small bird including but not limited to a canary, parakeet, finch, parrot, cockatoo or myna; or 
(3)  Any amphibian, fish or non-venomous reptile. 
Animal control administrator means the designee of the director of animal control responsible for supervising the animal control department of the Asheville Police Department. 
Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city for admitting and caring for all animals found running at large or otherwise impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
At large means an animal roaming unrestrained beyond the owner's exclusive control. 
Attended tethering means the tethering of an animal, on the property of the owner of the animal, when the animal is in visual range of the owner and the owner is located outside with the animal. 
Attractant means any substance which could reasonably be expected to attract a wild animal or animals or does attract a wild animal or animals, including but not limited to, food products, pet food, feed or grain. 
Beehive means any receptacle, container, or part of receptacle or container which is made or prepared for the use of bees or which is inhabited by bees. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Dangerous animal is defined as: 
(1)  An animal that: 
a.  Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a person; or 
b.  Is determined by the animal control administrator to be a potentially dangerous animal. 
(2)  Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting. 
Domesticated means any animal traditionally kept, cared for, sheltered, fed or harbored for use as a companion animal. 
Exotic pet is any animal that is not classified as domesticated, livestock or a wild animal. This definition does not include feral animals. 
Feral means an animal of a species normally domesticated that has reverted to a wild state. 
Fowl means any bird traditionally associated with sport, farming or production including, but not limited to poultry and game birds. 
Harboring an animal means feeding or sheltering an animal seven days or more unless the animal is being boarded for a fee. 
Hatchery means any establishment that operates hatchery equipment for the production of baby chicks or poults. 
Household means any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Impounded means any animal, which taken into the custody of the animal control officer. 
Humane care and treatment means maintaining an animal in an appropriate, sanitary environment. Humane care and treatment also considers the age, size, health problems, hardness and other characteristics of the individual animal in daily care to prevent avoidable harm and suffering. 
Kennel means any person, partnership or corporation currently licensed by the state department of agriculture and engaged in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs and/or cats. 
Lawfully established, non-conforming use means a use of land and/or structure(s) for activities that were established legally, under the rules in place at that time in the applicable jurisdiction, prior to either an amendment of this chapter or the city acquiring jurisdiction over the property, and which would not be permitted by this chapter. 
Livestock means animals commonly associated with farming including, but not limited to, horses, mules, ponies, swine, sheep, cattle and goats. Livestock shall not include chickens or fowl. 
Lot means a portion, piece, division or parcel of land, with or without a household, which is identified by a tax map, recorded plat, deed, lease or the like. All contiguous land under common ownership and used for a single purpose shall constitute a single lot. 
Owner means any person who or legal entity that has a possessory property right in an animal or harbors an animal or has it in his/her care, custody or control, or knowingly permits said animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. Presumption of ownership may be rebutted by proof that such person has no property right in the animal, is neither harboring nor caring for the animal and, in the case of a dog, is not the licensed owner. Excepting article II of this chapter, owner does not include veterinarians or commercial kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises for a period of less than 30 days animals owned by other persons. 
Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the owner of the animal, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of a condominium, apartment complex or townhouse development. 
Pet means any animal kept for pleasure versus utility. 
Pet shop means any person, partnership or establishment that acquires for the purpose of resale or trade, animals bred or supplied by others. Pet shops dealing in dogs or cats must possess a current license from the state department of agriculture. 
Potentially dangerous animal means an animal that the animal control administrator determines to have: 
(1)  Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization; 
(2)  Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not on the owner's real property. 
(3)  Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack. 
Premises means a definite portion of real estate including land with its appurtenances, a building or part of a building. 
Quarantine order is an action taken by an animal control officer to secure any dog, cat or other animal specified by state law, which has bitten a person, for a mandatory ten-day observation period as required by N.C.G.S. §§ 130A-196—199. Quarantine orders may also be issued by the local health director for up to six months when a domestic animal suffers a rabies exposure. 
Rabies exposure means any bite or other event in which a person or animal has been suspected of coming in contact with the saliva or nervous tissue of an animal possibly having rabies. 
Refuse means all garbage, trash, substances and materials which are an attractant to a wild animal. 
Secure enclosure means a structure with six sides including the top. The bottom must be concrete unless the sides of the structure are buried one foot deep in a hard-packed soil. The structure shall be a minimum of four feet high and surround at least 150 square feet in area. If the animal is over 15 inches at the shoulder, the structure shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
Secure fence means a padlocked fence that is a minimum of four feet high and secure enough to contain a particular dog at all times. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization. 
Sufficient food means the provision of food of sufficient quantity and quality to insure proper growth or maintenance of body weight appropriate to the age and species of the animal. 
Sufficient shelter means a structure which consists of at least three sides, a floor and a roof and adequate in size and design to preserve the animal's body heat and protect the animal from the elements. 
Sufficient water means access to a constant supply of water that is clean, fresh and visibly free of debris and organic material, provided at suitable intervals for the species, and not to exceed 24 hours at any interval. 
Tether means to restrain an animal by tying the animal to any object or structure, including without limitation a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including without limitation, a chain, rope, cord, leash, or running line. Tethering shall not include using a leash to walk an animal. 
T-runner means a device typically constructed from two airline cables and a pulley allowing a length of cable to move freely along a guide cable. When the T-runner is attached to the collar or harness of a dog, the dog may move uninhibited in the area below the guide cable. 
Vaccination means the administration of rabies vaccine as required by N.C.G.S. § 130A-185. 
Wild animal means any animal which can normally be found in the wild state, particularly those feral, dangerous or non-domesticated animals which generally do not live in or about the habitation of humans, including, but not limited to: bears, non-human primates, all felines (other than the domestic house cat), deer, raccoons, skunks, squirrels, turkeys, venomous snakes, elephants, camels, coyotes, wolves, and any hybrid or crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics of the animals specified herein. 
Wildlife sanctuary means a charitable organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(C)(3), Internal Revenue Code of 1986, that: a) Operates a place or refuge where abused, neglected, unwanted, impounded, abandoned, orphaned, or displaced animals are provided care for the lifetime of the animal; b) Does not conduct any commercial activity with respect to wild animals, including but not limited to, (i) the sale, trade, auction, or lease of wild animals or their parts or (ii) the use of wild animals in any manner in a for-profit business or operation; c) Does not use wild animals for entertainment purposes or in a traveling exhibit; d) Does not breed any wild animals. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 3795, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 4234, §§ 1a, b, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 4436, § 1a, 7-28-15)  
Sec. 3-5. - Annual registration for dogs; spaying and neutering requirements; unaltered permit required. 
(a)  Annual registration for dogs. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog six months old or older or possessing a set of permanent canine teeth, whichever comes first, within the city limits for more than 30 days in a 12-month period is required to obtain a license tag for such dog by registering it with the license-collecting agent of the city. The period of registration shall include the 12 months following January 1 of each calendar year. The registration fee shall be due and payable on January 1 each calendar year. The city's fees and charges committee shall set the amount of the annual registration fee. In lieu of the civil penalty, a person cited under this section may register his or her dog with the city within 15 days of the issuance of the citation and the civil penalty will be voided. 
(1)  When initially registering a dog, the owner shall produce proof of current rabies vaccination and shall thereafter forward proof of vaccination renewal to the license-collecting agent. Failure to maintain current rabies vaccination records with the city shall render the dog registration invalid. 
(2)  Every person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog subject to the annual registration requirement is required to see that the license tag is valid and is securely fastened to the dog by collar or harness at all times. 
(3)  Working police dogs, registered service dogs, and service dogs in training with credentials shall qualify for exemption from the annual registration fee by including on the license application the name and phone number of the responsible agency and, in the case of service dogs, the individual registration number of the animal. 
(b)  Spaying and neutering requirements. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat six months of age or older is required to spay or neuter said animal unless said person holds an unaltered animal permit issued by the license-collecting agent of the city, or any successor agency authorized by law to issue said permit, except: 
(1)  Persons who own, keep, harbor, or have custody of registered service dogs or working police dogs; 
(2)  Individuals who are non-residents of the city and reside temporarily therein for a period not to exceed 30 days within a 12-month period; 
(3)  Animal shelters and veterinary hospitals; and 
(4)  Persons who own, keep, harbor or have custody of a dog or cat and who are in possession of a certification signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal is unfit to be spayed or neutered because the procedure would endanger the life of the animal. 
(c)  Obtaining an unaltered permit. Applicants must apply for unaltered permits with the license-collecting agent of the city. The lifetime fee for an unaltered animal permit shall be $100.00. A certificate will be issued identifying the animal as an unaltered animal and must be made available for inspection at all times. Violations of this provision will be subject to the penalties set forth in appendix B. A citation will only be issued under this section if the owner is in violation of another provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-6. - Administration. 
For purposes of administering this chapter, the city manager may create an animal control division within a city department, designate a local agency or designate other city departments to perform some or all of the functions of said division. There shall be a director of animal control who shall have overall responsibility for administering this chapter. The director may have the authority to hire appropriate staff including the animal control administrator and the animal control officers. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-7. - Powers and limitations of animal control officers. 
The powers and limitations of animal control officers shall be: 
(a)  To carry out the responsibilities of section 3-6, the animal control officer shall have the power to: 
(1)  Take up and deliver any animal at large in violation of this chapter to the animal shelter. 
(2)  Issue all appropriate permits, citations and notices required for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Recommend that an animal be declared a potentially dangerous animal if the animal control officer determines that the animal so qualifies as that term is defined in this chapter. Upon a declaration of a potentially dangerous animal by the animal control administrator, the animal control administrator shall notify the owner of the animal in writing, giving the reasons for the declaration. The owner may appeal the declaration of the animal control administrator by filing written objections with the animal control appeal board as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Organize and carry out canvasses of the city, including homes and any businesses utilizing security dogs; and, insuring that the provisions of this chapter and state law related to animal control are adhered to. 
(5)  Investigate complaints of city residents with regard to animals. 
(6)  Protect animals from neglect or abuse. 
(7)  Enforce state law with regard to an owner's failure to obtain proper vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies. 
(8)  Investigate all reported animal bites or other exposures to suspected rabid animals, and submit reports to the Buncombe County Health Director. 
(9)  Issue orders and warnings regarding the presence of bears or other wild animals in an area, and directing residents in the area to remove attractants, as defined herein or as specified in the order or warning. Said warning or order shall not exceed 60 days duration. 
(10)  The animal control officer shall have no duties or responsibilities with respect to organizing and carrying out rabies vaccination clinics. 
(b)  The authority of the animal control administrator to enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to dangerous dogs does not apply to: 
(1)  A dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; 
(2)  A dog being used in a lawful hunt. 
(3)  A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained by a domesticated animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domesticated animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(4)  A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; had tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-8. - Inspection, interference, or concealment. 
(a)  Inspections. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the animal control officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists in any household or upon any premises any violation of this chapter, the animal control officer is hereby empowered to enter and inspect such property at any reasonable time and perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this chapter as follows: 
(1)  If such property is unoccupied, the animal control officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control of the property; and 
(2)  If such property is occupied, the animal control officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons therefore; and 
(3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having control or charge of the property cannot be located after due diligence, the animal control officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant as provided in N.C.G.S. § 15-27.2. 
(b)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, resist, or obstruct the animal control officer while the animal control officer is carrying out any duty created under this chapter. 
(c)  Concealment of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal any animal for the purpose of evading any federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-9. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  The keeping of any animal in such manner or in such numbers as to constitute a public nuisance is hereby prohibited. For the purposes of this section, a public nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The keeping of any animal which by continued or repeated howling, yelping, barking or otherwise, causes loud noises which would disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonably prudent person on adjoining property; 
(2)  The keeping of any animal which habitually is at large; 
(3)  The keeping of a cage or pen constructed and used for the purpose of restraining animals within ten feet of the outer limits of the lot upon which the cage or pen is situated; provided, however, this setback requirement shall not be applicable where the placing of the cage or pen within the ten-foot area does not result in locating the cage or pen within 50 feet of the nearest household occupied by persons other than the owner or keeper of the cage or pen. This subsection shall not apply to the fencing of all or a major portion of a lot; 
(4)  Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers, or damaging gardens, flowers, or vegetables, or defecating upon the property of another; 
(5)  Maintaining animals in an unsanitary environment which results in unsightly or offensive animal waste, litter, or odor which would disturb a reasonable person on adjoining property; 
(6)  The keeping, possession, harboring or feeding of animals; wild, feral or domesticated, which threaten the public health, safety and welfare of the community; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit keeping or maintaining a bird feeder, or from feeding birds, unless said activity constitutes an attractant and its cessation is ordered by the animal control officer pursuant to this chapter. 
(7)  Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, joggers, animals walked on a leash, bicycles or other vehicles; 
(8)  Failing to confine a female dog while in heat in a secure enclosure in such a manner that she will not be in contact with another dog, or attract other animals. 
(9)  Except as otherwise provided in section 3-10, the keeping of seven or more animals per household or lot, regardless of lot size and regardless of whether any of the provisions of this section are violated. This subsection shall not apply to offspring under the age of 16 weeks and to animals kept by a kennel or pet shop licensed in accordance with state and local law and to animals kept by a kennel, pet shop or other facility licensed or registered by the department of agriculture or the veterinary medical board. 
(10)  The tethering of any animal to public property or in a public right-of-way. 
(11)  After having received a warning or order from an animal control officer to remove an attractant, knowingly or willfully keeping or storing attractants in a manner contrary to the warning or order. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-10. - Permits. 
(a)  Except for animals kept on as part of a lawfully established, non-conforming use, the keeping of animals in excess of that designated in subsection 3-9(a)(9) shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a written permit by the animal control administrator. The procedure for obtaining a permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pay the amount of the permit application fee as set by the city's fees and charges committee. 
(2)  The application for each such permit shall contain the following information and documentation: 
a.  Size of the lot where the animal reside; 
b.  Size of the primary enclosure and housing facility where the animals reside; 
c.  The breeds of the animals; 
d.  The number of animals; 
e.  Purpose of the animals (i.e., pets, breeding, training); 
f.  Whether the keeping of the animals will be on a temporary (30 days or less) or permanent (in excess of 30 days) basis; 
g.  Whether the animals will be kept primarily indoors or outside; 
h.  The sex of the animals and whether the animals are spayed or neutered. 
(3)  Upon receipt of an application, an animal control officer shall make an inspection of the subject premises. The animal control officer may solicit comments from other interested parties. 
(4)  If the animal control administrator determines that the animals can be kept in such number and in such manner as not to constitute a threat to the health, safety or welfare of other persons residing near the property set forth in the permit application, the animal control administrator shall issue a permit allowing the keeping of such animals in accordance with the terms of the permit. 
(5)  All permits shall set forth an expiration date that shall not exceed 12 months from the date of issuance and shall require the keeping of the animals at the permitted location in such numbers and in such manner as the animal control administrator shall determine is necessary in keeping with the health, safety and welfare of the animals and the general public. In addition, the permit shall require the signed consent of the permittee for inspection of the premises at reasonable times by the animal control officer. 
(6)  No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to subsections 3-9(1) through (10). The animal control administrator may refuse to issue a permit, and after having issued a permit may revoke a permit upon finding any of the following: 
a.  Any material misstatement or misrepresentation in the application for a permit. 
b.  Any willful violation by the applicant or permittee of this chapter or of the Animal Welfare Act, N.C.G.S. § 19A-20 et seq. 
c.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of the permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
d.  Any violation of federal, state or local laws that relate to animals, zoning, nuisances or condition of the property. 
(7)  Upon the issuance, failure to issue, or revocation of any permit under this section, the applicant may appeal to the director of animal control for a determination concerning such issuance, failure to issue or revocation; provided, however, that any such appeal must be made in writing and delivered to the director of animal control within ten days following the issuance, failure to issue or revocation from which an appeal is taken. 
(8)  Upon revocation or expiration of a permit or the failure to issue a permit, the animals in violation of this section must be removed from the lot within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 4234, § 1c, 9-24-13)  
Sec. 3-11. - Sanitation. 
No keeper of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners or condominium association, or upon private property without permission of the occupant of said property, unless such keeper immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods: 
(1)  Collection of the faces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
(2)  Removal of such bag or container and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-12. - Animal care. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide his/her animals with sufficient food, water, shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care and with humane care and treatment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or intentionally beat, injure, endanger, wound, torture, torment, disfigure, poison, overdrive, overload or otherwise abuse any animal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate, permit, organize or attend any dogfight, cockfight or other combat involving animals. 
(d)  No person may transport any type of animal in a motor vehicle or in a wagon or trailer pulled by a motor vehicle, or in a truck or the back of a truck, in such a way as to cause pain, suffering, possible pain or death to the animal. Provided, however, there shall be no prohibition against the humane transportation of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry, or other livestock in trailers or other vehicles designed, constructed, and adequate for the size and number of animals being transported. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to temperature, lack of food or drink, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death. After making a reasonable effort to find the driver of a vehicle in which an animal is confined, the animal control officer, in the presence of a law enforcement officer, may use the least intrusive means to enter the vehicle if necessary to remove the animal, where reasonable cause exists to believe the animal may die if not immediately removed. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to trap a wild animal in the city limits without a permit and/or license as required by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission or successor agency. Live animals known to transmit the rabies virus, including but not limited to foxes, coyotes, skunks, bobcats, beavers, ground hogs and bats, shall not be trapped, handled, kept, transported or destroyed except by animal control officers or other authorized persons. 
(g)  Any person injuring or killing a domesticated animal by striking it with an automobile or other vehicle shall make reasonable and immediate efforts to notify the owner of said animal. If the owner cannot be contacted and the animal is still alive, reasonable measures must be taken to notify animal control. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor, promote, exhibit or train a wild, exotic or domesticated animal to participate in any unnatural behavior in which the animal is wrestled, fought, made to perform, harassed or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or harmed. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave a dog unattended and restrained by tether while outdoors. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person to auction, sell or trade any dog or cat in a public place without a valid permit from the N.C. Department of Agriculture. In addition it shall be unlawful to adopt any animal in a public place within the city unless the entity placing the animal is an active North Carolina non-profit corporation whose principal place of operation is located in Buncombe County, the animal is spayed or neutered prior to adoption and the animal has all of its necessary vaccinations as set forth by state law. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to give away, sell or adopt any dog, cat, or rabbit under the age of eight weeks old without accompanying its mother. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give away any live animal as a prize or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 3795, § 2, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 4436, § 1b, 7-28-15)  
Sec. 3-13. - Animal bite. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an animal to bite a human being who does not ordinarily reside on the premises, except a dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties or a dog that bites a person committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  The victim of a bite and the animal owner shall immediately report the incident to the Asheville Police Department. It shall be unlawful for any person to withhold accurate information revealing the location of the bite animal. A physician who attends the victim of a bite shall report the bite within 24 hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal under a quarantine order to fail to comply with the order in its entirety. The owner may also be subject to citation, preventive measures and/or dangerous dog classification as a result of the bite incident. The owner has the duty to report any changes in the animal's health or behavior or confinement during quarantine to an animal control officer immediately. 
(d)  If the owner is unwilling or unable to comply with an order of quarantine, the animal control officer may immediately seize the animal for impoundment and quarantine at the animal shelter at the owner's expense. If an owner fails to comply with the quarantine order, he/she waives the right to contest the seizure of the animal. Each day of non-compliance shall constitute a new violation. 
(e)  Wild mammals, including but not limited to, coyotes, raccoons, skunks, fox, bats and groundhogs involved in a rabies exposure shall be sacrificed and tested for rabies when they can reasonably be obtained. Other species may be tested at the discretion of the state veterinarian of the department of epidemiology. Dogs, cats or other animals specified by state law that die during quarantine shall be tested for rabies. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-14. - Wild animals. 
No person or entity shall keep or exhibit, or permit to be kept or exhibited on his/her/its premises a wild animal within the city limits. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  An exhibition or educational outreach program by a zoo or aquarium accredited by the Association of Aquariums and Zoos ("AZA"); 
(2)  A wildlife sanctuary or wildlife rehabilitator properly licensed and permitted by the NC Wildlife Resources Commission; or 
(3)  A university, college or laboratory, or other research facility registered under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. sec. 2132(e)). 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 4436, § 1c, 7-28-15)  
Sec. 3-15. - Dead animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place the carcass of any animal that he or she owns upon any street, alley, or lot, or to allow the animal to remain unburied on his/her property. This shall not be construed to prohibit the placing of a carcass of a small animal on the right-of-way or within six feet thereof, for pickup by the proper authorities such as the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-16. - Keeping of bees. 
No beehive shall be kept by any person within the city within 100 feet of any household other than that of the owner of the beehive. Any person keeping a bee hive must get a permit in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-17. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The area embraced within the corporate limits of the city and all land owned or leased by the city outside the corporate limits is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Shoot, hunt, kill, trap or otherwise take any bird or other wild fowl; 
(2)  Collect or destroy any bird's nest or eggs; or 
(3)  Disturb or annoy any bird within such sanctuary without a permit issued by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any bird classed as a pest under N.C.G.S. § 113-300.2 and the Structural Pest Control Act of North Carolina of 1955 or the North Carolina Pesticide Law of 1971. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-18. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon determination made by the animal control officer from which an appeal is authorized in this chapter, the owner of the animal may appeal the determination by filing written objections with the director of animal control within three business days of the violation. The owner shall be required to post a bond in the amount of the fine or penalty assessed with the application of appeal. Failure to post the bond will result in an invalid appeal. Upon timely receipt of an appeal and the posting of the bond, the director of animal control or his/her designee shall render a decision within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The decision of the director of animal control shall be final. If the owner's appeal is successful, the city shall refund any fines or penalties paid by the owner regarding the matter that was appealed. 
(b)  Any appeal from the declaration that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be made to the animal control appeal board. The animal control appeal board shall consist of three city employees appointed by the director of animal control. The appeal board shall schedule a hearing within ten days of the filing of the appeal. Any appeal from the final decision of such appeal board shall be taken to superior court by filing notice of appeal and petition for review within ten days. The appeal shall be heard de novo before a superior court judge sitting in Buncombe County 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-19. - Injunctions. 
Any provision of this chapter that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement. When a violation of such a provision occurs, the city or any resident of the city may apply to the general court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-20. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to impoundment or seizure of the animal and unless otherwise designated, any violation of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection (d) shall be deemed a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty as set forth in appendix B of this Code may be assessed to the owner of such animal. 
(b)  The owner shall be issued a written notice of violation and penalty and the owner shall require payment to be made to the city within three business days of receipt of the notice. Notice of the civil penalty and violation shall be delivered in person to the owner or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address. 
(c)  Upon the owner's failure to pay the required amount within the designated three business day period, the city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt to recover such amount. 
(d)  A violation of subsections 3-8(b), 3-8(c), 3-12(c), 3-13(b), or 3-30(b) shall constitute a criminal offense and may be punished as set forth in N.C.G.S. § 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-21. - Exceptions. 
Animal control officers shall have authority to conduct inspections of pet stores, kennels, zoos, circuses, and animal exhibits to the extent not preempted by federal or state law, in order to determine if there is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-22. - Severability. 
If any section or part of this chapter should be held invalid for any reason, such determination shall not affect the remaining sections or parts, and to that end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-23. - Vaccination. 
(a)  The owner of every dog and cat over four months of age shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies. Rabies vaccine shall be administered only by a licensed veterinarian or by a certified rabies vaccinator. 
(b)  Only animal rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture shall be used on animals in this state. 
(c)  A rabies vaccination tag is also furnished to the owner; dogs are required to wear the tag at all times. For the purpose of this subsection, cats are exempt from the requirement to wear the tag. 
(d)  Owners are required to have dogs and/or cats revaccinated so that the animal's immunity to rabies does not expire. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-24. - Animals associated with lawfully established, non-conforming uses. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to lawfully established, non-conforming uses. Non-conforming uses and/or animals other than those lawfully established shall be considered violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Livestock and/or exotic pets as part of a lawfully established, non-conforming use may be maintained and replaced by same or similar animals; however, their numbers may not be expanded even when the property and/or other conforming uses are expanded legally. 
(c)  A lawfully established, non-conforming use is allowed to continue unless the use is discontinued for a period of 180 or more consecutive days, and there are no substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use. Obtaining permits to maintain the existing use or significant continued efforts to market the property for sale or lease for the existing use shall be regarded as good faith efforts. A legally established, non-conforming use shall be deemed discontinued after 24 months regardless of any substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use. 
(d)  Animals associated with a lawfully established, non-conforming use must be documented and permitted by the animal control administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4234, § 1d, 9-24-13)  
Secs. 3-25, 3-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 3-27. - Restraint of animals. 
(a)  Every person owning or having possession, charge, care, custody or control of any animal shall keep such animal exclusively upon the owner's real property. However, such animal may be off the owner's real property if it is under the physical control of a competent person and physically restrained by a chain, leash or harness, not to exceed eight feet in length and held in the hand of said person. For the purposes of this subsection only, a cat belonging to the species Felis catus or Felis domesticus which is actually kept as a pet shall not be subject to this restriction. Exceptions to this section: 
(1)  Service animals trained to provide assistance to persons impaired in sight, hearing, or mobility, do not have to be under physical restraint while off the owner's premises if the dog is under the impaired person's direct control and is obedient to that person's commands. The animal control officer may request proof of assistance animal registration to satisfy this exception. 
(2)  Inside the gated portion of any designated city dog park, which is designated leash optional. 
(3)  The animal control officer may place a special order of restraint on individual cats known to violate section 3-9 or section 3-13 of this chapter. Possible restrictions include, but are not limited to, indoor confinement, microchip identification, and the construction of retaining structures and/or cat enclosures. 
(4)  A working police dog in the course and scope of its duties. 
(5)  The release into flight of doves, homing pigeons, or other species of bird that is bred or trained to return to its loft, home or nesting place upon being released from a remote location. This exception shall only apply to outdoor events for which a permit has been issued by the city, and only upon a finding by the city manager, or his or her designee that said release will not constitute a danger to the public health or safety, and that said birds are kept in a manner consistent with the recommendations of the International Federation of Homing Pigeons, the American Racing Pigeon Union, the National Aviation Welfare Alliance, or similar organizations. 
(b)  If an animal is kept on the premises by a fence, the fence must be adequate to contain the animal. If it is an effective, working invisible fence, then there must be a visible, permanent sign on the premises stating that there is an invisible fence. 
(c)  Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of a domesticated animal, wild animal, or livestock, to take the domesticated animal, wild animal, or livestock into picnic areas, pond areas, Riverside Cemetery, the children's play areas of any city park, or into any areas designated or permitted by the city as part of a community festival or event area. This restriction shall not apply to animals assisting persons impaired in sight, hearing or mobility. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-28. - Preventive measures for regulation of dogs. 
(a)  Circumstances requiring special preventive measures. Upon the finding of any violation in this chapter, or the animal control administrator making a declaration that a dog is potentially dangerous, the animal control officer shall have the authority to require the owner of a dog to comply with specific preventive measures, as described below, after taking into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  Nature of the particular dog. The behavior, size, temperament, capacity for inflicting serious injury, the number of dogs involved or other such factors which would be relevant to a determination of whether or not additional preventive measures need to be imposed for a particular situation; 
(2)  Adequacy of confinement. The adequacy of the enclosure or confinement, if any; 
(3)  Immediate surrounding area. The likelihood that the conditions pertaining to the particular dog and the dog's confinement are detrimental to the safety, welfare or peace and tranquility of a reasonably prudent person in the vicinity; 
(4)  Children under the age of seven, elderly persons and disabled persons who live in close proximity to the premises occupied by the dog. 
(5)  The dog bit a human being or another domesticated animal without provocation or approached a person in an apparent attitude of attack. 
(6)  Dogs trained for fighting or aggressive attack; 
(7)  History of the dog. Restrictions were previously placed on the dog in this city or in another jurisdiction; and 
(8)  Reputation of the dog. The dog has a known propensity, reputation, or tendency to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(b)  Preventive measures. If the animal control officer determines that the circumstances require special preventive measures, then the animal control officer shall have the authority to require appropriate, specific preventive measures which might include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Necessary repairs to any fence or enclosure. 
(2)  Measures to ensure that a gate will remain secure. 
(3)  A secure fence or any other similar device that would provide greater assurance for the confinement of the dog. 
(4)  Requiring the owner to tattoo or microchip the dog at the owner's expense. 
(5)  Posting of "Beware of Dog" signage. 
(6)  Requiring the owner to purchase and show proof of sufficient liability insurance. 
(7)  Preventive measures required for dogs classified "Dangerous" as defined in N.C.G.S. § 67-4.1: 
a.  The dog may not be left unattended on the owner's real property unless confined indoors, in a securely enclosed and locked pen, or in another structure designed to restrain the dog and approved by an animal control officer. 
b.  The dog may not go beyond the owner's real property unless securely restrained and muzzled. 
c.  The owner of a dangerous dog must provide the Asheville Police Department with written notice of transfer of ownership or possession stating the name and address of the new owner or possessor of the dog and with written notice to the new owner or possessor specifying the dog's dangerous behavior and the animal control administrator's declaration. 
d.  The owner of a dangerous dog must notify the Asheville Police Department in writing of any change in the owner's address or location where the dog resides. 
(c)  Written order. If the animal control officer determines that a dog owner must take specific preventive measures, the animal control officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner by a written order, stating the reasons that preventive measures are required, identifying the specific preventive measures that must be implemented, and stating the designated time period for compliance with the written order. The written order shall further state that failure to comply within the time period prescribed may result in the assessment of a civil penalty and/or seizure of the animal. The animal control officer shall have the authority to allow for reasonable extensions of time limits based on good faith progress of implementation of the preventive measures. Any approved extensions shall be in writing. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the written order. It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to comply with a written order to take preventive measures within the designated time for compliance stated in the written order or any extension thereof. Additionally, the animal control officer shall have authority to seize and impound the animal if the owner fails to comply with the aforementioned order. Each day of non-compliance shall constitute a new violation. 
(e)  Owner's challenge to the written order. The owner may submit in writing a challenge to the animal control officer's determination that specific preventive measures are required. The owner's written challenge must be received in the office of the director of animal control within three business days of the date of the written order. The director of animal control or his/her designee shall handle the appeal in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 3-18 of this chapter. 
(f)  Review of written order. When a dog is regulated by an order of preventive measures as authorized by this section (except for dogs declared dangerous or potentially dangerous), a review of the order may be requested by the owner. The review will be conducted by the animal control administrator when the following criteria have been met: (1) the request has been submitted in writing; (2) the order has been in effect without incident or review for 24 months; (3) there have been no violations of the animal control ordinance by the owner for the past 24 months. Upon receipt of a valid review request, the animal control administrator will conduct an inspection and uphold the existing order, modify the order or nullify the order based on the totality of the circumstances. The decision of the animal control administrator is subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Injury to person. If an animal has caused serious injury to any person, upon the finding by the animal control officer that an animal is a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, the owner shall forfeit his or her ownership rights and the animal shall be put down. The animal control officer shall make the decision in writing and serve said decision upon the owner. The owner may appeal this decision pursuant to section 3-18. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-29. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal that is found to be in violation of section 3-27 shall be subject to immediate impound. Any person finding any animal upon his/her property, in violation of section 3-27, to his/her injury or annoyance, shall be authorized to restrain such animal in a humane manner and to thereupon either notify the animal control officer, who shall take possession of the animal for impoundment, or deliver the animal directly to the animal shelter. The animal may, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the costs assessed by the city. Upon failure of the owner to redeem the animal as set forth herein, the animal shall be disposed of by the animal shelter as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Generally. Any dog or cat which appears to be lost, stray or unwanted, or which is found to be not wearing a currently valid rabies vaccination tag, as required by state law or this chapter or not under restraint in violation of this chapter, may be impounded by animal control and confined in the animal shelter in a humane manner. Impoundment of such an animal shall not relieve the owner thereof from any penalty that may be imposed for violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Notice to owner. Upon impounding an animal, the animal control officer shall inspect the animal for identification such as a tag, microchip or tattoo and make a reasonable effort to notify the owner and inform such owner of the condition whereby the animal may be reclaimed. Any owner concerned about the loss or possible impoundment of an animal must check the animal shelter since all animals seized or impounded under this ordinance shall be available for inspection and reclamation during the shelter's normal business hours. The 72-hour period begins when the animal control officer delivers the animal to the animal shelter. 
(d)  R edemption by owner generally. The owner of an animal impounded under this section may redeem the animal and regain possession thereof within 72-hours after notice of impoundment is given as required by subsection (c) of this section, by complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and making payment of any veterinarian fees and any redemption fees as determined by City of Asheville. Fee rates shall be available for public inspection in the office of the director of animal control. The owner shall make all redemption payments or payment arrangements at the animal shelter. 
(e)  Destruction or adoption of unredeemed animal generally. An unredeemed animal may be destroyed or adopted according to the following procedures: 
(1)  If the owner does not redeem the animal within the period prescribed by subsection (c) of this section, ownership of the animal shall revert to the animal shelter. 
(2)  If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner within the period prescribed in subsection (c) of this section, it may be destroyed in a humane manner or offered for adoption to any responsible adult who is willing to comply with this article. Such animal may be adopted or purchased by the first such person who meets adoption requirements, pays the adoption or purchase fee and rabies vaccination fee. 
(3)  The operator of the animal shelter shall require that all dogs and cats released for adoption from the animal shelter be spayed or neutered. 
(4)  No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, or unclaimed by its owner shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter during a period of emergency rabies quarantine invoked pursuant to state law. 
(f)  Procedure for redemption or adoption of unvaccinated animals. Unvaccinated animals may be redeemed or adopted according to the following provisions: 
(1)  Any person adopting or reclaiming any dog or cat from the animal shelter shall obtain a rabies vaccination and a microchip for the animal prior to taking possession. If the dog or at was previously vaccinated, proof of vaccination shall be required. Animals must display all tags required by this chapter prior to being released. 
(2)  Payment for rabies vaccination, tag replacement and microchip purchase shall be the responsibility of the person redeeming or adopting the animal. 
(g)  Suspected rabid animals not to be redeemed or adopted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, animals impounded which appear to be suffering from rabies shall not be redeemed or adopted, but shall be dealt with in accordance with this chapter and applicable state laws. 
(h)  Destruction of wounded or diseased animals. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any animal impounded that is badly wounded or diseased and has no identification may be destroyed immediately in a humane manner. If the animal has identification, the animal control department and/or the animal shelter attendants shall attempt to notify the owner before disposing of such animal. However, if the owner cannot be readily reached, and the animal is suffering, the animal control department and/or the animal shelter attendants may destroy the animal in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-30. - Seizure and disposition of animals. 
(a)  In addition to any other authority or procedure authorized by this chapter or by any other law to seize an animal, the animal control officer shall have the authority to summarily seize any animal from the premises when the animal control officer determines that the animal is receiving insufficient care or treatment as set forth in section 3-12 or that the animal in the surrounding circumstances is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. Upon summarily seizing an animal, the animal control officer shall provide the owner with a written order of seizure. The animal control officer shall give notice of this section by posting a copy of it at the location where the animal was seized or by delivering it to a person residing on the property of the owner within 24-hours from the time the animal was seized. 
(b)  Obligation of owner to comply with seizure order. When the animal control officer serves the owner with a written order of seizure, it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to comply with the order or to interfere with the animal control officer. A sworn officer shall accompany the animal control officer to seize the animal. 
(c)  A challenge to the seizure order. If the owner wishes to challenge the seizure order, then the owner must submit in writing the basis of the challenge within three business days of the seizure of the animal, not counting the day of seizure of the animal. The challenge must be filed with the director of animal control. The challenge to the seizure order shall be handled in the same manner as provided for in section 3-18 of this chapter. 
(d)  Owner's redemption of animal. The owner is entitled to redeem the animal, unless the animal control department retains the animal upon some other basis of legal authority, by paying all applicable fees, citation fees, boarding fees, any other costs that are attributable to the seizure of the animal, and complying with any outstanding order of the animal control officer. 
(e)  Termination of owner's rights. If an owner fails to comply with the requirements that constituted the basis for seizing the animal, or fails to reclaim the animal within the time allowed to appeal the seizure, then the animal shelter shall have the authority to humanely destroy the animal or place the animal for sale to the public, or to place the animal with a local humane society for future placement through the humane society, unless the animal's owner provides a security bond or cash in accordance with subsection (f). 
(f)  Security bond. Any person claiming an ownership interest in any animal confined pursuant to this chapter may prevent the disposition of the animal after the holding period set forth in subsections 3-29(c) or 3-30(e) by posting a security bond or cash with the animal shelter prior to the animal being adopted or euthanized in an amount sufficient to guarantee payment of all of the reasonable expenses expected to be incurred in caring and providing for the animal, including the estimated cost of medical care, for at least 30 days; However, such security bond shall not prevent the animal shelter from disposing of the animal at the end of the 30-day period covered by the posted bond/cash, unless the person claiming an ownership interest in the animal posts an additional security bond or cash with the animal shelter to secure payment of the animal's reasonable expenses for an additional 30 days, and does so prior to the expiration of the first 30-day period. The amount of the bond/cash shall be determined by the director of the animal shelter or his/her designee based on the current rate for board and on the condition of the animal after examination by a veterinary professional. Failure to post the security bond within the time allowed shall result in the animal being immediately forfeited to the animal shelter. The owner must comply with any order issued by the animal control officer and pay all city fees and fines before the animal may be released from the animal shelter. 
(g)  Security bond forfeited upon failure to pay costs. If the fees, costs, and penalties owed for the animal are not paid in full by the end of each security period, the security bond already posted shall be forfeited to the animal shelter on said date and used to pay the remaining unpaid fees, costs, and penalties owing for the animal. The animal's owner shall remain responsible for all remaining unpaid fees, costs, and penalties. Any security bond/cash remaining after the payment of all fees, costs, and penalties shall be remitted to the person who posted the bond/cash. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Secs. 3-31—3-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK AND EXOTIC PETS 
 
Sec. 3-36. - Permit for keeping. 
(a)  Except for animals as part of a lawfully established, non-conforming use, or animals participating in a permitted event, no livestock shall be kept by any person within the city; provided however, that livestock and exotic pets may be kept in the city if a written permit has been issued by the animal control administrator. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued under this section allowing any person to keep, stable, pasture, feed or water such livestock or exotic pets at any time within 100 feet of any household other than that of the owner of the animal. This paragraph shall not apply to animals that reside exclusively inside the person's household. 
(c)  Livestock used for ground clearing and nuisance plant removal shall be allowed on a temporary basis upon the issuance of a temporary permit issued by the animal control administrator. The fee for said permit shall be established in the city's fees and charges manual. All conditions as specified in this chapter for animal care shall apply and no temporary permit shall be issued for longer than 14 days. Any violation of this chapter shall allow the animal control administrator to order the immediate removal of said livestock. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 4234, § 1e, 9-24-13)  
Sec. 3-37. - Inspection of applicant's premises. 
Before the animal control administrator grants a permit required by this article, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to inspect the premises where the permit for keeping livestock is desired. In making such inspection, the animal control officer shall ascertain whether or not the premises, including any stables, sheds or other enclosures in, and are able to be maintained in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-38. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The owner must first pay the permit application fee and an annual permit fee as set by the city's fees and charges committee. If, after making the inspection referred to in section 3-37, the animal control administrator finds that all ordinances of the city and laws of the state relating to the keeping of animals have been complied with and the keeping of the proposed animals will not interfere with the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, a permit shall be issued. 
(b)  In issuing the permit, the animal control administrator may attach specific terms, including an expiration date. A permit issued under this section may be revoked by the animal control administrator at any time upon violation of the terms of the permit or any other provision of this chapter. Upon such revocation, the animal in violation must be removed from the premises by the owner within seven days from such expiration or revocation. 
(c)  Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be a defense to any action brought under subsections 3-9(1) through (10). 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Secs. 3-39—3-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOWL 
 
Sec. 3-50. - License for keeping. 
(a)  Except for fowl as part of a lawfully established, non-conforming use, or fowl participating in a permitted event, no fowl shall be kept by any person within the city except in accordance with this article. Roosters are expressly prohibited unless associated with a lawfully established, non-conforming use. Roosters previously permitted by the city are grandfathered for the life of the rooster so long as the owner of the rooster maintains compliance with this chapter and the rooster does not create a public nuisance. Licensing of all fowl will be required upon expiration of any existing fowl permit authorized by the city. 
(b)  Fowl shall be permitted according to the distance requirements as set forth in subsection 3-9(a)(3). This paragraph shall not apply to fowl that reside exclusively inside the person's household. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 4234, § 1f, 9-24-13)  
Sec. 3-51. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The owner must pay an annual license fee as set by the city's fees and charges committee and register the fowl with the license-collecting agent of the city. The animal control administrator may inspect the property to determine whether the owner is in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  A license issued under this section may be revoked by the animal control administrator at any time upon violation of the terms of the license or any other provision of this chapter. Upon such revocation, the fowl and/or coop in violation must be removed from the premises by the owner within seven days from such expiration or revocation. 
(c)  Any license issued pursuant to this section shall not be a defense to any action brought under subsections 3-9(1) through (10). 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 3-52. - Enclosure specifications. 
Each person holding a license to keep fowl within the city shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(a)  The fowl house and run must be fully enclosed, and the fowl kept within it at all times. 
(b)  The fowl house must be used for fowl only and it must be well ventilated and constructed of materials conducive to regular cleaning and sanitation. 
(c)  The fowl run must be well drained so there will be no accumulation of moisture. 
(d)  The floor and walls of the fowl house must be kept in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition, with all dropping and organic waste material removed and disposed of in a proper manner. 
(e)  The number and type of fowl must be appropriate for the size and furnishings of the coop and run. 
(Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; development, ch. 7; historic preservation, ch. 8; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 14; solid waste management, ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 17; trees, ch. 20; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Building code council and building code, G.S. 143-136 et seq.; adoption of technical codes by reference, G.S. 160A-76. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Permit required. 
No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit therefore from the building inspections division. Failure to obtain a such written permit shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00, which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance, but shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 8-4; Ord. No. 2242, § 1, 9-26-95)  
Sec. 4-2. - Permit fees. 
The fees for permits shall be as set forth in the city fees and charges manual at the time of approval of the application and shall be collected prior to the beginning of any work. Each subcontractor or his agent shall be responsible for the payment of the permit fees charged, to enable him to perform the work for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1965, § 8-12)  
Sec. 4-3. - Building codes adopted. 
(a)  The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction, with all supplements and amendments thereto, ratified and adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, in full effect and having the force of law within the territorial jurisdiction of the city under the provisions of G.S. 143-138, is affirmed to be the building code for the city and is incorporated by reference in this section as fully and completely as if written verbatim in this section. 
(b)  The North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, Volume IB, with all supplements and amendments thereto, ratified and adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, in full effect and having the force of law within the territorial jurisdiction of the city under the pro-visions of G.S. 143-138, is affirmed to be the residential building code for the city and is incorporated by reference in this section as fully and completely as if written verbatim in this section. 
(c)  Not less than three copies each of such codes are filed as public records in the office of the building inspections division. 
(d)  Where the provisions of these codes are similar with the provisions of other applicable laws, codes or ordinances, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(Code 1965, §§ 8-1, 8-3)  
Sec. 4-4. - Duties and responsibilities of chief of building inspections and codes enforcement officers. 
(a)  In addition to other duties assigned to him, the chief of building inspections and those codes enforcement officers assigned to assist him shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing section 10-56 et seq., section 11-12 and section 10-26 et seq. The chief of building inspections and codes enforcement officers shall enforce such sections by the inspection of property and by the observance of those persons who are seen to violate any of the sections. They shall be empowered to issue citations when in their opinion any of the provisions of such sections have been violated. Citations so issued may be delivered in person to the violator by the chief of building inspections or codes enforcement officers or they may be mailed to the person so charged if he cannot be readily found. Any notice or citation so delivered or mailed shall direct the alleged violator to appear at the building inspections division, codes enforcement section, on or before a specific day and hour named in the notice, and the period so specified shall be not less than 72 hours after its delivery to the violator. 
(b)  When a person charged with a violation of any section enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, administered by the chief of buildings inspections, codes enforcement section, shall appear before the clerk on duty at the codes enforcement section of the building inspections division in response to a citation, such clerk is authorized, if the person appearing so desires, to allow him to sign on the docket which is kept in connection with violations and pay the civil penalty assessed. Upon payment, the clerk shall give him a receipt for the money paid, showing the type of violation, and shall deliver the money to the director of finance for the city. 
(c)  The chief of building inspections shall cause all citation forms to be serially numbered in triplicate, and records with respect to the citation forms are to be maintained so that all of them can be accounted for. The director of finance or his agent shall periodically investigate the records of the chief of building inspections, codes enforcement section, for the purpose of determining the disposition of the forms, and he shall report the result of such investigation to the city manager. For the purpose of making this investigation, the director of finance shall have access to the necessary records of the codes enforcement section of the building inspections division. 
(d)  If a violator of the provisions of the sections enumerated in subsection (a) of this section does not appear in response to the notice or citation at or before the date and hour named, a complaint will be filed and a warrant of arrest issued against that person. 
(Code 1965, § 18-41)  
Secs. 4-5—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Asheville Electrical Code. 
(Code 1965, § 11-1)  
Sec. 4-32. - Adopted. 
The North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical Systems), adopting by reference the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, together with all supplements and amendments thereto, in full effect and having the force of law within the territorial jurisdiction of the city under the provisions of G.S. 143-138 et seq., is affirmed to be the electrical code for the city and is incorporated by reference in this section as fully and completely as if written verbatim in this section. 
(Code 1965, § 11-68) 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, G.S. 87-39 et seq.; electric wiring of houses, G.S. 143-143.2; adoption of technical codes by reference, G.S. 160A-76(b).  
Sec. 4-33. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability because of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificates of approval issued as provided in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 11-9)  
Sec. 4-34. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, other than failure to obtain the permit required prior to commencing work, or who shall fail to correct any defects within a reasonable specified time, after having been notified in writing by the electrical inspector, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided under the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(Code 1965, § 11-10; Ord. No. 2242, § 2, 9-26-95)  
Secs. 4-35—4-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WORK PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Issuance of permits to licensed electrical contractors and certain property owners. 
(a)  Permits required by this division shall be issued only to persons who hold a valid contractor's license issued by the state board of examiners of electrical contractors. 
(b)  Any person may be permitted to perform electrical work upon his own property, except property intended for commercial, industrial or institutional use or property intended for rent, sale or gift, provided he first makes application for and obtains a permit from the electrical inspector to do the specific work contemplated. The applicant shall satisfy the electrical inspector by written examination and evidence of necessary experience that he is competent to perform the work for which the permit is requested in a manner that will meet all statutory and ordinance requirements. Such examination shall be predicated on the type of work the applicant may be required to perform and shall be prepared by the electrical inspector with review and approval by the electrical examining board established by section 9-253. If so satisfied, the electrical inspector shall issue a permit to the applicant personally to perform the particular work for which application was made. Such permit shall extend to the applicant only and shall not authorize the applicant to employ the services of any other person to assist him, unless such other person is a qualified contractor. The permit granted the applicant shall automatically expire upon completion of the work for which application was made and the permit issued. All work done under such permit shall be subject to regular electrical inspection requirements and fees and shall satisfy all statutory and ordinance requirements applicable to such work. 
(c)  If any person commences any work before obtaining the necessary permit, he or she shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00, which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance, but shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 11-46; Ord. No. 2242, § 3, 9-26-95) 
State Law reference— Regulations as to issuance of building permits, G.S. 87-14.  
Sec. 4-62. - Annual permits. 
(a)  In lieu of an individual permit for each electrical installation or alteration, an annual permit shall, upon application therefor, be issued to any person regularly employing one or more electricians for the installation and maintenance of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment on premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. 
(b)  The application for such annual permit shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector and shall contain a description of the premises within which work is to be done under the permit. 
(c)  The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a record of all electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed under the permit, and the electrical inspector shall have access to such record. 
(d)  Each annual permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1965, § 11-47)  
Sec. 4-63. - Inspection of work performed under annual permit. 
At regular periods, the electrical inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done under an annual permit issued pursuant to section 4-62 and shall inspect all electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed under such a permit since the date of his last previous inspection. A certificate of approval shall be issued for such work as is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this article after the fees required have been paid. Upon inspection, if the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with this article, the electrical inspector shall at once forward to the person holding such permit a written notice stating the defects that have been found. 
(Code 1965, § 11-52) 
State Law reference— Periodic inspections, G.S. 160A-424.  
Sec. 4-64. - Fees. 
The fees for inspections shall be as set forth in the city fees and charges manual at the time of approval of the application and shall be collected prior to the beginning of any work. 
(Code 1965, § 11-54)  
Sec. 4-65. - Extra inspections. 
Additional inspections or inspection trips made by the electrical inspector or his assistant made necessary through the failure of any electrical contractor or electrician in charge of work to specify the location of the work or failure to install wiring or apparatus in proper manner or otherwise creating conditions making such additional inspections or trips necessary are hereby designated as extra electrical inspections. For each such extra electrical inspection, additional fees shall be charged as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require extra fees for the several inspections made necessary in the regular order of electrical construction work. 
(Code 1965, § 11-55)  
Secs. 4-66—4-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Installation standards. 
(a)  Described. The following applies to permanent buildings or structures covered by the electrical code adopted by reference in this article: 
All wiring on or in permanent buildings or structures located within a defined fire district shall utilize approved raceways or metal jacketed cables such as MI, ALS, CS or metal clad type MC (type AC not allowed) where permitted by the electrical code. 
(b)  Exception. Sound equipment, communication circuits, class 2 and class 3 remote control and signal circuits and fire protection signaling circuits as permitted in the electrical code. 
(Code 1965, § 11-67)  
Secs. 4-82—4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Adopted. 
(a)  The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume III, Heating and Air Conditioning, with all supplements and amendments thereto, ratified and adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, in full effect and having the force of law within the territorial jurisdiction of the city under the provisions of G.S. 143-138 et seq., is affirmed to be the heating code for the city and is incorporated by reference in this section as fully and completely as if written verbatim in this section. 
(b)  Not less than three copies of such code are now filed as public records in the division of building inspections. 
(Code 1965, § 8-61) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference, G.S. 160A-76; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194.  
Sec. 4-102. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, alteration or restoring of heating or cooling equipment in the city without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the building inspections division. If any person commences any work before obtaining the necessary permit, he or she shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00, which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance, but shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(b)  Securing permits for others. No licensed heating or cooling contractor shall secure a permit for another person. 
(Code 1965, § 8-62; Ord. No. 2044, § 1, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 2242, § 4, 9-26-95) 
State Law reference— Plumbing and heating contractors, G.S. 87-16 et seq.; permits, G.S. 160A-417.  
Sec. 4-103. - Inspection fees. 
The fees for inspections shall be as set forth in the city fees and charges manual at the time of approval of the application and shall be collected prior to the beginning of any work. 
(Code 1965, § 8-63; Ord. No. 2044, § 2, 8-3-93) 
State Law reference— License fee for heating contractor, G.S. 87-22.  
Secs. 4-104—4-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 4-126. - Adopted. 
(a)  The North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing), together with all supplements and amendments thereto, ratified and adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, in full effect and having the force of law within the territorial jurisdiction of the city under the provisions of G.S. 143-138 et seq., is affirmed to be the plumbing code for the city and is incorporated by reference in this section as fully and completely as if written verbatim in this section. 
(b)  Not less than three copies of such code are now filed as public records in the division of building inspections. 
(Code 1965, § 20-1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes by reference, G.S. 160A-76; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194.  
Sec. 4-127. - Permits, inspections, fees. 
(a)  The fees for plumbing permits shall be as set forth in the city fees and charges manual at the time of approval of the application and shall be collected prior to the beginning of any work. 
(b)  The permit fees shall entitle the person holding the permit to the required number of inspections for the completion of the installation of the fixtures involved, plus one additional reinspection for corrections to the installation of the fixtures involved. For inspection trips in addition to such one additional reinspection to inspect corrected installations, a fee shall be imposed for each additional trip as set forth in the fees and charges manual. 
(c)  Permits or other approvals must be obtained as required by the Asheville-Buncombe Water Authority, the Metropolitan Sewerage District of Buncombe County, the county health department and the state department of environmental, health and natural resources before beginning the installation, extension, alteration or restoring of plumbing systems and fixtures in the city. 
(d)  No licensed plumbing contractor shall secure a permit for another person. 
(e)  If any person commences any work before obtaining the necessary permit, he or she shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00, which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance, but shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 20-2; Ord. No. 2242, § 5, 9-26-95) 
State Law reference— Plumbing and heating contractors, G.S. 87-16 et seq.; permits, G.S. 160A-417.  
Secs. 4-128—4-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 4-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generally. The words and terms defined in the public swimming pool standards of the state department of human resources, division of health services, and found in section 1 of the standards shall be applicable throughout this article with the following additions and changes. 
Approving authority means the county board of health and the city division of building inspections. 
Chief building inspector, division of building inspections, means the chief building official of the city. 
Pool area means the general area in which the pool is located. Examples include a front yard, back yard or side yard. 
Public and residential swimming pools means all below-ground-surface swimming pools. 
(Code 1965, § 8-103) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-152. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  This article is adopted to promote the health, safety and welfare of those residents and visitors who reside and visit in areas within the jurisdiction of the city for that portion of this article that applies to public swimming pools. 
(b)  This article is also adopted pursuant to the need of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and visitors to those areas within the jurisdiction of the city for that portion of this article that applies to residential swimming pools. 
(c)  This article shall apply to all public and residential swimming pools constructed in any area that is within the jurisdiction of the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (Ordinance No. 964, 7-7-77), with the exceptions as provided in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 8-101)  
Sec. 4-153. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Establish standards for public swimming pools that are uniform with those standards set forth by the public swimming pool standards of the state department of human resources, division of health services, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors in those areas that are within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  Establish standards for residential swimming pools for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors in those areas that are within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 8-102)  
Sec. 4-154. - Standards. 
(a)  The standards for public swimming pools shall be those standards set forth in the public swimming pool standards of the state department of human resources, division of health services, and all revisions thereof and shall include the following: 
(1)  All plumbing work shall be in compliance with state standards and the state building code, Volume II, Plumbing, and all revisions thereof. 
a.  All plumbing work shall be done by a licensed plumbing contractor, licensed in the state. All plumbing work shall be approved by the plumbing inspector of the city. 
b.  The recirculation/filtration system of the pool shall not be subject to the requirements of this subsection (1). 
(2)  All electrical work shall be in compliance with state standards and with the electrical code and all revisions thereof. All electrical work shall be done by a licensed electrical contractor licensed in the state. All electrical work shall be approved by the electrical inspector of the city. 
(b)  Standards for residential swimming pools shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential swimming pools shall be of a generally accepted and approved structural design. 
(2)  Any residential pool must be located at least five feet from the property or lot line. 
(3)  There shall be a walk around the entire perimeter of any outdoor pool with a minimum width of three feet of unobstructed clear distance from the pool edge. 
(4)  All permanent installations to introduce water into the pool from a potable water supply shall be done only through an air gap of at least 1½ the diameter of the introducing pipe. In those instances where a permanent water introduction system is not installed and water from a potable water supply is introduced into the pool by means of a hose, the hose bib to which the hose is connected shall be equipped with a backflow preventer approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(5)  All outdoor residential swimming pool areas shall be enclosed by an ornamental wire, wood stave or other type barrier at least four feet in height, designed to minimize the possibility of unauthorized or unwary persons from entering the pool area. Entrances through the barrier shall be provided with self-closing gates or other acceptable entrances of the same heights, bottom and top, above the adjacent ground surface, having latches. The bottom edge of the barrier shall be not more than six inches from the adjacent ground surface and the height of the barrier shall be not less than four feet from the adjacent ground surface. This shall apply to all residential swimming pools constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (Ordinance No. 964, 7-7-77). 
(c)  The construction of all public swimming pools and residential swimming pools shall be in compliance with the zoning regulations of the city and all revisions thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 8-104)  
Sec. 4-155. - Permits. 
A building permit is required and shall be issued by the chief building inspector, division of building inspections, before any construction is begun on any public swimming pool or residential swimming pool. All plans and specifications for public swimming pools and residential swimming pools shall be submitted to the chief building inspector, division of building inspections, for approval. The chief building inspector shall in all cases require an additional copy of the plans and specifications to be submitted to the county board of health for their recommendations and approval. If the county board of health does not act within 20 days of the submission of the plans and specifications to them, the chief building inspector may then take independent action to approve or disapprove the plans and specifications as submitted to him. 
(Code 1965, § 8-105)  
Sec. 4-156. - Responsibilities of approving authority. 
The chief building inspector, division of building inspections, shall approve the plans and specifications of all public swimming pools and residential swimming pools if they comply with this article, the state building code, Volumes I and II, the electrical code or any other ordinances, laws and regulations that may govern the construction of public swimming pools or residential swimming pools. The chief inspector shall also have the responsibility of enforcing the portion of this article that requires barriers enclosing public and residential swimming pool areas. 
(Code 1965, § 8-106)  
Sec. 4-157. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person failing to comply with any order or notification issued and served in accordance with this article within the time specified therein shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalty of a fine of $50.00 or 30 days imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day in violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 8-107)  
Secs. 4-158—4-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 4-180. - Agents. 
All owners who do not reside in Buncombe County but who own rental property in the City of Asheville must authorize a person residing in Buncombe County to serve as his or her agent for the purpose of accepting service of process under this article. The authorization shall be complete upon the owner providing a completed form supplied by the city clerk including the authorized agent's name, address and telephone number. The owner shall notify the city clerk of any changes in the information not less than ten days after such changes have occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2156, § 1, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 4-181. - Declaration of unsafe building. 
Any building or structure or part thereof partially destroyed or otherwise which is found by the building inspector to be in such a dilapidated state of disrepair or other substandard condition as to be dangerous to life, health or other property or to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public nuisance shall be declared by the building inspector to be unsafe. Such unsafe condition may be caused by defective construction, overloaded structural parts, decay, susceptibility to fire, exits or any other hazardous conditions or circumstances. The building inspector shall declare all such buildings or structures unsafe and take appropriate action to have such conditions corrected or removed. Such declaration by the building inspector shall constitute an order of condemnation for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 8-51)  
Sec. 4-182. - Duty of owner; procedure. 
Whenever any building or structure has been condemned by the building inspector and the existence of such building or structure in a dilapidated state of disrepair or other substandard condition is found and determined by the building inspector or, upon appeal from or report by the building inspector, by the city council to be dangerous to life, health or other property or is in such condition as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public nuisance, the owner of such building or structure shall be required to demolish and remove the building or structure and remedy such conditions under the regulations and procedures provided in this article. If such owner fails or refuses to do so within the time directed by the building inspector or by the city council, the city council may, in its judgment, cause the building or structure to be demolished and removed or such other steps taken as it may find to be necessary to suppress and abate the nuisance and remove the fire or safety hazard and the danger to life, health or other property found to exist and specially assess the cost and expense of doing the work against the lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure is located. 
(Code 1965, § 8-52)  
Sec. 4-183. - Service of notices and orders. 
(a)  Before any building or structure may be ordered to be demolished and removed as provided in section 4-182, the building inspector shall notify the owner thereof, in writing, by certified or registered mail, and, in conjunction therewith, may be served by regular mail, to the last known address of such owner or by personal service of such notice by the building inspector or his assistant or by posting notice that the building or structure is in such condition that appears to constitute a fire or safety hazard or is dangerous to life, health or other property or to be a public nuisance. The notice shall state that a hearing will be held before the building inspector at a designated place at a time not less than ten days after the date of such written notice, at which time and place the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel upon all legal or factual questions relating to the matter and shall be entitled to offer such evidence as he may desire which is relevant or material to the questions sought to be determined or the remedies sought to be effected. When the manner of service is by regular mail in conjunction with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is returned, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after mailing, service shall certify that fact and the date thereof, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. 
(b)  If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due diligence, be discovered, the notice referred to in this section shall be considered properly and adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or structure in question at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing and a notice of the hearing is published one time in a qualified newspaper having circulation in the city at least one week prior to the date fixed for such hearing. Such notice shall state the address or location of the building or structure and the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(c)  A copy of any notice issued under this article shall be mailed by first-class mail by the city within two business days of mailing of the notice or within two days of personal service of the notice to: 
(1)  The Land-of-Sky Regional Council; 
(2)  Mountain Housing Opportunities, Inc.; 
(3)  Neighborhood Housing Services of Asheville, N.C., Inc.; 
(4)  Western North Carolina Habitat for Humanity, Inc.; 
(5)  The Housing Authority of the City of Asheville; 
(6)  The Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County; and 
(7)  The Preservation Society of Asheville and Buncombe County, Inc. 
The person mailing such copy shall certify that fact and the date therof, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. Service shall not be required to be made upon any of the foregoing corporations if that corporation is dissolved. 
(Code 1965, § 8-53; Ord. No. 2156, § 2, 11-15-94)  
Sec. 4-184. - Order to remedy or demolish. 
If, upon such hearing as provided in section 4-183, the building inspector shall find that the building or structure in question is in such a dilapidated or substandard state of disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health or other property or is a public nuisance, he shall make an order in writing, directed to the owner of the building or structure, requiring the owner to remedy such conditions so found to exist by demolishing and removing the building or structure or taking such other steps as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, within such period, not less than 60 days, as the building inspector may prescribe. 
(Code 1965, § 8-54)  
Sec. 4-185. - Appeal. 
The owner of any unsafe building or structure ordered by the building inspector to be demolished and removed or who is directed by the building inspector to take any other steps to abate a nuisance or remove hazards found by the building inspector to exist shall have the right of appeal from such order to the city council. Such owner shall give notice of appeal to the building inspector at the time of the hearing at which the order is made or, within ten days after such order is made, shall file with the building inspector a written notice of such appeal. Notice of appeal shall state the grounds therefor. Unless an appeal is taken within the time and in the manner prescribed in this section, the action of the building inspector shall be deemed final, subject only to such action as the city council may take as provided in this article. Where an appeal has been properly taken and notice thereof given in accordance with the provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to report the appeal to the city manager, who shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda for action by the city council at its next ensuing regular meeting. The city council shall have the right to continue the hearing of the appeal from time to time as it may deem necessary and consider such appeal either during a regular or special meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 8-55)  
Sec. 4-186. - Report of owner noncompliance. 
If the owner does not appeal from the final order or direction of the building inspector requiring the unsafe building or structure be demolished and removed or the taking of such other steps to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards and fails or refuses to comply with such order and direction, the building inspector shall file a written report thereof with the city manager, who shall cause such report to be placed on the agenda for action by the city council at its next ensuing regular meeting or at some subsequent meeting to which the city council may continue the action. The building inspector shall mail a copy of the report by certified or registered mail to the owner at his last known address or have a copy of the report delivered to the owner. The report shall specify the date of the meeting of the city council for which the matter will be scheduled for action. 
(Code 1965, § 8-56)  
Sec. 4-187. - Order of city council; assessment of costs. 
In all cases referred to in this article that reach the city council for action, either upon appeal of the owner from the ruling of the building inspector or upon report of the building inspector that the owner fails or refuses to comply with his order or direction, the city council shall hear the matter. If the city council finds and determines that the building or structure in question is in such a dilapidated or substandard state of disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health or other property or is a public nuisance and that the owner of the building or structure has failed or refused to abate the nuisance and has failed or refused to have the building or structure demolished and removed or has failed or refused to take such other steps as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards found to exist, the council may cause the demolition and removal of such building or structure to be done or effect such other remedies as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards and specially assess the cost of such work against the lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure was situated. Such assessment shall constitute a specific lien upon the lot or parcel of land which may be enforced by an action instituted in the name of the city in the nature of an action to foreclose a mortgage as provided by G.S. 105-414 and in the case of ad valorem taxes and local improvement assessments. 
(Code 1965, § 8-57)  
Sec. 4-188. - Notice of city council hearing. 
In cases in which the building inspector has been unable to give the owner actual notice of hearing in the manner provided in this article and has given such notice by posting and publishing the notice as authorized in section 4-183 and the owner has failed or refused to comply with the order or direction of the building inspector to demolish and remove the building or structure or take such other remedial action as will remove the hazards and such case is referred to the city council for action, the city council shall, before taking such action, cause to be posted on the outside of the building or structure in question, at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and published one time in a qualified newspaper having circulation in the city, at least one week prior to the date fixed for such hearing, a written notice stating the name of the owner as appears of record in the office of the register of deeds of the county, the address or location of the building or structure involved and the time, place and purpose of the hearing and such other information as the city council may deem advisable. 
(Code 1965, § 8-58)  
Sec. 4-189. - Presumption of danger to public. 
In all cases in which the city council, under authority of this article, causes the demolition and removal of any building or structure to be carried out or directs such other remedial steps to be taken as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazard, it shall be conclusively presumed that the public nuisance and the fire and safety hazard and danger to life, health or other property created and maintained by the continued presence of such building or structure in such condition as is found to exist constitute a clear and present danger amounting to a situation of emergency involving the public health, safety and general welfare which requires entry upon private property for the summary abatement and removal of such danger, in the public interest. 
(Code 1965, § 8-59)  
Sec. 4-190. - Willful failure or refusal to comply with order. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any final order or direction of the building inspector or city council made by virtue and in pursuance of this article. Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-5 for the violation of municipal ordinances. Every day such person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any final order or direction of the building inspector or city council made by virtue and in pursuance of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1965, § 8-60)  
Secs. 4-191—4-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3055, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2003, repealed art. VII, §§ 4-201—4-221, which pertained to the housing code and enacted new provisions designated as art. VII, §§ 4-201—4-222, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 4-201. - Housing code established, title. 
There are hereby established rules and regulations for the repair or elimination of unfit and/or unsafe housing conditions in the City of Asheville, North Carolina, which shall be known as "The Minimum Housing Code of the City of Asheville" (herein "Code"). 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-202. - Exercise of police powers: authority. 
The city council hereby finds and declares that there exist in the City of Asheville dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Asheville, and that a public necessity exists to exercise the police powers of the city pursuant to Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as now or hereafter amended, to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings in accordance with the procedure herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-203. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Code is to remedy and prevent the decay and deterioration of places of human habitation or intended for human habitation by providing minimum requirements for the protection of the life, health, welfare, safety, and property of the general public and the owners and occupants of places of human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-204. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code are applicable to all existing dwellings and all dwellings hereafter constructed within the City of Asheville, which are used or intended for use for human habitation. Demountable dwellings or demountable dwellings being moved and temporarily stored prior to relocation, when used or intended for use for human habitation with the city, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-205. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Apartment house : Any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living independently of each other in dwelling units. 
Approved : Performed in a manner and/or with materials consistent with the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of construction or substantial renovation unless otherwise provided herein. 
Area: 
Area as applied to the dimensions of a dwelling : The maximum horizontal projected area of the dwelling at grade. 
Area as applied to the dimensions of a room : The total square footage of floor area between finished walls. 
Basement : A story having a clear height of at least seven feet from finished floor to finished ceiling, the floor level of which is below finished grade but not less than four feet below the average finished grade, having floor and walls of approved construction. 
Bed and breakfast : A private, owner occupied dwelling where overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation. 
Boarding house (or rooming house) : Any dwelling unit or that part of any dwelling unit containing one or more rooms in which space is let by the resident owner or operator to three or more tenants. 
Building : That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Ceiling height : The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
City : City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Code enforcement officer : The officer or officers who are authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed herein. 
Component : A readily accessible and observable aspect of a system, such as a floor or wall, but not individual pieces such as boards or nails where many similar pieces make up the component 
Condemn : To deem unfit for occupancy. 
Deflection : The sagging of a structural member. 
Demolish : The tearing down and disposal of the entire dwelling in a lawful manner, leaving the property free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets. 
Deteriorated : A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and can be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this Code at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by finding of the director. 
Dilapidated : A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this Code at a cost in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by findings of the director. 
Director : The person in charge of the building safety department. 
Dwelling : Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, apartment houses, boarding or rooming houses, hotels, motels and other transient places of habitation and dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit : Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a habitation unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
Exit : A clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of a dwelling to the exterior at street or grade level. 
Extermination : The control and elimination of insects, rodents, and other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and lawful pest elimination method. 
Family : One or more persons living together and having common housekeeping facilities. 
Functional drainage : A drain is functional when it empties in a reasonable amount of time and does not overflow when another fixture is drained simultaneously. 
Functional flow : A reasonable flow at a fixture in a dwelling when another fixture is operated simultaneously. 
Garbage : Waste produced by the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of animal or vegetable products used for human consumption. This definition shall include any other matter that is also subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which before, during or after decay may serve as feeding or breeding material for animals or flies or other insects. 
Habitable space or habitable room : Any room or enclosed floor space in a dwelling used or intended for use for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, including kitchens, but excluding bathrooms, toilets, halls, corridors, pantries, storage space, closets, laundries, and other spaces not used frequently or during extended periods. 
Housing certificate : A written document issued by the housing division, stating that the named dwelling appears to comply with the minimum requirements of this Code at the time of the inspection. The housing certificate does not convey any guarantee or warranties on any building system or component. 
Housing code coordinator : The individual responsible for the administration and enforcement of the housing code. 
Housing code division : The office and staff of the housing code coordinator of the City of Asheville. 
Imminent danger : A condition which places life, limb, or property in immediate peril. 
Inspect : The act of examining areas and parts of a dwelling to determine its compliance with the standards set out in this Code. Housing inspections are primarily visual and not technically exhaustive. 
Life safety review : An inspection of a dwelling for compliance with section 4-209 of this Code for unsafe conditions. 
Normal operating controls : Homeowner operated devices such as a thermostat, wall switch, or safety switch. 
North Carolina State Building Code or North Carolina Building Code : Any or all volumes of the North Carolina State Building Code as promulgated by the North Carolina State Building Code Council. 
Occupant : Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of space within a building. 
Owner : The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Owner occupied : The primary residence of the owner. 
Parties in interest : All individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof. 
Pier : A post, pole or column of masonry, concrete, steel or pressure-treated wood extending from a concrete or masonry footing to and supporting the building or portion thereof. 
Plumbing : The water supply system, sanitary drainage system, vent system, fixtures, and traps and shall include their respective connections, devices, appliances, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises. 
Public space or common space : That space within any dwelling which is open to use by the general public or to occupants of more than one dwelling. 
Readily accessible : Having direct access without the need of moving furniture, removing any panel, door or similar covering, and without the use of portable ladders, chairs, etc. 
Rubbish : Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; including, but not limited to, ashes, wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust, and dirt. 
Story : That part of the dwelling comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above having the required amount of ceiling height. 
Technically exhaustive : An inspection involving the extensive use of measurements, instruments, testing, calculations, and other means to develop scientific or engineering findings and conclusions. 
Tenant : A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a dwelling or dwelling unit by right or title. 
Unfit : Unsuitable for human occupancy as set forth under the provisions of this Code. 
Unsafe : Especially dangerous to life because of a dwelling's liability to fire or because of bad condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, dangerous wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes or conditions enumerated in section 4-209(a) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-206. - Agents. 
All owners who do not reside in Buncombe County, or in an adjacent county, who own rental property in the City of Asheville must authorize a person to serve as his or her agent for the purpose of accepting service of process under this Code. The authorization shall be effective upon the owner completing a form provided by the housing code coordinator, which includes the authorized agent's name, address and telephone number. The owner shall notify the housing division of any changes in the information after such changes have occurred. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-207. - Agencies. 
(a)  Enforcement agency. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a division within the government of the City of Asheville to be known as the housing division which shall be composed of a housing code coordinator, code enforcement officers, and such other employees as shall be authorized by the city manager. The housing division shall be a division of the city department designated by the city manager. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specified herein, the housing code coordinator is hereby designated the public officer to exercise, by and through his duly appointed agents, the powers prescribed by this Code. 
(b)  Consulting agency. 
(1)  The code enforcement officer shall have authority to request advice and assistance from any public authority or agency the code enforcement officer deems appropriate in performing the duties hereunder. 
(2)  Any public authority as defined under N.C.G.S. 160A-442 or any other public agencies may report in writing to the code enforcement officer any dwelling or abandoned dwelling they may encounter which is, may be, or is suspected of being unfit for human habitation under the terms of this Code. 
(c)  Administrative liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent, or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be personally liable for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Code. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this Code shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-208. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-209. - Life safety/unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human occupancy, unsafe, and represents a threat to life or property, if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Lack of or inadequate potable water service; 
(2)  Presence of raw sewage or open sewer inside the dwelling, whether from broken, plugged or inoperative fixtures or pipes inside the dwelling, or migrating into the dwelling from outside; 
(3)  Improperly operating or no sanitary facilities; 
(4)  Lack of or inadequate hot water supply; 
(5)  Lack of or inadequate operating heating facilities between November 1 and March 30 of any year; 
(6)  Chimney not safe for intended use; 
(7)  Lack of or unsafe electrical system; 
(8)  Nonfunctioning or missing smoke detector(s); 
(9)  Address not visible from the public street; 
(10)  Failing or failed primary structural members that threaten the stability of the dwelling and/or visible structural defects that appear to render the structural members ineffective; 
(11)  The dwelling is a physical threat due to immediate risk of collapse; 
(12)  Missing roof, or part of roof missing; 
(13)  The means of exit or escape in the event of fire or other emergency is blocked or structurally unsafe; 
(14)  An excessive internal accumulation of items or garbage that block exits, overloads the structural floor system, or creates an unhealthy condition; 
(15)  Interior wall sheathing or sheeting that is not present, or has been removed to a point where there is little or no protection from spread of fire from story to story, or from other habitable spaces to bedrooms; 
(16)  Occupancy of habitable space that does not meet below-grade occupancy standards; 
(17)  Presence of uncontained flammable or combustible liquids or gases, poisonous solids, liquids, gases, life or health threatening depletion of oxygen; 
(18)  Multiple violations of the standards set forth in section 4-210. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall give priority enforcement to any dwelling that falls within the provisions of section 4-209. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-210. - Minimum standards. 
Without excluding other ways and means of determining that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall apply the minimum standards set forth in section 4-210 of this Code in determining whether a dwelling is unfit. 
(1)  Fire safety. 
a.  Street address. Each dwelling shall bear a street address number of a color contrasting with the surface on which the number is mounted, such number to be of sufficient size to be visible from the nearest public street, but not less than two inches in height on one or two family residences and four inches in height on all other multi-family residences. Any new numbers to be installed shall be four inches in height. If the dwelling is not visible from the nearest public street, a sign or standard bearing the address number shall be placed on the principal public street access point to the dwelling, such number to meet the standards set forth herein. 
b.  Smoke detector. Every dwelling shall be provided with a smoke detector listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. or other equivalent national testing laboratory on each level of the dwelling and in stairwells, hallways and other common areas of multiple-unit dwellings. Such detectors shall be installed in accordance with either National Fire Protection Association Standard 72, National Fire Alarm Code, Chapter 8, or the minimum protection designated in the manufacturer's instructions. 
c.  Hazardous materials. Presence of uncontained flammable or combustible liquids or gases, poisonous solids, liquids, gases, life or health threatening depletion of oxygen not in compliance with the state building code, or manufacturer's product installation instructions. 
d.  Fire-stopping and draft-stopping. Fire-stopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings both horizontal and vertical and to form a fire barrier between floors and between the upper floor and the roof space. 
Draft-stopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings in floor/ceiling assemblies and in attics. 
e.  Means of egress. In multi-family houses having two or more dwelling units above the first story, every dwelling unit above the first story shall have access to at least two exit ways. One common exit is permitted provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Maximum distance of travel to reach the exit or stairs from the entrance door to any dwelling unit shall not exceed 30 feet. 
2.  Maximum number of dwelling units served by the exit shall not exceed four per floor. 
3.  Maximum gross area of the dwelling units shall not exceed 3,500 square feet per floor. 
4.  Maximum building height shall be one story above the level of exit discharge. 
(2)  Light and ventilation. 
a.  Windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. 
b.  Ventilation. Every habitable room (except kitchens with exhaust fans in good working order) shall have at least one window or skylight, which can be easily opened. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
c.  Mechanical ventilation. Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
1.  Bathrooms. Every bathroom with tub and/or shower shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements of section 4-210 (b)(1) of this Code for habitable rooms in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina Building Code when the structure was built. Electrical exhaust fans used for mechanical ventilation must be vented directly to the outside. 
2.  Range hoods, if installed shall be vented to the outdoors pursuant to the North Carolina State Building Code. Vents serving range hoods shall not terminate in an attic or crawl space or other areas inside the building. Unvented range hoods must be installed per manufacturer's recommendations. 
3.  Dryer vents shall be installed pursuant to the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(3)  Space and sanitation. 
a.  Required space. Every dwelling shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. Provided, however, the requirement of this section shall not be applicable to hotels, motels and other transient dwellings. 
b.  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
c.  Ceiling height. Habitable rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, and water closet rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than six feet-six inches measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a dwelling has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height of the room is required in only one-half the room area. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum room area. 
Exception: Before the North Carolina Building Code adoption of the August 1936 edition, there was not a written Code. The ceiling heights on structures built before that time is considered acceptable, provided that the ceiling height is reasonable. Reasonable being at least six feet five inches in 50 percent of the total area. Provided no alterations have been made to the structure after the August 1936 date. 
d.  Occupancy below grade. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unless: 
1.  The floor and walls are resistant to leakage of underground and surface runoff water, and show no evidence of recent water leakage or accumulation; and 
2.  The total window area (or window well area) is equal to at least 22 inches in height, 20 inches in width and a window sill of not more than 44 inches in height. The window area shall not be less than eight percent of the floor space, except that in non-sleeping rooms, mechanical ventilation and electrical light may be used in place of window ventilation and light; and 
3.  An easily accessible means of fire escape in addition to the basement or cellar stair is provided. Windows which are easily accessible and of sufficient size to accommodate occupants escaping a fire are acceptable. 
e.  Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling shall provide a clean, safe and sanitary dwelling and shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, safe and sanitary condition outbuildings and appurtenances to the extent that such outbuildings and appurtenances are regulated by this Code. 
f.  Extermination. Every owner of a dwelling or a boarding house shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests within the dwelling or premises. If the owner fails to provide such extermination services and evidence of insect, rodent or other pest infestation is present, extermination shall be ordered by the code enforcement officer; such extermination shall be conducted by a licensed exterminator; the owner shall then provide the code enforcement officer with a statement of action from the licensed exterminator. Monthly extermination treatment is the maximum that an owner shall be required to provide. 
(4)  Building. 
a.  Exterior. 
1.  Foundation. The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Beneath the dwelling, there must be firm, reasonably dry ground ("reasonably dry" means no mud, standing water, running water or evidence of same). Mobile homes shall be set up and secured as required by the regulations of the state building code for manufactured/mobile homes. 
2.  Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. Termites, termite damage, fire damage, absence of footings or cracked or split wood structural supports are examples of evidence of deterioration. 
When additional direct support is required, piers shall be used under girders, at walls or other primary support points. 
3.  Exterior walls. 
(i)  Every exterior wall shall be reasonably weathertight (free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, dampness, vermin or air to the wall cavity or to the occupied spaces of the building). All siding material shall be kept in repair. "Kept in repair" includes maintenance of painted surface areas where the protective paint surface no longer protects the wood or other organic building materials from weather damage, repair of cracks or holes exceeding one-quarter inch in width and replacement of wood or other organic components that show visual signs of rot, or are soft to the touch or otherwise show evidence of rotting. 
(ii)  Existing skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members which compromise the insulation characteristics of the skirting. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. If skirting is not provided, or if existing skirting is removed, water lines and drain lines shall be insulated to prevent freezing. 
(iii)  Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the dwelling. Adequate means to gain access to the dwelling crawl space, via inside or outside, shall be furnished. Adequate means to gain access to heating or other mechanical equipment, via inside or outside, shall be furnished. 
4.  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces (other than decay-resistant woods, such as cedar, redwood, cypress, or pressure-treated lumber) shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Minimal chipping or peeling of surfaces not directly exposed to the elements and not reasonably expected to contribute to decay of wood surfaces is not required to be treated. All siding shall be weather-resistant and watertight. All masonry joints shall be sufficiently tuck pointed to insure water and air tightness. "Sufficiently tuck pointed" means that mortar shall not be removable by finger pressure. 
5.  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound, and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the dwelling. The following may constitute evidence of defects: Missing shingles; flashing(s) missing; roof deflection deeper than 1 / 6 of the depth of the rafter and/or rafters cracked; damage to ceilings (ceiling plaster loose or falling, brown spots, etc.), sheet rock hanging, etc. in rooms below roof; or fire damage. 
No more than two layers of roofing materials (shingles, shakes, roofing) shall be permitted unless complaint with the North Carolina Building Code under which it was installed or certified as structurally sound by an architect or engineer registered in North Carolina. 
6.  Attics. All attics shall be adequately ventilated. Insulation rated at least R-19 (or minimum thickness of six inches) and consisting of rock wool, fiberglass, or other material exhibiting fire-resistance and insulation capacities equal to, or greater than, rock wool or fiberglass shall be required in the accessible ceiling or attic of the highest story containing habitable rooms in all dwellings. 
Exception: Knob & tube wiring shall not be covered with insulation. The owner of any dwelling must produce an insulation certification card or other identifying marks as described in the North Carolina State Building Code before that owner can obtain a housing certificate. 
b.  Interior surface. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially vermin-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Interior finish shall be free of excessive holes and cracks. No cardboard or other highly combustible or improper wall finish or ceiling finish shall be allowed. No rotted, fire-damaged, or loose flooring shall be allowed. All floors shall be level enough so as not to present a tripping hazard. Every bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be readily kept in clean and sanitary condition. 
c.  Windows and window assemblies. 
1.  Each window shall be weathertight, watertight and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. If daylight can be seen around the inside or outside perimeter of the window casing, that window does not meet this standard. Every openable window shall be equipped with an effective locking mechanism or other mechanism that functions as a lock. 
2.  Each window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes. Wood, cardboard or polyethylene or other plastic film are not approved substitutes. A window pane with a crack or hole must be replaced or the crack or hole sealed with clear silicone seal. A broken window (pieces missing or exposed glass edge) must be replaced. 
3.  Each window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame. If daylight can be seen from around the inside or outside perimeter of the window sash, that window does not meet this standard. 
4.  Each window required for ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened or closed and secured in position by window hardware. 
5.  Security bars. When security bars exist, one grill in each room used for sleeping should be equipped with a release device designed for emergency escape. Occupancies below grade, windows fitted with security grills intended for emergency escape should have a vertical measurement of no more than 44 inches from the sill or fixed portion of the grill to the finished floor. Exception: If a room used for sleeping has a door leading directly to the outside of the building at or to grade level. 
6.  Screens. In order to provide for required ventilation, dwelling units which do not have central air conditioning systems shall have fitted screens in good repair on all operable windows. One window or skylight facing directly outdoors must be provided in all habitable rooms and must have a screen. Screens shall provide a continuous barrier to insects. Warning: Screens will not stop a child from falling out a window; a child shall be kept away from an open window. 
d.  Doors. 
1.  Every exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. "Good repair" includes no delamination or splitting of wood doors. 
2.  Every exterior door to a dwelling shall be provided with properly-installed hardware that is maintained to insure reasonable ease of operation to open, close or secure in an open or closed position, as intended by the manufacturer of the door and the attached hardware. Properly-installed hardware shall consist of knob, bib and operating lock with sufficient strength to prevent unauthorized entry in all situations short of disassembly, force or use of a key or pick. All exterior doors shall be capable of being locked from the inside and outside in a manner that will provide for the safety and security of the occupant(s). 
3.  Exterior door frames shall be properly maintained and shall be equipped with weather-stripping and thresholds as required to be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent and insect restrictive when the door is in a closed position. If daylight can be seen from inside around the inner perimeter of an exterior door frame that door frame does not meet this standard. 
4.  Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the dwelling, maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and security of the door in a closed position. If daylight can be seen from inside around the outer perimeter of an exterior door frame that door frame does not meet this standard. 
5.  Interior door hardware. Every interior door shall be provided with proper hardware, securely attached and maintained in good condition. Hasp lock assemblies are not permitted on any side of the door of habitable rooms. 
6.  The use of double cylinder locks on common area egress doors for multi-family rental units is prohibited. 
e.  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. 
1.  Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Stairs and steps shall be free of holes, grooves and/or cracks large enough to constitute accident hazards. Risers shall be reasonably uniform in height. Stair coverings shall be securely mounted and shall not interfere with safe use of the stairs. 
2.  Protective railings. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. Protective railings and guards are required for stairs and stairwells exceeding 4 risers high and shall be required for every porch, terrace or entrance platform located at least 30 inches above the adjacent finished grade or floor. Railings and guards shall be in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code when the structure was built. New railings and guards shall comply with the current North Carolina State Building Code. Stairs located in or leading to an unheated and uninhabitable attic or basement must be sturdy and have at least one handrail. 
f.  Outbuildings. Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be structurally sound. When the condition of plumbing, heating, structural or electrical facilities present an imminent danger to occupants, or to the public, if such outbuilding is accessible to the public, those facilities shall be made safe in a manner consistent with this Code. 
(5)  Electrical. 
a.  Service. Adequate electric service must be provided to the dwelling. "Adequate" means a minimum of 60 ampere service with no more than five two-wire branch circuits connected and a total connected load of less than ten kilowatts. If a service has six or more two-wire branch circuits, 100 ampere service at a minimum must be provided. If the connected electrical load exceeds the capacity of a 100 ampere service, a service of sufficient ampere capacity to safely bear the connected electrical load shall be furnished. "Edison base" fuses shall not be permitted as components of any electrical service, and no more than one two-wire branch circuit shall be connected to any fuse, circuit breaker or other approved over-current protection device. Drop cords from a neighboring source, generator or similar source are not "adequate" for purposes of this Code. 
Every new or additional electrical outlet and fixture required by the Code shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina Building Code. 
b.  Wiring. All outlets, switches, wiring and light fixtures shall be safe and operable. Any new outlets shall be installed to the standards of the North Carolina State Building Code. Appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines, dishwashers, microwaves and air conditioners shall be protected by a grounded receptacle. An ungrounded ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) may be installed pursuant to the National Electrical Code (NEC); however these are not recommended for refrigerators. Outlets within 6 feet of a source of water shall be protected by a grounded outlet or GFCI. An arc-fault interrupter is recommended, but not required, for extensions of bedroom circuits. No extension cords shall be spliced or used as fixed wiring or permanently installed to service appliances or fixtures. Extension cords shall be used only as temporary extensions for portable equipment not routinely used in an area where permanently wired receptacles are not available or installed. Cords shall not be run through openings in walls, ceilings, or doorways; attached or fixed permanently to any surface; run under carpets or floorings; or plugged into a power strip. Multi-outlet assemblies (power strips) shall be equipped with fuse or circuit breaker and used in accordance with the limitation of the product label of the testing agency. Electrical odor, flickering lights, visibly frayed wiring, broken switch plates or outlet plates or failure of circuit-tester check shall be evidence of an unsafe electrical system. 
c.  Light fixtures and outlets. 
1.  Halls and stairways. Every hall and stairway of every dwelling shall be lighted, including exterior stairways and stairways in halls and public space. 
2.  Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted fixture outlet. For purposes of this section a laundry closet shall not be considered a laundry room. 
3.  Bedrooms shall have, in addition at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet or ceiling light fixture or permanent fixture controlled by a pull chain. 
4.  In bathrooms, the lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull chain. In addition to the lighting outlet in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one receptacle outlet. Any new or replacement bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
5.  Every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote duplex receptacle outlets. 
6.  In kitchens, three separate, remote and accessible receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling light outlet controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull-chain shall be provided. An outlet dedicated to powering an appliance and/or not easily accessible because it is blocked by an appliance, shall not be counted as a separate outlet. In kitchens with less than six linear feet of counter top, two of the three required outlets may be within the counter top space. 
Exception: When an existing kitchen area is less than 70 square feet of floor area, two separate, remote and accessible receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull-chain shall be provided. 
(6)  Plumbing. 
a.  Sanitary. Every dwelling shall be furnished with a potable water supply system. "Potable water supply" means direct connection to a well, to a public water utility or equivalent water service delivery system, and does not include water delivered through a hose or via containers. Every dwelling shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition and properly connected to a functioning water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in good sanitary working condition. "Properly connected" means connected with approved plumbing materials (no radiator hose, duct tape, etc.). Any new, additional or repair plumbing must meet the current requirements of the North Carolina Building Code. Provided, however, that the kitchen sink standards enumerated herein shall not apply to hotels, motels and other transient places unless kitchen sinks are otherwise required. 
b.  Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room or adjoining rooms affording privacy to the user. Required bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas. 
c.  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through a functioning distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
d.  Water heating. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which appear to be properly installed, appear to be in safe and good working condition, respond to normal operating controls, and capable of heating water to such a temperature so as to permit hot water to be drawn consecutively (that is, at one tap after the other, and not simultaneously) at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 116 degrees F. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling's heating facilities required under the provisions of the Code are not in operation. Apartment houses may use a centralized water heating facility capable of delivering an amount of hot water in the quantity and at the temperature described above. 
Water heaters shall be equipped with approved relief valves, which are piped to a point not more than six inches above the floor. The pipe material for the relief valve shall be properly connected and rated for interior water service lines. The discharge end of the extension tube may not be threaded. 
e.  Bathroom access. Bathroom access shall be provided in a manner that does not require an occupant to leave the dwelling to gain access. Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose. 
f.  Water closet, lavatory and bath facilities for boarding houses. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be private and reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
(7)  Mechanical. 
a.  Heat. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which appear to be properly installed, appear to be in safe and good working condition, respond to normal operating controls, and capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees in all habitable rooms. Each heating system shall have at least one readily-adjustable control for regulation of living space temperature in each dwelling unit. Radiator control knobs in good working order shall be regarded as a readily-adjustable control. 
1.  Where a central heating system is not provided for a dwelling, the dwelling shall be provided with properly installed baseboard electric heat, properly installed and properly vented wood or fossil fuel heater(s), or unvented natural gas heaters having oxygen depletion sensors listed for residential use by UL, ETL, or other North Carolina recognized testing laboratory and installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
2.  The following heating devices do not meet the requirements of subsection (g)(1)a. of this section: (i) portable electric heating units; and (ii) un-vented fuel-burning heaters. 
3.  The use of unvented fuel-burning heaters is prohibited in any bedroom. 
4.  Heating appliance clearances maintained at 36 inches from combustible materials and/or surfaces, except that clearances may be reduced as provided in National Fire Protection Association's Standard 211, "Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances," 1992 edition. 
5.  Central warm air heating systems for multi-family units have not been allowed since 1991. The furnaces for shared systems may be repaired or cleaned, however, may not be reconfigured or replaced unless the entire system is made to comply with the present North Carolina State Building Code. This means that ventilation air may not be recirculated from one dwelling unit to another. The owner and heating contractor will need to address the entire scope of work in the permitted work including but not limited to fire stopping, damper systems when necessary; fire-rating mechanical rooms if necessary and allowing proper access to mechanical areas. 
b.  Chimneys. 
1.  Chimneys must appear to be safe for use as specified and intended. "Specified" means use in connection with specific heating appliances or systems, or limitations of such use. 
"Intended" means use in connection with combustion of fuel, for which the following minimum chimney standards apply: flue liner intact; chimney mortar and bricks secure; flue unobstructed; fireplace firebricks intact; stove piping placed and secured with clearances as follows: 
(i)  Minimum 12-inch brick clearance separation from combustibles; or 
(ii)  Minimum nine-inch air separation for insulated listed stove-piping; or 
(iii)  Minimum one-inch air clearance surrounded by six-inch glass fiber insulation and ventilated thimble assembly; or 
(iv)  Minimum two-inch air separation for insulated listed stove-piping with one-inch air space between inner and outer chimney components; and as otherwise described in National Fire Protection Association's Standard 211, "Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances," 1992 edition. 
2.  Chimneys that do not meet these standards shall either be repaired or sealed. 
c.  Cooking equipment. All cooking equipment and facilities shall be installed in an approved manner and shall be maintained in safe working condition. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited as a substitute for approved cooking equipment. Portable cooking equipment is prohibited outside the kitchen area of a boarding or rooming house. 
d.  Master meters. All duplex and multi-family dwellings must conform to the city's Unified Development Ordinance. If permitted in 1977 or later, as required by N.C.G.S., sec. 143-151.42, each individual dwelling unit must have separate electric and gas utility meter services. 
(8)  General. Violation(s) of state building code regulations for existing multi-family dwellings. A dwelling that is not in compliance with the state building code shall be considered unfit and ineligible for a housing certificate under this Code unless the owner has been granted a building permit for work that would bring the structure into compliance with the state building code. Expiration of the permit without completion of such work shall result in revocation of the housing certificate issued for such dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-211. - Alternate means. 
(a)  The housing code coordinator may authorize an alternate means of meeting the requirements of this Code only under the following circumstances as established by the owner(s): 
(1)  The condition for which the alternate means is sought is not one of the conditions set forth in section 4-209 of this Code. 
(2)  The condition for which the alternate means is sought is an element of the fundamental and original construction of the dwelling. "Fundamental and original construction" includes foundation dimensions, ceiling height, organization of habitable space, and any other condition governed by the original structure of the dwelling; and 
(3)  There exists a demonstrable alternate means of meeting the intent of this Code. 
(b)  In the event that the code enforcement officer withholds approval of one or more plumbing, electrical, mechanical, structural or fire safety components, the code enforcement officer may accept approval of such components without further corrections upon receipt of a report from an appropriately licensed contractor, architect or engineer certified in North Carolina, as specified by the code enforcement officer in writing. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-212. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-213. - Duties of tenants. 
This Code is not intended to interfere with or abrogate the duties imposed on tenants of rental property by N.C.G.S., Chapter 42-43, or with lawful written agreements between property owners and tenants. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-214. - Responsibility of owner. 
The owner remains responsible for complying with the provisions of this Code, even though: 
(1)  An obligation is also imposed on the occupants. 
(2)  The owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of complying with this Code. 
(3)  In cases where a part of a dwelling unit or dwelling is owned by an association of owners and the balance of such dwelling unit or dwelling is owned by an individual owner, responsibility for compliance lies with the owner of that part of the dwelling unit or dwelling not in compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-215. - Third party inspector program. 
(a)  The housing code coordinator shall develop standards and requirements for certification of third party inspectors as qualified to conduct a housing inspection under this Code, which standards and requirements shall be approved by the director of the City of Asheville Building Safety Department. Such standards and requirements shall include, but not be limited to, training and education, insurance and bonding, assumption of liability and continuing education standards. A housing inspection conducted by such an inspector, who shall be an independent contractor and not a city employee, shall be treated as if conducted by a code enforcement officer for purposes of enforcement of this Code. 
(b)  The results of an inspection conducted under authority of this section shall be turned over to the code enforcement officer in written form within five working days of completion of such inspection. At the time of receipt of the foregoing report, the code enforcement officer shall proceed to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The housing code coordinator shall maintain a listing of approved third-party inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-216. - Administration of the code 
(a)  Powers of the code enforcement officer: The housing code coordinator shall have such powers as may be necessary, lawful, or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this Code, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation. 
(2)  To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections in a manner that will cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties, as provided in this Code, of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this Code. 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to periodically examine the dwellings located in the city for the purpose of determining the fitness of dwellings for human habitation, and for the enforcement and administration of this Code. 
In exercising this power, the code enforcement officer shall have a right to enter on any premises within the city at all reasonable hours (between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and at the convenience of the occupant) for the purpose of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials. Upon refusal after proper notice, the code enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect pursuant to N.C.G.S., article 4A of chapter 15, as amended. 
(2)  If, during the course of an inspection, the code enforcement officer finds evidence of construction in progress that would require a permit (or permits) pursuant to N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-417, the owner shall produce evidence that such permit(s) have been obtained prior to issuance of any housing certificate. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to relocate any moveable obstructions (furniture, boxes, appliances and construction materials, for example) that would otherwise interfere with a complete housing certificate inspection. The code enforcement officer shall not be responsible for failure to detect violations of this Code when such violations are concealed behind, under or above walls, floors, ceilings or other fixed components of the dwelling that are not readily accessible. Inspections are primarily usual in nature and not technically exhaustive. 
(4)  Housing authority. 
a.  The Asheville Housing Authority ("authority") shall be authorized to provide inspections under this Code in dwelling units owned or regulated by the authority. It shall be the responsibility of the authority to ensure that all inspectors are properly trained to conduct inspections under the City of Asheville Housing Code on a report form approved by the housing code coordinator. The authority must maintain a file on all inspections and notify the housing code coordinator in writing when inspections are completed. Should evidence show that inspections are not performed in accordance with this Code, then authorization may be withdrawn by the housing code coordinator. 
b.  All complaints received on dwelling units owned or regulated by the authority shall be processed pursuant to section 4-217 of the Code. 
(c)  Housing certificate/life safety letter of compliance. 
(1)  For rental dwellings, whether occupied or vacant, the owner is required to obtain a housing certificate as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Buildings containing up to five dwelling units; at least one unit must be inspected. 
c.  Buildings containing six or more dwelling units; an inspection shall take place in 20 percent of the dwelling units in each building. Provided, however, multi-family complexes with a verifiable maintenance program, a housing certificate inspection shall take place in ten percent of the dwelling units in each building. 
Selection of units for inspection shall be random in nature and at the discretion of the code enforcement officer. In a required inspection, if an average of four or more violations of the standards set forth in section 4-210 of this Code is present in each dwelling unit, an additional 20 percent of the dwelling units in each building shall be inspected. 
d.  Nonconformity. All dwellings not conforming, as of the effective date of this Code, to the housing certificate requirements of the housing code, adopted in article VII of chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances on November 30, 1993, 100 percent of the dwelling units must be inspected under the provisions of this Code. 
e.  Conformity. All dwellings conforming, as of the effective date of this Code, to the housing certificate requirements of the housing code, adopted in article VII of chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances on November 30, 1993, except as herein provided, shall be deemed conforming to the terms of this Code. 
Additionally, all dwellings having received a certificate of occupancy, on or after July 1, 1994, except as herein provided, shall be deemed conforming to the terms of this Code. 
f.  Annexation. Dwellings annexed into the city shall obtain a housing certificate in accordance with this Code within five years of annexation, or upon a change of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
g.  Duration of housing certificate. Any housing certificate deemed conforming to the terms of this section, or any housing certificate issued pursuant to this Code, shall apply to all dwelling units within the building inspected. The housing certificate shall remain valid until there is a failure to maintain the dwelling in compliance with the terms of this Code. Provided, however, if an average of four (4) or more violations of the standards set forth in section 4-210 of this Code are identified, the code enforcement officer may invalidate the housing certificate. If invalidated, a new housing certificate shall be required. Failure to respond to inspection scheduling efforts on the part of the code enforcement officer shall be a violation of this Code. 
(2)  Owner occupied dwellings. Upon change of occupancy, it shall be a violation of this Code to occupy the property without a life safety report addressing the conditions set forth in section 4-209 of this Code. If the life safety report identifies a violation of any of the standards set forth in section 4-209 of this Code, it shall be a violation of this Code to occupy the property without a life safety letter of compliance from the code enforcement officer stating that there is compliance with section 4-209. This subsection (2) shall apply to all owner occupied dwellings except: 
a.  If the dwelling conforms as of the effective date of this Code, with the housing certificate requirements of the housing code, adopted in article VII of chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances on November 30, 1993; or 
b.  If the dwelling received a certificate of occupancy, on or after July 1, 1994; or 
c.  If the dwelling previously received a housing certificate or life safety letter of compliance under the terms of this Code. 
(3)  General. 
a.  When a housing certificate has been requested, the city's inspection form must be completed and re-inspection must be scheduled by the owner within 90 days of the initial inspection. The re-inspection shall consist primarily of a recheck of Code violations listed on the initial inspection report. Any additional violations noted at the time of the re-inspection, will become part of the inspection record and shared with the owner. Additional "life safety/unsafe conditions" shall be required to be corrected prior to issuance of a housing certificate. Less serious issues shall be recommended for repair. 
b.  The code enforcement officer certifies to the findings of the inspection only upon the date of issue and not beyond. A disclaimer to this effect shall appear on all housing certificates and life safety letters of compliance issued. 
c.  No housing certificate, life safety letter of compliance, or temporary housing certificate shall be issued if electrical service and/or water service is not present at the time of inspection. 
d.  Once a housing certificate or life safety letter of compliance has been issued, no additional inspections, certificates or letters will be required at any future change of occupancy as long as the owner maintains the property in compliance with the standards of this Code. 
e.  Nothing herein shall prevent either the buyer or seller from requesting a housing certificate inspection. 
f.  Violations of section 7-5-2 (zoning permits), of the city's unified development ordinance as it may be amended from time to time, shall be corrected prior to occupancy. 
(d)  Temporary housing certificate. Where no violation as described in section 4-209 of this Code is identified, the code enforcement officer may issue a temporary housing certificate to an owner contingent upon completion of violations identified in the inspection report. The owner must agree to vacate the dwelling immediately upon failure to complete the repairs within the time period specified in the temporary certificate. Upon expiration of the temporary certificate, the dwelling shall be deemed unfit, and the code enforcement officer may proceed to enforce this Code. Temporary housing certificates can be renewed or extended upon request for renewal and must be approved by the code enforcement officer. 
(e)  Fees. The housing code division will charge the owner such inspection fees as may be established from time to time by the city council as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(f)  Reports. Inspection findings will be recorded on standardized report forms and provided to the owner. Such standardized reports shall include specific references to sections of the Code when any violations are recorded. The reports shall contain notice of any deficiencies under the Code and inform the owner of any deadline to remedy the deficiencies. It is the responsibility of the owner(s) to immediately advise the occupants of any unsafe conditions as set forth under section 4-209 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-217. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Issuance of complaint. 
(1)  Whenever a petition or complaint is filed with the code enforcement officer by a public authority, or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the code enforcement officer, on his own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint. The complaint shall list the violations of this Code and contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the housing code coordinator, at a place within the city at a time fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint. The notice shall also notify the owner and parties in interest that they have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the housing code coordinator. All complaints and notices of hearing issued by the code enforcement officer may be filed in the notice of its pendens in the office of the clerk of superior court for Buncombe County. 
(2)  The code enforcement officer may, prior to the issuance of a complaint, serve the property owner or property owner's agent with a violation notice giving the property owner a designated date to correct the violation(s). 
(b)  Findings of fact and order. If, after such notice and hearing, the housing code coordinator/designee determines that the dwelling under consideration is unsafe or unfit for human habitation, according to the standards of this Code, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order. All orders issued by the housing code coordinator may be filed in the notice of its pendens in the office of the clerk of superior court of Buncombe County. 
(1)  Deteriorated. If the dwelling is found to be deteriorated as defined in this Code, the housing code coordinator shall require the owner to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling so as to bring it into compliance with this Code within a designated date of the service of the order upon the owner. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation. Where the housing code coordinator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be necessary. 
(2)  Dilapidated. If the dwelling is found to be dilapidated as defined in this Code, the housing code coordinator may require the owner to remove or demolish such dwelling within a designated date of the service of the order. Where the housing code coordinator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may condemn and/or order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be necessary. Such order will not bar the owner from making such repairs as are necessary to bring the dwelling into compliance with this Code within the corrective action period imposed by such order. 
(c)  Service of complaints and orders. Complaints and orders issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to this Code shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, and, in conjunction therewith, may be served by regular mail. When the manner of service is by regular mail in conjunction with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is returned, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after mailing, service shall be deemed sufficient. The person mailing such complaint or order by regular mail shall certify that fact and the date thereof, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. If the identifies of any owners or the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under this article. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice, or order herein provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner or party in interest or any other person, firm, or corporation. 
(d)  Prior orders. 
(1)  Prior orders or ordinances not directing demolition. If city council has adopted an ordinance, or the housing code coordinator has issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in section 4-217(b)(1), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the city council shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the city in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this state, then in such circumstances, the city council may, after the expiration of such one year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 
a.  That the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or 
b.  That the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. 
c.  That the ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds for Buncombe County and indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. That failure to comply with the ordinance shall authorize the director to effectuate the purpose of the ordinance. 
(2)  Historic district. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the city and the historic district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-400.14(a). 
(e)  Action upon failure to comply with order. 
(1)  If the owner of a dwelling fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the housing code coordinator may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed; the housing code coordinator may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: 
"This dwelling is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this dwelling for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." 
Occupation of a dwelling so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(2)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the housing code coordinator may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. 
(3)  The order of the housing code coordinator to repair, alter, improve, vacate and close or remove and demolish shall not be exercised by the city until city council shall have by ordinance ordered the housing code coordinator to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Code with respect to the particular property or properties which the housing code coordinator shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unsafe and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinances shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity to this Code. Such ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds for Buncombe County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
Provided, however, nothing in this Code shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. 
(4)  The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the housing code coordinator shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in N.C.G.S., Article 10 of Chapter 160A. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the housing code coordinator, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Buncombe County Superior Court by the housing code coordinator, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
(5)  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the housing code coordinator may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such a dwelling. The clerk of the Buncombe County Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in N.C.G.S., sec. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the housing code coordinator produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to subsection (d)(3) of this section authorizing the housing code coordinator to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under N.C.G.S., sec. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in N.C.G.S., sec. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in N.C.G.S., sec. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this section unless such occupant has been served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the city has ordered the housing code coordinator to proceed to exercise his duties under this section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling. 
(f)  Notices to organizations. Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this section that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions of this Code, notice of the order shall be given by first-class mail to any organization, involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the housing code coordinator, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The housing code coordinator shall certify the mailing of the notice, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Except as herein stated, only an organization that has filed a written request for such notice shall receive such notice. The sole remedy for failure to notify shall be an order requiring the housing code coordinator to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition. 
(g)  Displacement. In enforcing the provisions of this Code, the housing code coordinator shall make every effort to prevent unnecessary displacement of occupants, and to the extent possible, discuss with the affordable housing agencies and other organizations on any alternate housing needs. 
(h)  Determination of value. The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to fix the reasonable value of any dwelling or abandoned dwelling for the purpose of this Code. Such value shall be binding unless the owner provides for delivery of a written appraisal as to the reasonable value of the dwelling prepared by a North Carolina state-certified residential appraiser within 30 days after receipt of an order from the housing code coordinator. 
(i)  Equitable enforcement. In case any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this Code or any order or decision of the housing code coordinator or board made pursuant to this Code, the housing code coordinator may initiate any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation and to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling. 
(j)  Criminal enforcement. A violation of any provision of this Code shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the violator may be fined up to $500.00 or up to 30 days imprisonment or both for each offense, in the discretion of the court. 
(k)  Civil enforcement. 
(1)  Failure to comply with orders. An owner who fails to comply with an order to repair or to improve, vacate, close or demolish any dwelling determined unfit for human habitation pursuant to the provisions contained in this Code, or who permits the occupancy or reoccupancy of an unsafe or unfit dwelling in violation of this Code shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00 for the first day following the expiration of an order to repair or improve, vacate or close any occupied dwelling or following a determination that an unfit dwelling has been reoccupied in violation of this Code. In each instance, a penalty of $50.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that such failure to comply continues. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within ten days after being notified of the amount due, the city may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(2)  Failure to obtain a housing certificate. An owner who does not have a housing certificate on the effective date of this Code, but who was required to have a housing certificate under the terms of the housing code adopted in article vii of chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances on November 30, 1993, or does not have a housing certificate as required under the terms of this Code, shall be assessed a penalty of $20.00 per month, per unit for which a housing certificate has not been obtained. This penalty shall be paid prior to the issuance of a housing certificate. Additionally, effective January 1, 2004, the failure to obtain a housing certificate shall subject the owner to an increased penalty of $150.00 per month, per unit, for which a housing certificate has not been obtained; provided, however, the maximum penalty hereunder shall not exceed $600.00 per unit. 
(l)  Response time. The city manager shall maintain statistics and monitor response times to ensure that complaints are responded to within a reasonable amount of time. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-218. - One-step service process. 
(a)  In lieu of the procedure set forth in section 4-217 of this Code, the code enforcement officer may proceed as set forth in this section whenever it appears to the code enforcement officer that any dwelling is extremely dilapidated and meets the following conditions: 
(1)  It has been determined by the code enforcement officer to be either: 
a.  At least 50 percent destroyed by fire or other casualty; or 
b.  Unable to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all the standards established by this Code at a cost of less than 75 percent of its value; 
(2)  It is not occupied; and 
(3)  For at least one year, there has been no record of electrical service as required by section 4-210(e) of this Code and/or no record or evidence of a potable water supply as required by section 4-210(f) of this Code, or substantially similar conditions that indicate that the dwelling has not been lawfully occupied. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer may serve the property owner and parties in interest with a notice of violation of the housing code and set a date not less than 30 days from the date of service of the notice within which the property owner shall either commence rehabilitation so as to bring the dwelling into compliance with the housing code or commence demolition proceedings. The notice shall also inform the property owner that if corrections or demolition proceedings are not commenced within the time period specified, the code enforcement officer shall, without further notice or further request of the governing body, cause the demolition of the dwelling and place a lien against the property. 
(c)  Written objection. If the property owner or party in interest submits written objection to the code enforcement officer proceeding against the dwelling within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall cease any further efforts at compliance under this section but may proceed in accordance with other provisions of this article. If the property owner or party in interest does not submit written objection to the code enforcement officer proceeding against the dwelling within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall document that the conditions set forth in subsection (a)(1) exist, enter an order to that effect, and cause the dwelling to be demolished. The code enforcement officer shall be under no further obligation to notify or serve the property owner or party in interest where there is no written objection. The amount of the cost of demolition by the code enforcement officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in N.C.G.S., Article 10 of Chapter 160A. 
(d)  Civil actions. Civil actions against the City of Asheville for proceeding under this subsection must be filed within nine months from the date the violation notice is served upon the aggrieved party. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-219. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  To housing code coordinator. Any owner may file a written appeal within ten days after issuance of the code enforcement officer's report, with the housing code coordinator. The housing code coordinator is hereby given authority to rule on any dispute arising out of the interpretation of this Code by the code enforcement officer. The housing code coordinator will affirm, reverse, or modify the ruling of the code enforcement officer. Appeals of decisions or orders of the housing code coordinator shall be made to the director. 
(b)  To board of adjustment. A housing appeals board is hereby created to which appeals on the record may be taken by an owner or other party in interest from any decision or order of the director. The zoning board of adjustment of the City of Asheville shall serve as the housing appeals board and will hear and determine such appeals on the record. 
(1)  An appeal from any decision or order of the director may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Such appeal shall be taken within ten days from the service of the order and shall be taken by filing with the director and with the board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the director shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from the decision of the director refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the director requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the board, unless the director certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the petitioner) a suspension of his requirement would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. To this end the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(2)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse, affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision of an order. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the director. The board shall have power also in passing upon appeals in any case where there are practical difficulties or undue hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, to adapt the application of the Code to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(3)  Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted in Buncombe County Superior Court within 15 days after the written decision of the board is filed or after a copy thereof is delivered to the appealing party, whichever is later. The decision of the board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by hand delivery or by any method authorized by the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(c)  Injunction. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the board may petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the code enforcement officer from carrying out the order or decision and the court may upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the code enforcement officer pending a final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-220. - Other unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to remove or permit the removal of, damage or deface any complaint, notice, order or certificate posted in accordance with the provisions of this Code, unless the code enforcement officer consents in writing to such action. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or his agent or any person to lease, re-lease charge or accept rent for occupancy of any dwelling which does not have a housing certificate in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or owner's agent(s) of any dwelling subject to the provisions of this Code to fail to furnish to the buyer a copy of any required inspection findings or report prior to closing or other property transfer of such dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 4-221. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-222. - Invalidity. 
Notwithstanding any other evidence of intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling intent of the city council of the City of Asheville that if any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, firm, or corporation or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provisions to persons, firms, or corporations or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 3055, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Chapter 4.5 - CABLE SERVICES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4.5-1—4.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CABLE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 4.5-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Establish a local policy concerning cable service providers and cable services; 
(2)  Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable service providers and cable services; 
(3)  Promote fair competition in cable services; 
(4)  Minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable service providers and cable services; 
(5)  Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the city; 
(6)  Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the city for cable services purposes on a competitively neutral basis; 
(7)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the city; 
(8)  Assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs; 
(9)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and the residents of the city for permitting private use of the public ways; 
(10)  Assure that cable service providers comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city; 
(11)  Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(12)  Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-32. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given as set forth hereinafter. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future, and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
Additional services means video programming or cable service for which an additional charge is required of a subscriber beyond the charge for basic service tier and cable programming tier services, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view movies and concerts, variety acts and sporting events, pay-per-view programs and interactive services. 
Basic cable services or basic service shall have the meaning set forth in the Cable Act. 
Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1996, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as it may be amended or succeeded. 
Cable programming services means those services provided on the cable programming service tier, as such term is defined in the Cable Act. 
Cable service shall have the meaning set forth in the Cable Act. 
Cable service provider means and includes every person who provides cable service over a cable system. 
Cable system shall have the meaning set forth in the Cable Act. 
Channel shall mean a portion of the electro-magnetic frequency spectrum (or any other means of transmission, including, but not limited to, optical fibers) which is capable of carrying the equivalent of a standard six MHz television broadcast signal and includes uses of all or any portion of such band of frequencies. 
City means the City of Asheville. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Asheville. 
City property shall mean and include all real property owned by the city, other then public rights-of-way as defined hereinafter. 
Commercial subscriber means a subscriber who lawfully receives a service in a place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Complaint means a verbal or written indication from a subscriber of a problem with any aspect of cable service. 
Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Drop shall mean a coaxial connection from the activated feeder cable of the cable system to the subscribers's demarcation point as specified by the FCC. 
Educational channel or educational access channel means any channel provided by the franchisee which is designated by the city for educational use, consistent with the Cable Act. 
FCC or the Federal Communications Commission shall mean the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services, and providers on a national level. 
Franchise means a grant from the city to a franchisee pursuant to state and federal law, granting to the franchisee the nonexclusive and revocable right to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system along the public rights-of-way within the franchise area and/or to provide cable services within the franchise area. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. 
Franchise area shall mean the entire corporate limits of the city, or portions thereof, as said areas are specifically described in the franchise, and any area annexed by the city during the term of the franchise. 
Franchisee shall mean any person who has been legally granted a franchise by the city and shall include the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of such franchisee. 
Franchise fee means the percentage, as specified in the franchise, of the franchisee's gross annual revenues paid to the city in exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter. 
Government channel or government access channel means any channel provided by the franchisee which is designated by the city for government use, consistent with the Cable Act. 
Gross annual revenues means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by the franchisee, affiliates, subsidiaries, or any other person in which the franchisee has a financial interest, from operation of the cable system within the franchise area, including, but not limited to: basic and tier services; premium and pay-per-view services; leased access; installation; connection; Internet; home shopping; equipment charges; non-entertainment services; trades and goods or services. Gross revenues shall exclude government imposed taxes, fees, or assessments, which are excluded pursuant to the Cable Act, bad debt, refunds, and credits. Gross revenues shall not include the revenue of any person, including, without limitation, a supplier of programming to the franchisee, to the extent that said revenue is also included in the gross revenues of the franchisee. 
Installation shall mean the connection of the system from the feeder cable to the subscribers' terminal(s). 
Institutional service means such video, audio, data, or other services provided to or among institutional users. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way video, audio or data transmitted among institutions. 
Laws and regulations means any and all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Leased access channel or commercial access channel shall have the meaning set forth in the Cable Act. 
Overhead facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and associated equipment located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or organization of any kind or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof. 
Plant mile means a linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. 
Public access channel or community access channel means any channel provided by the franchisee to the city which is designated by the city for use by the general public or non-commercial organizations, consistent with the Cable Act. 
Public right-of-way shall mean the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, utility easements, or other public right-of-way located within the franchise area. 
Resident means any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
Residential subscriber means a subscriber who lawfully receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Sale shall include any sale, exchange, barter, or similar transaction. 
School means any public or nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. 
Small cable system operators means any cable system provider serving 1500 subscribers or less. 
State means the State of North Carolina. 
Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives a service provided by the franchisee by means of or in connection with a cable system. 
System facilities means the cable system constructed for use within the city, including, without limitation, the headend, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters, property security systems, equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city designed, constructed, or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio, radio, television, and electronic signals to and from subscribers in the city, and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city intended for the use of the cable system; provided, however, such system facilities excludes buildings, contracts, facilities and equipment where its sole use is for providing service to other system facilities located outside the city limits. 
Transfer means the disposal by the franchisee, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of ten percent or more of the assets, stock, title, rights, or other interest of, in, or to the cable system at one time or cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interest to any other corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert, subject to subsection 4.5-57(b). 
Trunk line means the major distribution cable used in the cable system, which divides into the feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers. 
Upstream signal means a signal originating from a terminal to another point in the cable system. 
User means a person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and facilities for the purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 2, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-33. - Registration of cable services providers. 
(a)  Required. Unless prohibited by other laws and regulations or unless a cable service provider has an existing franchise with the city, all cable services providers that offer or provide any cable service for a fee directly to the public, either within the city, or outside the corporate limits, from facilities within the city, shall register with the city pursuant to this section on forms to be provided by the city clerk, which shall include the following: 
(1)  The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement. 
(3)  A description of the registrant's existing or proposed facilities within the city. 
(4)  A description of the cable services that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons within the city. 
(5)  Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter. 
(6)  Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the cable services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any taxes, fees, or charges imposed by the city. 
(7)  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any permit or approval required by federal or state agencies to provide cable services within the city. 
(8)  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC to provide cable services or facilities within the city. 
(9)  Such other information as the city may reasonably require. 
(b)  Fee. Each application for registration as a cable services provider shall be accompanied by a registration fee of $25.00. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of registration under this chapter is to: 
(1)  Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the cable service providers who offer or provide cable services within the city, or that own or operate cable systems within the city; 
(2)  Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter; 
(3)  Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees or other fees or charges that may be due the city; 
(4)  Assist the city in monitoring compliance with laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-34. - Franchise required. 
Unless prohibited by other laws and regulations, no person shall operate, construct, or maintain a cable system on the public rights-of-way of the city without a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 4, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-35. - Cable services franchise. 
(a)  The city may, at its sole option, grant to a person the non-exclusive right, privilege and authority to construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, rebuild and reconstruct a cable system to provide cable service within a franchise area. 
(b)  Except as may be otherwise provided herein or as otherwise regulated or prohibited by other applicable laws and regulations, any cable services provider who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate a cable system in, under, over or across any public rights-of-way, and/or also provide cable services to persons or areas in the city shall first obtain a franchise from the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Franchise application. Unless the city determines otherwise, any person that desires a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city which shall include the information, in a format requested by the city, as follows: 
(1)  The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
(2)  A description of the cable services that will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant and whether such services will be provided over an existing or proposed cable system or on a cable system owned by another cable services provider. 
(3)  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide its cable services. 
(4)  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed cable system. 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public right-of-way along the proposed route. 
c.  When known at the time the application is made the specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; otherwise, applicant shall furnish this information as soon as it is known. 
(5)  If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, and if the information is known by the applicant, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable system on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
(6)  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, if the information is known by the applicant, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's cable system; 
b.  The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable system. 
(7)  If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed with in the public rights-of-way: 
a.  The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; 
b.  The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable system. 
(8)  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates. 
(9)  A preliminary traffic control plan. 
(10)  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principals demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the cable system and/or provide cable services. 
(11)  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable system and services described in the application. 
(12)  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other necessary governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the cable system and/or to offer or provide the cable services. 
(13)  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, open video systems or other video programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable system or cable service franchising. 
(14)  An accurate map showing the location of any existing system facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use or lease. 
(15)  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions. 
(16)  A description of the applicant's access and/or line extension policies. 
(17)  The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area. 
(18)  All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter and/or the Fees and Charges Manual of the city. Unless provided otherwise in the franchise, any applicant for a new franchise or for a renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall pay an application fee of $2,500.00 to the city, which shall be a non-refundable fee. In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the city for all fees and costs incurred by the city which are associated with the initial grant of a franchise, which payment of fees and costs shall become a material term of the franchise. 
(19)  Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested by the city manager or city council. 
(d)  Determination by the city. After receiving a complete application under subsection (c) hereof, the city shall review the application and issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
(1)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(2)  The legal ability of the applicant. 
(3)  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed cable system. 
(4)  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and cable systems if the franchise is granted. 
(5)  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted. 
(6)  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way. 
(7)  The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region. 
(8)  The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted. 
(9)  The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities of the cable system. 
(10)  Applicable laws and regulations. 
(11)  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use of the public right-of-way will serve the community interest. 
(e)  Agreement. No franchise granted under this chapter shall be effective until the applicant and the city have negotiated and executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public rights-of-way of the city will be granted. 
(f)  Non-exclusive grant. No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of cable services or any other purposes. 
(g)  Rights granted. No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(h)  Term of grant. A franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term as set forth in the franchise. A franchisee owning a cable system shall have no right to use of public rights-of-way upon the completion of the franchise term. 
(i)  Franchise area. A franchise granted under this chapter shall apply to the franchise area as described in the franchise. 
(j)  Location of facilities. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The franchisee shall use reasonable efforts to install its facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility and whenever the franchisee deems it technically and operationally desirable. 
(2)  A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities may install the facilities for its cable system on pole attachments to existing utility poles only. 
(3)  Whenever all existing electric and telephone utilities, cable facilities or facilities are located underground within the public rights-of-way in the city, a franchise with permission to occupy the same public rights-of-way must also locate its facilities for its cable system underground. In such situations, the franchisee shall use reasonable efforts to joint trench with the other utilities. 
(4)  Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, or facilities for a cable system are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way in the city, a franchisee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the franchise term. In such situations, the franchisee shall use reasonable efforts to joint trench with the other utilities. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Construction permits. All franchisees for cable systems are required to obtain construction permits for construction of facilities for a cable system and for other permits as required by applicable laws and regulations. 
(l)  Amendment of franchise. A new application for and an amendment to a franchise shall be required of any cable services provider that desires to extend or locate its cable system in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in the franchise area previously described in a franchise granted under this chapter. 
(m)  Franchise renewal. Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter to provide cable service, the city may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the franchisee in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. 
If the Cable Act ceases to provide a procedure and/or other requirements for a franchise renewal, the city may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the franchisee in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act which were in effect immediately prior to the Cable Act ceasing to so provide, provided this provision is enforceable and/or not pre-empted by federal law. 
(n)  Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. Unless otherwise provided or prohibited by other applicable laws and regulations, no franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's performance under the franchise, or of the requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 5, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-36. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Generally. The city hereby determines and declares that the public rights-of-way to be used by the franchisee in the operation of its franchise are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city and state at great expense to their taxpayers; that the grant to the franchisee is a valuable property right without which the franchisee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and that the administration of this chapter and the franchise impose upon the city regulatory and administrative responsibility and expense. For that reason, the franchisee shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise, but in no event less than five percent of the gross annual revenues. This annual franchise fee shall be in addition to any other fee and the obligation to pay such fee shall commence on the effective date of the franchise, unless otherwise provided by the franchise. 
(b)  Other assessments, taxes or fees. The franchise fee required hereunder is in addition to all other lawful fees, assessments, taxes or payments that the franchisee may be required under any laws and regulations. 
(c)  Payment schedule and reports. The franchisee shall make quarterly payments to the city of the franchisee fee for the quarters ending on September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30 of each year, with the payments due from the franchisee to the city within 45 days after the end of each quarter. At the time of each quarterly payment, the franchisee shall furnish to the city a report certified by a certified public accountant showing complete calculations on which the payment of the franchise fee is based, with such calculations based upon data separately shown for only that portion of the cable system of the franchisee which is located within the franchise area. On or before April 1, 2003, and on or before April 1, 2008, the franchisee shall provide to the city, at no cost to the city, an independent audit, prepared by a certified public accountant, of the franchise fee payments made to the city for the five previous calendar year periods (1998-2002 on or before April 1, 2003, and 2003-2007 on or before April 1, 2008). 
(d)  Acceptance by the city. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or the franchise or for the performance of any other obligation of the franchisee under this chapter or the franchise. 
(e)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, the franchisee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge at the annual maximum rate allowed by the state. 
(f)  City's right to inspection. The city or its designee shall have the right to inspect all of the franchisee's records which relate to gross annual revenues and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter and/or the franchise. Audits other than those required pursuant to section 4.5(c), shall be at the expense of the city, provided, however, the franchisee shall immediately reimburse the city for all reasonable audit expenses of the city in the event the audit conducted shows that franchise fee payments or other payments due to the city are in error in the amount of five percent or more. Unless contested in writing by the franchisee, the cost of the audit (if applicable) and any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the franchisee by the city, which notice shall include a copy of the city's audit report. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 6, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-37. - Regulatory authority. 
(a)  On-going regulation. The city shall exercise its regulatory authority in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with and pursuant to applicable laws and regulations. This authority shall be vested in the city council and administered through the city manager or his designee or the city's designee. The city manager, his designee or the city's designee shall provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder, and shall carry out the city's responsibilities with regard to cable services. 
(b)  Governing requirement. At all times during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall comply with all laws and regulations which are now applicable or may be applicable hereafter to the construction and operation of cable systems, including without limitation, all laws and regulations now in force or hereafter enacted. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the franchisee's right to challenge the validity of any such laws or regulations. 
(c)  Change in laws or regulations. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the franchisee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the franchise, the city, at its option, may notify the franchisee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in laws or regulations. Thereafter, the franchisee shall negotiate in good faith with the city in the development of alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of authority and power permitted by laws and regulations. Subject to applicable laws and regulations, the franchisee shall have the duty, based upon the results of such negotiations, to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purposes of this chapter and the franchise. 
If the FCC no longer provides for any of the standards, rules or regulations as described or referred to in this chapter, the city shall have the option to adopt the FCC standards, rules or regulations in effect immediately prior to the date the FCC no longer provides for the standards, rules or regulations, provided that this provision is enforceable and/or not preempted by state or federal law. 
(d)  Authority. The city reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable system, the franchise and the franchisee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the city, the city may engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this chapter or the franchise, including without limitation, regulation regarding franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and users, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter. 
(e)  Right of inspection of records. Unless otherwise provided in the franchise, after seven days written notice to the franchisee, the city or its designee shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, plans, financial statements, and other like materials of the franchisee which relate to the franchise or this chapter, at any time during normal business hours. The franchisee shall provide such information in such form as may be reasonably required by the city for said records. 
(f)  Right of inspection of cable system. The city or its designee shall have the right to inspect all facilities and appurtenant property of the cable system and installation work on the cable system performed subject to the provisions of the franchise. After written notice to the franchisee, the city or its designee shall have the right to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of laws and regulations. The franchisee shall have the right to have a representative present during inspections or testing conducted by the city or its designee. The city shall conduct such investigations in a manner that avoids unreasonable interference with the delivery of cable service to subscribers. 
(g)  Expense reimbursement to city. Unless otherwise agreed to by the city, the franchisee shall pay the city a sum of money which will, when added to any application fees received, reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting, extending, or renewing a franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorneys' fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs; provided, however, that the city shall submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the city furnishes the franchisee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 7, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-38. - Supervision of the franchise. 
(a)  Subject to applicable laws and regulations, the city shall have the following additional regulatory authority: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder. 
(2)  Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(3)  Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted hereunder. 
(4)  Performance evaluation. 
(5)  Receive and investigate complaints regarding subscriber service and to initiate any action necessary pursuant to and in accordance with this chapter or the franchise or any applicable laws or regulations to address the complaints. 
(6)  Rate regulation, if applicable. 
(b)  Subject to applicable laws and regulations, the city also reserves the right to perform the following functions: 
(1)  Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the operation of public, government and educational channels. 
(2)  Approve procedures and standards for public, government and educational channels and operations and services, including the use of those channels and sharing of public facilities. 
(3)  Coordinate plans with franchisees for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable services. 
(4)  Formulate and recommend long-range cable services policy for the city, and determine the future cable services needs and interests of the community. 
(5)  Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the administration of this chapter and the franchise. 
(6)  Monitor the franchisee's process for handling citizen complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints. 
(7)  Receive applications for rate increases, if applicable, and provide staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto. 
(8)  Monitor the franchisee's adherence to operational standards, service requirements and line extension policies. 
(9)  Assure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(10)  Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as needed to insure compliance with this chapter and the franchise. 
(11)  Receive for examination all data and reports required by or requested pursuant to this chapter or the franchise. 
(12)  Represent the city's interest before local, state or federal government agencies in cable service matters. 
(13)  Such other regulatory authority as may be lawful to carry out the intent of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 8, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-39. - Services to subscribers and institutions. 
(a)  Programming. Concurrently with the activation of the cable in the city, the franchisee shall provide all services to subscribers as described herein. 
(1)  Diversity. The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and services listed in the franchise. Should the franchisee desire to change the selection of programs or services offered on any of its tiers, it shall maintain the mix and quality of services provided over the cable system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the city at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation, unless a different time period is required by applicable laws and regulations. The franchisee shall use its best efforts to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)  Basic service tier. Consistent with the Cable Act, a basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of the franchise. 
(3)  Access channels. The franchisee shall provide and maintain access channels as specified in the franchise. 
(4)  Leased access. Consistent with the Cable Act, the franchisee shall make available leased access channels to assure that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made available to subscribers. 
(5)  Access services. The franchisee shall fully provide, at a minimum, services, facilities and equipment for public, educational, and government access as indicated in the franchise. 
(b)  Institutional network. The franchisee shall construct, install, operate and maintain a separate institutional network, in addition to the residential subscriber network as specified in the franchise. 
(c)  Emergency override. The franchisee shall, without charge, provide service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities to the city, as described in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 9, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-40. - Installations, connections, and other services. 
(a)  Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a service not exceeding 150 feet from the activated feeder cable of the cable system. Service in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring shall be charged at such cost as exceeds normal installation costs in compliance with the terms of the franchise. The desire of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence or commercial establishment and location of pedestal shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The franchisee shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than ten days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(b)  Reconnection. The franchisee shall restore service to subscribers wishing restoration of service provided subscriber shall first satisfy any previous obligations owed, and subject to any other reasonable requirements or restrictions of the franchisee. 
(c)  Free disconnection. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the subscriber, subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the subscriber within 30 days from the date of termination of service or the next billing cycle. 
(d)  Delinquent accounts. The franchisee shall use its best efforts to collect on delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the franchisee shall provide the subscriber with adequate notice prior to disconnection in a manner consistent with applicable laws and regulations. 
(e)  Installation. Consistent with the FCC customer service standards, or successor standards adopted by the city, the franchisee shall install cable service to a subscriber within seven business days of request by the subscriber. 
(f)  Outages. The franchisee, upon a subscriber's request, shall credit or issue a refund to the subscriber for verifiable outages of six hours or more in duration for the levels of service affected by such outages. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 10, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-41. - Service calls and complaint procedures. 
(a)  Business offices and personnel. The franchisee shall establish and maintain a business office within the corporate limits of the city which shall, at a minimum, be open to receive payments and subscriber equipment for the hours specified in the FCC customer service regulations in effect as of the commencement date of the franchise. If the FCC adopts higher customer service standards during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall comply with the higher customer service standards of the FCC. Consistent with the FCC's customer service standards, the franchisee shall also provide personnel, telephone service, including a locally listed telephone number, and other equipment as needed within the franchise area, to ensure timely, efficient and effective service to subscribers and for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system and for the payment of subscribers' service charges. 
(b)  Standards. The franchisee shall meet the FCC's customer service standards. If the franchisee does not meet the FCC's telephone answering-busy signal standards for a quarter, the franchisee shall add a minimum of one telephone line or make other changes in order to satisfy the FCC's standards. Upon request of the city, the franchisee shall provide to the city; annual management data, including data from any service centers used by the franchisee related to compliance with the FCC's customer service standards. At such time as the franchisee does not meet the FCC and/or the customer service standards of this chapter for repair for one quarter, the franchisee shall take corrective action to ensure that such standards are met during the next quarter. 
(c)  Franchisee rules. Upon request of the city, the franchisee shall prepare and file with the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The franchisee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the city office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including, but not limited to, the address and telephone number of said office. 
(d)  Complaint records. The franchisee shall keep full records in connection with all inquiries, complaints and requests in connection with the cable system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the franchisee, and the person responding on behalf of the franchisee, the subject matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the matter in question or the action taken by the franchisee in connection with the contact, and the date and time thereof, and such other information as may be deemed pertinent by the franchisee. These records shall be made available at the franchisee's office for periodic inspection by the city. 
(e)  Equipment service. Consistent with the FCC's regulations, the franchisee shall service or replace without charge all equipment provided by it to the subscriber, provided, however, that the franchisee may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any equipment damaged as a result of the subscriber's conduct. 
(f)  Subscriber solicitation. Upon request of the city, the franchisee shall provide the city with a list of names and addresses of all representatives who will be soliciting within the city and the area in and the dates within such solicitations shall take place. Each such representative and all other employees entering upon private property shall be required to wear an employee identification card issued by the franchisee and bearing a picture of said representative. 
(g)  Subscriber information. The franchisee shall provide to all subscribers annually and all prospective subscribers or users with complete written information concerning all services and rates provided by the franchisee upon solicitation of service and prior to consummation of any agreement for installation of service. Such sales material shall clearly and conspicuously disclose the price and other information concerning the franchisee's least costly service. Such information shall be written in plain English and shall include but shall not be limited to the following: all services, tiers, and rates; deposits if applicable; installation costs; additional television set charges; service upgrade or downgrade charges; lockout devices; and information concerning the utilization of video cassette recorders (VCRs) with cable services and the cost for hooking up such VCRs so that they function as manufactured. 
(h)  Billing practices information. Consistent with FCC standards, the franchisee shall inform all subscribers annually and all prospective subscribers or users of complete information respecting billing and collection procedures, procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services, and refund policies, upon solicitation of service and prior to the consummation of any agreement for installation of service. The franchisee shall provide its name, address and telephone number on subscribers bills. All information required herein shall be written in plain English. 
(i)  Notice or complaint procedures. The franchisee shall periodically, and at various times of the day, present its business office address and publicly listed local telephone number by means of alpha-numeric display on a local origination channel. 
(j)  Response to service complaint. Calls for repair service shall be responded to within 24 hours. System outages, whole or partial, shall be responded to immediately. The franchisee shall promptly resolve complaints other than requests for repairs. The franchisee shall keep a record of all complaints received. Upon request from the city, the franchisee shall provide the city with records of and responses to subscriber's complaints. 
(k)  Unresolved complaints. Should a subscriber or user have an unresolved complaint after seven calendar days regarding cable system operations, the subscriber or user shall be entitled to file his complaint with the city, which shall have primary responsibility for the continuing administration of this chapter and the franchise and the implementation of complaint procedures. A representative of the franchisee shall be available thereafter to meet jointly with the city and the affected subscriber or user, within 30 days after said subscriber or user has filed the complaint, to fully discuss and resolve the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 11, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-42. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
(a)  Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. The franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, pursuant to the Cable Act and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  Notice of privacy provisions. Consistent with the Cable Act, at the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber, and at least once a year thereafter, the franchisee shall provide notice in the form of a separate written statement to each subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of: 
(1)  The privacy rights of the subscriber and the limitations placed upon the franchisee pursuant to the subscriber privacy provisions in applicable laws and regulations; 
(2)  The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such information; 
(3)  The nature, frequency, and purpose of any disclosure which may be made of such information, including an identification of the types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made; 
(4)  The period during which such information might be maintained by the cable operator; 
(5)  The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such information in accordance with the Cable Act and other applicable laws and regulations; 
(6)  A request for the subscriber signature allows for use of personally identifiable information. 
(c)  Disclosure of subscriber information prohibited. Consistent with the Cable Act, the franchisee shall not without the specific written authorization of the individual subscribers involved, sell or otherwise make available to any party any list of the names and addresses of individual subscribers, any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, or any personal data, social security number, income and other data the company may have on file about individual subscribers, except as necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the subscriber, provided, however, that such disclosure shall not reveal directly or indirectly the extent of viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator, or the nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the cable system. 
(d)  Correction policy. Consistent with the Cable Act, each subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable information regarding such subscriber that the franchisee collects or maintains or allows to be collected or maintained, and such subscriber shall be provided the opportunity to correct any error in such information. 
(e)  System performance. This section is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 12, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-43. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Schedule filings. Consistent with the Cable Act, the franchisee shall file with the city schedules which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. Unless otherwise required by laws and regulations, the franchisee shall notify subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any change in services offered, rates charges, or terms and conditions related thereto. 
(b)  Nondiscriminatory rates. Consistent with the FCC's regulations, the franchisee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the franchisee from offering discounts or reductions such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Discounts to commercial and multiple family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; 
(2)  Promotional discounts; 
(3)  Reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; or 
(4)  Discount for senior citizens and/or low income residents. 
The franchisee's charges and rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills pursuant to FCC's regulations and rules. 
(c)  City regulation. To the extent that laws and regulations may now, or as the same may hereafter be amended to, authorize the city to regulate the rates for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by the franchisee, the city shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by laws and regulations, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the city. 
(d)  Regulation of rates and charges. The city will follow FCC regulations and other applicable laws and regulations as they now exist or as hereafter amended by the FCC or other applicable governmental authorities from time to time, in its regulation of the rates and charges of the franchisee. In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties; and the city attorney, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC or other governmental authority forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC or other governmental authority in order to enable the city to regulate the franchisee's rates and charges. 
(e)  Ability to petition. If applicable, the city shall have the right to petition the FCC or other governmental authority to obtain authority to regulate rates and charges. 
(Ord. No 2496, § 13, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-44. - Performance evaluation. 
(a)  Annual sessions. The city and the franchisee shall, upon 30 days written notice from the city to the franchisee and at the discretion of the city, hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions annually. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Special sessions. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city, upon written notice by the city. Thirty days written notice must be given to the franchisee prior to the date of a special evaluation session, which notice shall provide a description of the subject matter to be discussed. 
(c)  Topics for review. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, system performance and construction, franchisee compliance with this chapter and the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. 
(d)  Cooperation by franchisee. During the review and evaluation by the city, the franchisee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide such information and documents as the city may reasonably request to perform its review. 
(e)  Response to inquiries. The city may, at any time, make written inquiries, concerned with the management and affairs of the cable system. The franchisee shall respond to such inquiries in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. No 2496, § 14, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-45. - Design and construction provisions; authority to construct. 
The franchisee shall apply for and secure any needed contracts for pole use. Pole space and other facilities obtained from the city, utilities and others, and other lawful uses of the public rights-of-way shall be at the cost and expense of the franchisee. The franchisee shall apply for all necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations in a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere unreasonably with or cause delay with the initial or rebuild construction schedule as outlined in the franchise. 
(Ord. No 2496, § 15, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-46. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. The franchisee shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws and regulations, construction standards or guidelines, governmental requirements and standards, and the FCC's technical standards required in the franchise. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. 
(b)  City approval of construction plans. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or rebuild of the cable system regulated under this chapter, the franchisee shall, consistent with the requirements in the franchise, first submit to the city and other designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required by the city, together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the cable system shall be commenced by any person until approval thereof has been received from the city. 
(c)  Contractor qualifications. Any contractor proposed for work of construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under applicable laws and regulations. 
(d)  Minimum interference. The franchisee's cable system and associated equipment erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the franchisee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way. 
(e)  City maps. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps it furnishes to a franchisee showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by the franchise. 
(f)  Quality of construction. Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current technological and industry standards and the manufacturer's specifications. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for aesthetic and engineering considerations. 
(g)  Construction standards. The construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and/or removal of the cable system shall meet all of the applicable safety, construction, and technical specifications of the following codes and standards: 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations (OSHA). 
National Electrical Code. 
National Electrical Safety Code (NESC). 
National Cable Television Standard Code. 
AT&T Manual of Construction Procedures (Blue Book). 
Bell Telephone Systems Code of Pole Line Construction. 
All federal, state and municipal construction requirements, including FCC rules and regulations. 
Utility construction requirements. 
All building and zoning codes, and all land use restrictions as the same exist or may be amended hereafter. 
(h)  Right to inspection of construction. The city or its designee shall have the right to inspect at any time all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and the franchise and to make such tests as it shall deem necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise and all other applicable laws and regulations. The franchisee shall cooperate fully with the city during all inspections and tests and shall provide access to all equipment, records, and other materials and information necessary for such inspections and tests. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the franchise or laws and regulations, all inspections and tests performed by the city shall be at the city's sole cost and expense. 
(i)  Antennas. Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure standards as required by city ordinances and by other applicable laws and regulations. 
(j)  OSHA. All worker facilities, conditions, and procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(k)  RF leakage. RF leakage shall be checked and stray radiation shall be measured according to FCC rules and regulations. The cable system shall be operated and maintained so as to avoid any measurable interference in TV signal reception to any operating receiver not connected to and serviced by the cable system. 
(l)  Standby power. The franchisee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for a minimum of eight hours for the headend and 2½ hours at a node site. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 16, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-47. - As-built drawings. 
Within 60 days after completion of construction, including without limitation construction of a rebuild of the cable system; the franchisee shall furnish the city with one complete set of plans, drawn to scale and certified by a registered professional engineer to the city as accurately depicting the location of those portions of the cable system which have been constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 17, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-48. - Use of street. 
(a)  Underground installation. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the franchisee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as both those facilities are placed underground, the franchisee shall likewise place its services underground without cost to the city. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter or the franchise, the franchisee's cable system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. For installations after the effective date of this chapter, all cable passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit. 
(b)  Pedestals. In any cases which pedestals housing mini-hubs, switching or other equipment, are to be utilized, such equipment must be installed in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Any pedestals to be located in the public rights-of-way require written approval from the city. All such equipment shall be shown on the design plans for permits. 
(c)  Permits. Prior to construction or alteration, the franchisee shall, consistent with the requirements of the franchise, file plans in each case with the appropriate city agencies, enter into use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all construction permits and receive written approval of the city before proceeding. 
(d)  Construction notice. The franchisee shall give appropriate notice in a timely manner to the city and residents of proposed construction, excavation, laying or stringing of cable under streets or on poles, but in no event shall such notice be given less than 48 hours before such commencement. 
(e)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. The franchisee's cable system and system facilities, including poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and maintained so that such facilities shall: 
(1)  Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of persons; 
(2)  Not unreasonably interfere with any improvements the city, county or state may deem proper to make; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property; except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; and 
(5)  Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the city. 
(f)  Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as, or better than, before said work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the city. Such restoration shall be commenced within no more than 15 business days after the damage occurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(g)  Disconnection and relocation. The franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street, or other streets and public grounds, or remove from any street or any other public ways and places, and of its property as reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, or the construction of any public improvement or structure by any city department. 
(h)  Private property. The franchisee shall be subject to all laws and regulations regarding private property or regulations regarding private property in the course of constructing, installing, operating or maintaining the cable system in the city. The franchisee shall promptly repair or replace all private property, both real and personal, damaged or destroyed as a result of the construction, installation, operating or maintenance of the cable system at its sole cost and expense. 
(i)  Cooperation with building movers. The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 15 working days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(j)  Tree trimming . The franchisee may trim trees or other vegetation which is located on property owned, leased or regulated by the city to prevent branches, leaves or roots from touching or otherwise interfering with its wires, cables, or other structures upon receiving prior written approval of the city. All tree/root trimming or pruning provided for herewith shall be done under the supervision and direction of the appropriate city agency. All trimming or pruning requested by the franchisee shall be at the expense of the franchisee. 
The franchisee may contract for such trimming or pruning services with any person approved by the city prior to rendering of such services. 
Any and all persons engaged by the franchisee to provide tree trimming or pruning services shall be deemed, for purposes of the franchise, an employee or agent of the franchisee when engaged in such activity and in no event shall such person be deemed to be an employee of the city. 
The franchisee shall use reasonable efforts to obtain the prior permission of the owner of any privately owned trees or other vegetation before it prunes or trims same. 
Unless a shorter or longer time period is required by any other city ordinance, the franchisee shall give appropriate notice to the city and residents within a reasonable time of proposed tree/root trimming and pruning to be conducted by the franchisee (or its designee), but in no event shall such notice be given less than seven days before such commencement. 
(k)  Public property. In addition to, and consistent with the requirements set forth in other provisions of this chapter and the franchise, the franchisee shall, prior to performing any underground construction, receive city and other governmental approval to construct and the franchisee shall use its best efforts to locate, in advance, any water, sewage, and drainage lines. Where any damages or alterations occur to the city's water, sewage or drainage lines or to any other city structures in the streets during the construction due to the presence, negligence, operation or maintenance of the cable system, the sole cost of such repairs including all services and materials will be billed against the franchisee and these charges shall be paid promptly upon notice to the franchisee. 
(l)  Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property shall be arranged for by the franchisee. 
(m)  Construction and installation manual. If the franchisee has its own construction and installation manual, the franchisee shall make available for review by the city the manual which sets forth the specifications, standards and procedures for construction and installation of its cable system. Said manual shall be consistent with the prevailing standards of the top ten multiple system operators in the cable industry and shall, at a minimum, establish procedures to ensure quality work and provide for the safety and protection of residents and property. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 18, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-49. - Erection, removal and common use of poles. 
(a)  Approval for poles. No poles shall be erected by the franchisee in the public rights-of-way or on property owned or leased by the city without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, types and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the franchisee in the public rights-of-way or on property owned or leased by the city shall give rise to a vested interest and such poles or wire-holding structures shall be removed or modified by the franchisee at its own expense upon 45 days written notice from the city to the franchisee (absent emergency situations) whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  Use of existing poles. Where poles already exist for use in the city and are available for use by the franchisee, the franchisee shall use such poles and structures provided the franchisee determines that the terms of the use available to the franchisee are just and reasonable, and provided such use is consistent with the franchisee's technical and operational requirements for its cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 19, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-50. - Conduit. 
(a)  Approval for conduit. No conduit or related structures shall be installed by the franchisee in the public rights-of-way or on property owned or leased by the city without prior approval of the city with regard to location and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any conduit or related structures of the franchisee in the public rights-of-way or on property owned or leased by the city shall give rise to a vested interest. Such conduit or related structures shall be removed or modified by the franchisee at its own expense upon 45 days written notice from the city to the franchisee (absent emergency situations) whenever the city determines that the general health; safety or welfare would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  Use of existing conduit. Where conduit already exists for use in the city and is available for use by the franchisee, the franchisee shall use such conduit provided the franchisee determines that the terms of the use available to the franchisee are just and reasonable, and provided such use is consistent with the franchisee's technical and operational requirements for its cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 20, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-51. - Tests and performance monitoring. 
(a)  Completion tests. Not later than 60 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the cable system is made available for service to subscribers, and thereafter semi-annually pursuant to the FCC's technical standards during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC or other applicable governmental authority. 
(b)  Methodology. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of a qualified registered professional engineer. Upon request of the city, a copy of the report shall be submitted to the city, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualification of the engineer responsible for the tests. 
(c)  Test points. System monitor test points shall be established pursuant to the FCC technical standards. 
(d)  Regulatory tests. In addition to the performance test reports required herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC or other governmental authority shall be submitted to the city within ten days of the city's request. 
(e)  City required tests. Whenever there have been repeated or multiple complaints made or when there exists other relevant evidence, which would reasonably cast doubt on the compliance of the franchisee's cable system or system facilities with applicable standards, the city shall notify the franchisee in writing of any deficiencies and may require the franchisee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of its system at the expense of the franchisee. In the event any deficiencies are not corrected, the city may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal at the expense of the franchisee. Tests shall be conducted within a reasonable time after requested but not later than 30 days unless mutually agreed upon by the parties hereto. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the city no later than 14 days after completion of the tests. The report shall include the following information: a summary of the reasons for conducting the tests; the cable system component tested; the procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and methods by which any complaints were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by a qualified engineer who shall sign all records of the special tests and forward same to the city with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions should be taken. If requested by the city, the franchisee shall retain an independent engineer to conduct such tests. All such tests by an independent engineer shall be at the expense of the city unless the test results confirm the presence of material noncompliance with applicable standards and, in that event, the franchisee shall pay all costs, fees and expenses of the independent engineer. 
(f)  General maintenance. The franchisee shall maintain wires, cables and all other real and personal property and facilities constituting the cable system in good condition, order and repair at all times during the term of the franchise. 
(g)  Maintenance log. The franchisee shall maintain an annual log showing the date, approximate time and duration, type and probable cause of all cable system outages, whole or partial, due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance. The entries in such log shall be retained by the franchisee for one additional year and shall be subject to inspection and copying by the city or its designee during the franchisee's regular business hours upon reasonable request. 
(h)  Service interruption. Except where there exists an emergency situation necessitating a more expeditious procedure, the franchisee shall use reasonable efforts to schedule planned service interruptions for the purpose of repairing, upgrading or testing the cable system, only during periods of minimum use, and after using reasonable efforts to notify affected subscribers. 
(Ord. No 2496, § 21, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-52. - City's right to perform public works. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be in hindrance to the right of the city or any governmental authority to perform or carry on, directly or indirectly, any public works or public improvements of any description. Should the cable system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of such public works or public improvements, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or relocate its cable system, or part thereof, as reasonably directed by the city officials or any governmental authority. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 22, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-53. - Emergency removal of plant. 
If at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the city, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the city to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances of the cable system, the city shall have the right to do so at the sole cost and expense of the franchisee provided that the city provides prior written notice of such activity. If under the circumstances prior written notice is not possible, the city shall provide the franchisee with notice as soon as is possible. The franchisee shall bear all costs of reinstallation, repair, and other costs resulting from or arising out of the emergency cutting or removal of the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 23, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-54. - Removal or abandonment. 
Upon termination or revocation of the franchise by passage of time or otherwise, and unless the franchisee transfers the cable system to a subsequent franchisee approved by the city, the franchisee shall remove its supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution systems; and all other appurtenances from the public rights-of-way and from any city property and shall restore any property, public or private, to the same or similar condition as they existed prior to the installation, erection, or construction of the cable system. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and of city property shall be in accordance with the directions and specifications of all affected departments and agencies of the city, and all applicable laws and regulations. The franchisee, at the option and direction of the city, shall accomplish such restoration at its expense. Such removal shall be made with the supervision of the city. If such removal and restoration is not completed within 12 months after the notice by the city delivered in writing to the franchisee all of the franchisee's property remaining in the affected public rights-of-way shall, at the option of the city, shall be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of the city, become the property of the city. In the event the franchisee fails or refuses to remove its cable system or satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which they existed prior to the original construction of the cable system, the city, at its option, may perform such work and collect the cost thereof from the franchisee. No surety on any bond nor any letter of credit shall be discharged until the city has certified to the franchisee in writing that the cable system has been dismantled, removed, and all other property, city property and public rights-of-way restored to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 24, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-55. - Time is of the essence. 
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the franchisee, such time shall be deemed to be of the essence. Any failure of the franchisee to perform within the time allotted shall be sufficient ground for the city to invoke an appropriate penalty including possible termination or revocation of the franchise, following applicable notices of default and cure procedures provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord No. 2496, § 25, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-56. - No waiver of rights. 
No course of dealing between the franchisee and the city nor any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of the franchisee in contravention of rights except to the extent expressly waived by the city or expressly provided for in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 26, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-57. - Transfer. 
(a)  Franchise. A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title to the cable system, legal or equitable, or any right, interest or properly therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city. 
(b)  Ownership. The franchisee shall not sell, transfer or dispose of ten percent or greater ownership interest in the franchisee without the consent of the city. Every sale, transfer, or disposition of ten percent or greater ownership interest in the franchisee shall make the franchise subject to termination or revocation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto. No consent by the city shall be required, however, for a change of ownership of limited partners, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  It does not result in a change in control; 
(2)  Prior to such transfer, the franchisee provides to the city verifiable information to establish that the transferee is of good character and that the transfer shall not change the financial, legal and technical ability of the franchisee to perform fully all obligations required of the franchisee in the franchise and this chapter; and 
(3)  Except for those limited partners in existence as of the commencement date of the franchise, the change of ownership in limited partners does not exceed a cumulative amount of 30 percent over the term of the franchise. 
(c)  Control. The franchisee shall not change control of the franchisee in whatever manner exercised without the prior written consent of the city. 
(d)  City approval. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the franchisee shall make the franchise subject to termination or revocation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the franchisee shall provide the city with all information required by the city and applicable laws and regulations. Failure to provide all information requested by the city as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control. Unless otherwise provided by applicable laws and regulations, the city reserves the right to impose reasonable conditions on the franchise to ensure that the transferee is able to meet existing requirements of the franchise. 
(e)  Assumption of control. The city agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the obligation to notify the city in the event that it will take control and operate the cable system. In the event the ownership or control of the cable system is transferred to another cable service provider, the city shall have the right to consent to the transfer in accordance with the process set forth in this section. 
(f)  No waiver of city property rights. The consent or approval of the city or any other public entity to any transfer of the franchisee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the public property or public rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(g)  Time periods. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to construction or the completion of a rebuild of the cable system. 
(h)  Signatory requirement. Any approval by the city of transfer of ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective party becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(i)  Time frame for city review. Consistent with the Cable Act, the city shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with this chapter and applicable laws and regulations. If the city fails to render a final decision on the request within 120 days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the city agree to an extension of time. 
(j)  Reimbursement. The franchisee shall reimburse the city for all fees and costs incurred by the city which are associated with the transfer of a franchise, whether or not the transfer is approved by the city; provided, however, the reimbursement costs shall not exceed $5,000.00 for transfers occurring during the first eight years of a franchise term and $10,000.00 during any remaining portion of a franchise term. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 27, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-58. - Bonds and guarantees. 
(a)  Construction bond. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, the franchisee shall provide to the city a performance bond in an amount equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing a rebuild of all or any portion of the cable system within the public rights-of-way of the city. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, this bond shall also meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The bond shall be provided by a company authorized and licensed to do business in the state, which company is included on the most current list of the United States Treasury Department Circular 570, as amended, and in a form and substance acceptable to the city. 
(2)  The bond shall be deposited with the city before any construction is commenced and shall remain in full force and effect until after completion of 90 percent of the rebuild, as determined by the city engineer. The franchisee shall submit evidence to the city engineer to document that 90 percent of the rebuild has been completed. After the determination is made by the city engineer, the city manager or his/her designee may release the bond to the franchisee. Completion of the construction work shall include, but not be limited to, restoration of the public rights-of-way, city property and other property affected by the construction work. 
(3)  The bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  Timely completion of construction; 
b.  Construction and compliance with applicable laws and regulations; 
c.  Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city; 
d.  Restoration of the public rights-of-way, city property and other property affected by the construction; 
e.  The submission of "as-built" drawings after completion of the construction as required by this chapter; and 
f.  Timely payment in satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, materials or services provided in connection with the construction. 
(4)  The bond shall be obtained and maintained by the franchisee at its sole cost and expense. 
(b)  Performance bond Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, the franchisee shall provide to the city a performance bond in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement to guarantee the faithful performance of or by the franchisee of all of its obligations under this chapter, the franchise and any other documents related to the franchise. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise, this performance bond shall also meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The bond shall be provided by a company authorized and licensed to do business in the state, which company is included on the most current list of the United States Treasury Department Circular 570, as amended, and in a form and substance acceptable to the city. 
(2)  The bond shall be furnished to the city upon execution of a franchise agreement and shall be maintained throughout the term, and any extensions and renewals, of the franchise. 
(3)  The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city, that there shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all penalties and liquidated damages due to the city and any and all damages, losses, costs and expenses suffered or incurred by the city resulting from the failure of the franchisee, unless the order, permit or directive is the subject of an appeal by the franchisee to: 
a.  Comply with the provisions of this chapter or the franchise; 
b.  Comply with all orders, permits and directives of the city or any governmental agency having jurisdiction over the acts or omissions of the franchisee, unless the order, permit or directive is the subject of an appeal by the franchisee; 
c.  Pay any and all fees due to the city; 
d.  Pay any claims, liens or taxes due to the city which may arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and other associated expenses. 
(4)  Letter of credit. The franchisee may elect to provide, in lieu of a performance bond, an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the city and licensed to do business in the state in an amount to be specified in the franchise, naming the city as beneficiary. The form and contents of such letter of credit shall be acceptable to the city and the letter shall be released only upon the expiration of the franchise or upon the replacement of the letter of credit by another letter of credit or performance bond satisfactory to the city. 
The city may draw upon the letter of credit up to the amount of damages suffered by the city if the franchisee fails to comply faithfully with the provisions of this chapter or the franchise; to comply with all orders, permits and directives of the city or any governmental agency having jurisdiction over the acts or omissions of the franchisee; to pay any and all fees due to the city; or to pay any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and other associated expenses. 
Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit by the city, the city shall send to the franchisee written notice of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. No later than 30 days after the mailing of the notice of withdrawal by the city to the franchisee, the franchisee shall replenish the letter of credit in an amount equal to the amount withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and a default under the franchise. 
(c)  The bonds or letters of credit shall require 30 days written notice of any non-renewal, alteration or cancellation to the city and to the franchisee. The franchisee shall, in the event of any such notice, obtain and file with the city written evidence of a replacement bond or letter of credit within 30 days following receipt by the city or the franchisee of any notice of cancellation. 
(d)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the bonds or letters of credit required hereunder are in addition to all of the rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter, the franchise, or authorized by laws and regulations, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bonds or letters of credit shall affect any right the city may have. 
(e)  If the city becomes aware of the financial condition of any bonding or insurance company issuing a bond or letter of credit to the franchisee as required in this chapter where, if such conditions were known at the time, the city would not have approved the surety of the bond or the provider of the letter of credit or the city would not have found the form of the bond or of the letter of credit satisfactory or if the financial condition of such bonding company or financial institution materially changed to the extent that such approvals would not have been made, the city may, at any time, submit written notice to the franchisee and require that any such bond or letter of credit be replaced with such other bond or letter of credit consistent with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(f)  Prior to executing remedies provided to the city under the bonds or guarantees required pursuant to this section, the city shall provide written notice to the franchisee and a reasonable opportunity for the franchisee to cure the alleged default in performance. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 28, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-59. - Insurance requirements. 
As of the date of execution of a franchise, the franchisee shall furnish to the city evidence of insurance coverage as set forth hereinafter. The insurance coverage required hereinafter shall be maintained by the franchisee during the term of the franchise and during any renewal or extension of the franchise. The insurance coverage required is as follows: 
(1)  Broad form comprehensive general liability insurance in the minimum amounts set forth in the franchise. 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance in the minimum amount required by the laws of the state. 
(3)  Employers liability insurance in the minimum amounts set forth in the franchise. 
(4)  Automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned or rented vehicles of the franchisee in the minimum amounts set forth in the franchise. 
(5)  Property damage insurance in the minimum amounts set forth in the franchise. 
(6)  All of the foregoing insurance shall be provided by a company authorized and licensed to do business in the state and with an A.M. Best rating of "A" or better. The franchisee shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing such insurance coverage in a form and substance reasonably acceptable to the city. Each insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. In addition, each insurance policy shall require 30 days written notice, by registered mail, of any cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage by the carrier to both the city and the franchisee. 
(7)  No limitation on liability. The provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the franchise shall not be construed to limit the liability of the franchisee under this chapter or the franchise or damages recoverable from the franchisee. No limit in the amount of insurance provided by the franchisee pursuant to the requirements of this chapter or the franchise, nor any damages recovered by the city, shall excuse the faithful performance by or limit the amount of damages recoverable of the franchisee. 
(8)  Failure by the franchisee to furnish or maintain the insurance coverage required by this chapter or the franchise or failure to furnish the coverage required in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter and a default under the franchise. 
(9)  Insurance for contractors and subcontractors. The franchisee shall provide or cause to be provided coverage for any contractor or subcontractor involved in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its cable system by either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance policies or requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate insurance coverage consistent with this chapter and the franchise and appropriate to the extent of the involvement of the contractor or subcontractor in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of the cable system. 
(10)  No provision of insurance required herein shall be deemed to constitute a waiver by the city of any governmental immunity available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 29, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-60. - Indemnification provisions. 
(a)  To the fullest extent allowed by law, the franchisee shall agree in the franchise to indemnify fully, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, losses, expenses, costs and fees, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and other costs of suit or defense, for personal injury and/or property damage which arise out of, result from or are alleged to arise out of or result from the ownership, construction, installation, operation and/or maintenance of the cable system of the franchisee. 
(b)  To the fullest extent allowed by law, the franchisee shall agree in the franchise to indemnify fully, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, losses, expenses, costs and fees, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and other costs of suit or defense, for any claims of or for copyright and/or patent infringement, invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person or any other right of any person which arise out of, result from or are alleged to arise out of or result from the ownership, construction, installation, operation and/or maintenance of the cable system by the franchisee. 
(c)  To the fullest extent allowed by law, the franchisee shall agree in the franchise to indemnify fully, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, losses, expenses, costs and fees, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees and other costs of suit or defense, arising out of the franchisee's failure to comply with the provisions of any laws or regulations applicable to the franchisee which result from or are alleged to arise out of or result from the ownership, construction, installation, operation and/or maintenance of the cable system by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 30, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-61. - No recourse against city. 
Unless otherwise provided by applicable laws and regulations, a franchisee shall have no recourse against the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions for any loss, cost, expense, claim, liability or damage: 
(1)  Arising out of any action undertaken or not undertaken by the franchisee pursuant to this chapter and/or the franchise, whether or not such action or non-action was required by this chapter and/or the franchise; 
(2)  Arising out of the enforcement or non-enforcement by the city of any provision or requirement of this chapter and/or the franchise; or 
(3)  Otherwise arising out of this chapter and/or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 31, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-62. - Effect of pending litigation. 
Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the franchisee shall not excuse the franchisee from the performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise unless a regulatory agency or court so provides. Failure of the franchisee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in termination or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. NO. 2496, § 32, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-63. - Liquidated damages. 
The city may require, at its option, provisions regarding liquidated damages to be paid by the franchisee under the franchise. 
(Ord. No 2496, § 33, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-64. - Non-discrimination; minority business plan; drug-free workplace certificate. 
(a)  Non-discrimination. A franchisee shall make its cable services available to any subscriber within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for the franchisee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated subscribers. 
(b)  Minority business plan. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the franchisee shall comply with the city's minority business plan. 
(c)  Drug-free workplace certificate. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the franchisee shall comply with the city's policies regarding a drug-free workplace certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 34, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-65. - Termination; revocation. 
(a)  Right of termination or revocation. Subject to the provisions of this section, the city reserves the right to terminate or revoke, at any time, any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and to rescind all rights and privileges of the franchisee associated therewith in the event that: 
(1)  The franchisee has not complied in some material respect with any provision of this chapter, the franchise or any other such document, contract or other terms and provisions which relate to the franchise and are entered into between the city and the franchisee. 
(2)  The franchisee has made a material misrepresentation or false statement in the application for the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(3)  The franchisee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage, bonds or letters of credit required under this chapter or the franchise. 
(4)  The franchisee shall violate any material orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the franchisee which is related to the franchisee's performance under this chapter or the franchise, unless the franchisee is lawfully contesting the legality or the applicability of such order or ruling. 
(5)  The franchisee becomes insolvent, enters into receivership or liquidation, files for bankruptcy or assignment for benefit of creditors, and thereby becomes unable to pay its debts as they mature, unless the franchisee is lawfully contesting such debt. 
(6)  The franchisee commits a fraud in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city. 
(7)  The franchisee fails to comply with any final federal or state judgment arising directly from the exercise of the franchisee's rights under its franchise. 
(8)  The franchisee ceases to provide the cable services for 30 calendar days for any reason within the control of the franchisee. 
(9)  The franchisee assigns, sells or transfers its title or interest in its franchise without the required consent of the city. 
(10)  The franchisee fails to properly compensate the city as required by this chapter, the franchise. 
(b)  Notice and hearing for termination or revocation. In the event that the city shall decide to terminate or revoke a franchise granted under this chapter, it shall give the franchisee at least 60 days written notice of its intention to terminate or revoke the franchise and shall set forth in the written notice the detailed reason or reasons for its decision to terminate or revoke the franchise. If, during the period of said notice, the cause for the termination or revocation shall be cured or the franchisee has commenced diligent efforts to cure, to the satisfaction of the city, the city may determine that it will no longer proceed with the termination or revocation. If the cause is not cured or if the franchisee has failed to commence diligent efforts to cure, to the satisfaction of the city, within that notice period, the franchisee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the city council after written notice of the public hearing has been provided to the franchisee and published within a newspaper with general circulation within the city at least 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing. At the public hearing, the franchisee, the city, its residents and/or subscribers of the franchisee may present evidence relating to the determination of the city to terminate or revoke the franchise. After the public hearing, if the city council determines that the franchise should be terminated or revoked, the city council shall issue a written decision containing its findings of fact and stating the specific grounds for termination or revocation. The decision of the city council to terminate a franchise shall be subject to judicial review as provided by laws and regulations. 
(c)  Transfer, removal, recovery of fees. In the event that a franchise is terminated or revoked by the city, the city may, in its sole discretion, do any of the following: 
(1)  Affect the transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party. 
(2)  Order the removal of the cable system from the city at the expense of the franchisee. In the event of any such removal, the franchisee shall restore the public rights-of-way, any city property and any other property to a condition satisfactory to the city or the property owners. During the entire period of removal, the franchisee shall maintain the insurance, bonds or letters of credit and the indemnity required under this chapter and the franchise. If the city or the state or other governmental authority is forced to remove the cable system, the work shall be done at the expense of the franchisee and may be recoverable, at the option of the city, from the bonds or letters of credit furnished by the franchisee to the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and the franchise. 
(3)  Recover any franchise fees or other fees or taxes owed to the city by the franchisee from the bonds or letters of credit furnished by the franchisee to the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 35, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-66. - Penalties. 
Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175, the city manager, in consultation with the city attorney, may choose from the remedies set forth below to enforce the requirements of this chapter when there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or the franchise. Those remedies are as follows: 
(1)  In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in this chapter or in the franchise the city manager, or his designee, may issue a citation setting forth a civil penalty of $150.00. In the case of a continuing violation, each 24-hour period in which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The citation shall be served upon the person violating any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise by hand delivery or certified mail or by any other means made in accordance with the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. In the event the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days of service of the citation, the civil penalty shall be collected by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, which shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4. 
(2)  In addition to or in lieu of other remedies set forth in this chapter or the franchise, the city attorney may seek injunctive relief in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 36, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 4.5-67. - Notice. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise, any written notices required by this chapter or the franchise shall be provided by either hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 37, 6-23-98)  
Secs. 4.5-67—4.5-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3056, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2003, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 4.5-1—4.5-24. For purposes of continuity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 4.5-81—4.5-104. 
 
Sec. 4.5-81. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the Telecommunication Ordinance of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following phrases, terms, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise defined by federal or state law. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
City: City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Council: City Council of the City of Asheville. 
County: Buncombe County, North Carolina. 
Franchise: A franchise contract entered into voluntarily by the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including applications, referenced specifications and other related material. A franchise granted pursuant to this article grants the nonexclusive rights to construct, maintain, and operate a telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any construction permits or license required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the city. 
Franchise area: The entire city, or portions thereof, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this article. 
Grantee: Any natural persons, partnerships, domestic and foreign corporations, associations, joint ventures, or organizations of any kind which have been legally granted a franchise by the city, and shall include the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such grantee. 
Grantor: City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Law: Any local, state or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, guideline or other requirement, as amended, now in effect or subsequently enacted or issued during the term of a franchise, including, but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 70, codified at 47 U.S.C., and all orders, rules, tariffs, guidelines and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the North Carolina Utilities Commission pursuant thereto. 
Public rights-of-way or public way: The surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, utility easement or other public rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's telecommunication system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of each terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give or as granted by law. 
State: The State of North Carolina. 
Telecommunication system and system: Cabinets, cables, conduits, converters, drains, equipment, handholes, markers, splice boxes, surface location markers, vaults and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunication service. 
Telecommunication service: Local, private telephone service, toll telephone service, long distance telephone service, data service, fiber optic service, and video service. Telecommunication service does not include a cable network or video programming as defined in Section 602 of the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 510), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-83. - Franchise required; grant of franchise; general provisions. 
(a)  Franchise required. No telecommunication system shall be allowed to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city or be allowed to operate within the city without a franchise. Any telecommunication system located in the public rights-of-way on the effective date of this article shall obtain a franchise from the city pursuant to this article within 180 days, unless such timeframe is extended by the city. 
(b)  Grant and area covered. Pursuant to the state law and applicable Charter provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations, the city can grant revocable and non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate and maintain a telecommunication system within the city and in the public rights-of-way. The specific locations of the telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer pursuant to the terms of a franchise and other applicable local ordinances. The franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a telecommunication system pursuant to a grantee's certificates of public convenience and necessity and the North Carolina public utilities laws and regulations. By acceptance of a franchise, grantee acknowledges and accepts the legal right of the city to issue the franchise. 
(c)  Use of public rights-of-way. For the purpose of operating and maintaining a telecommunication system within the city, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public rights-of-way within the city such cabinets, cables, conduits, converters, drains, equipment, handholes; markers, splice boxes, surface location markers, vaults and other appurtenances as are necessary to the operation of the telecommunication system, provided, however, that, subject to applicable law, any grantee shall comply with all design, construction, and safety provisions contained in the franchise, this article and other applicable local ordinances, and any applicable technical standards and specification of the city. 
(d)  Use of grantee facilities. Solely for the city's use, a grantee shall, during the life of the franchise, cooperate with the city to facilitate the installation of facilities sufficient to meet the city's needs as agreed upon by both parties. 
(e)  Police powers. A grantee's rights under a franchise are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances for the health, safety and welfare of the public. Subject to applicable law, grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to that power. Nothing in this article or the franchise shall be deemed to be a waiver of the requirements of the various codes, ordinances, regulations, standards and specifications regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. 
(f)  Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted by the city is nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, additional franchises in accordance with state and federal law, provided any telecommunication system franchise granted by the city contains substantially equivalent standards, terms and conditions as are contained herein or any amendments to this article. 
(g)  Time is of the essence of the franchise. Subject to applicable law, whenever a franchise shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient material ground for the city to invoke an appropriate penalty including possible revocation of the franchise. 
(h)  Maintenance and repair. No franchise shall be required for routine maintenance and repair to existing facilities, provided said facilities are legally within the right-of-way. Routine maintenance and repair includes: replacing buried and aerial service facilities, digging pits to access existing buried cable, placing short sections of buried cable to provide service or replace defective sections, and placing new buried terminals on existing buried cable. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-84. - Franchise term. 
The term of the franchise shall commence upon execution of the franchise by the city and the grantee and shall continue for the period specified in the franchise, unless sooner terminated as provided herein, but may not exceed 60 years. Grantee shall have no property right upon the expiration of the franchise term, except as provided by applicable law 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-85. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Payment of fee. The grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount specified in the franchise, which fee shall represent fair and reasonable compensation to the city for the use of its public right-of-way together with costs of administering the franchise. This franchise payment shall be in addition to any other fee and shall commence and be paid as set forth in the franchise. The franchise may provide for non-monetary consideration including but not limited to, additional facilities and excess capacity to be reserved for the city's use. 
(b)  Fee in addition to taxes. The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other fees, tax or payment owed by the grantee to the city or other taxing jurisdiction. Payment of the franchise fee by grantee to the city shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or may be required hereafter to be paid by any federal, state, or local law. 
(c)  Acceptance by the city. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee under this article subject to any applicable statute of limitations. 
(d)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or installment thereof is not made on or before the dates specified herein or in the franchise, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed. 
(e)  Time for payment. Subject to applicable law, any other cost or damages assessed under the franchise shall be payable to the city upon demand, unless otherwise provided in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-86. - Service. 
A grantee shall, upon completion of the construction of grantee's main or central lines, as specified in the franchise, commence service within the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of its franchise. A grantee shall complete construction of its main or central lines within 12 months of the commencement of construction of any portion of said main or central lines in the public rights-of-way, unless a longer time for completion is allowed in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-87. - Construction and technical standards; use of streets. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. A grantee shall construct, install and maintain its telecommunication system in a manner consistent with applicable laws or specifications, including the following: 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
National Electric Code 
National Electric Safety Code (NESC) 
National Cable Television Standard Code 
AT&T Manual of Construction Procedures (Blue Book) 
Bell Telephone Systems Code of Pole Line Construction 
All federal, state and municipal construction requirements, including FCC rules and regulations 
Utility construction requirements 
All building and zoning codes, and all land use restrictions as the same exist or may be amended hereafter. 
(b)  Use of existing poles and conduits. A grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits to accomplish its installation, including poles and conduits belonging to the city, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as permission to use any particular pole or conduit, whether or not belonging to the city. Grantee shall be responsible for obtaining appropriate permission from the owners of poles or conduits, including the city, for any installation. A grantee shall not erect any new poles unless necessary for the provision of service and approved by the city engineer, or to replace existing poles for the purpose of maintaining current service. The location of any conduit or wire-holding structure of a grantee shall not be a vested right and such conduits or other structures shall be removed or modified by grantee at its own expense upon order of the city. Where the placement of new conduit is required for an installation, the city may, at the city's cost and expense for additional or different materials, require the grantee to install additional facilities or provide excess capacity to be dedicated for future use as determined by the city. 
(c)  Trees, tree trimming. Grantee shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 20 of this Code with respect to trees and tree trimming in connection with the installation or maintenance of its telecommunication system. 
(d)  Approvals and construction plan. 
(1)  Prior to the placement or installation of any part of the telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way, a grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for approval a construction plan sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state, including a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, specifications and engineering drawings, and a map indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. A grantee shall include in its plans submitted to the city engineer the length of the telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way. The plan shall also include pole numbers and clearances along the telecommunication system route. As to materials to be used for the installation, an engineer's seal shall only be required for non-standard materials. 
(2)  A grantee shall provide the city with satisfactory written verification of grantee's right to attach to poles along the path of the telecommunication system and that there is sufficient clearance for attachment. A grantee shall not attach any part of the telecommunication system to city maintained lines without the prior approval of the city engineer. Prior to receipt of a permit for construction of the telecommunication system from the city engineer, a grantee shall submit to the city written verification of approval of the grantee's final construction plans from the North Carolina Department of Transportation, where applicable, and evidence of compliance with Article 8 of N.C.G.S. Chapter 87, the Underground Damage Prevention Act. 
(3)  No placement or installation of any part of the telecommunication system shall be commenced by any person until construction permits and written approval therefor have been received from the city engineer; provided further, that such permits and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld and action thereon shall be taken within a reasonable period of time. 
(e)  Requirement for installations. 
(1)  All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where utilities and cable television serving the area are underground at the time of installation, or are planned for underground installation within 12 months. Where the system is installed underground, the construction plans shall indicate the depth and profiles of facilities to be installed. In areas where other utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, a grantee may install its service above ground on such facilities. 
(2)  All above ground cables shall be installed parallel with electric or telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Any variance from the above requirements must be approved by the city engineer in writing. 
(3)  At such time as existing electric utilities serving an area are required to be placed underground by the city, a grantee shall likewise place its services underground without additional cost to the city or to the individual subscriber so served within the city. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this article or the franchise, a grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of an adjacent property owner, if technologically feasible, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by such property owner. 
(f)  Applicable standards. A grantee shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations of the North Carolina Utilities Commission; applicable federal, state and local regulations; and the standards as set forth in the franchise and this article. 
(g)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. A grantee's telecommunication system shall be located, erected and maintained so that such system shall: 
(1)  Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of persons; 
(2)  Not interfere with any improvements of the city, county or state; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction, repair or removal; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction, repair or removal; and 
(5)  Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or other utilities, cable, telecommunication or telephone facilities located within the city. 
(h)  Excavation and work in public rights-of-way; restoration; damage. 
(1)  A grantee may install cable and other underground facilities by use of trenching, directional boring, excavation, or other method consistent with sound engineering practice, and may disturb pavement, curb, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or other surfacing in the public rights-of-way as necessary for such installation, provided the installation has been approved by the city engineer. Directional boring may be required in certain instances to protect vegetation and other features in the right-of-way. Manholes and handholes shall not be visible in residential areas unless approved by the city engineer who may require a route change. If authorized in writing by the city engineer, sidewalks may be excavated for the placement of manholes and handholes. 
(2)  Excavations or borings made by a grantee in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the franchise shall be made in compliance with the ordinances and regulations of the city in effect at the time of such excavation. 
(3)  Prior to any excavation or boring in the public rights-of-way, a grantee shall notify all other utilities that may be affected by such excavation or boring of the nature of the work to be performed. Additionally, the services of North Carolina one-call may be used to notify its member utilities. 
(4)  In situations deemed by a grantee to constitute an emergency involving a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, a grantee shall notify the city manager and the city engineer of the nature, location and potential hazard. 
(5)  During the installation, repair or removal of a grantee's telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall provide at all times proper signs, signal lights, flagmen, barricades, and other warning devices for the protection of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in conformance with the latest manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways and amendments or supplements thereto. 
(6)  A grantee shall exercise due care in the operation, installation, alteration, repair or removal of its system. If any utility or property of the city, real or personal, is damaged, impaired or destroyed as a result of either the negligent or intentional acts of a grantee, its employees, agents or persons operating under its direction, supervision or control, the grantee shall be liable to the city for such damages, including but not limited to the cost to repair or replace the utility or property. 
(7)  Immediately after a grantee installs or repairs its system, the grantee shall refill any excavations according to the technical specifications of the city. A grantee shall restore and replace landscaping destroyed, disturbed, or damaged by such work in accordance with the technical specifications of the city and subject to the inspection of the city engineer. 
(8)  If the installation, alteration, repair or removal of the telecommunication system in the public rights-of-way requires the temporary removal of bricks, grates, trees or other property or materials belonging to the city, a grantee shall, until such materials are reinstalled, and in the exercise of due care, store said property or materials in a safe place satisfactory to the city to minimize the risk of damage or theft. 
(9)  A grantee shall preserve and protect all trees and shrubbery located in the public rights-of-way from damage by the grantee. A grantee shall comply with the regulations of the city concerning the preservation and protection of trees and shrubs. A grantee shall pay to the city the cost of treating, removing and replacing any tree or shrub in the public rights-of-way which has been damaged or destroyed as a result of the work of the grantee. 
(10)  If a grantee fails, neglects, or refuses to refill such excavations within 24 hours after the telecommunication system has been installed, repaired or removed, or fails, neglects or refuses to restore the landscaping as herein provided within 144 hours after the telecommunication system has been installed, repaired or removed, then after notice by the city, the grantee shall pay a deposit to the city in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost as determined by the city engineer to do all or such part of said work as may remain undone. The city may also contract with a third party to do all or such part of said work as may remain undone at the cost and expense of the grantee. 
Upon completion of the work by the city and after the total cost has been determined, if the amount of a grantee's deposit exceeds the total cost of the work, any excess will be refunded to the grantee, without interest, within 15 days of official acceptance of the work by the city. If the amount of a grantee's deposit is less than 100 percent of the city's final cost, the grantee shall pay to the city within 15 days of written notification, such additional amounts as will bring the total funds deposited equal to the total cost of the work. 
(11)  Whenever the city or the North Carolina Department of Transportation or its successor shall plan to widen, modify, close, relocate, grade or regrade any public street, sidewalk, or other public way, in which a grantee shall have installed any of its telecommunication system, it shall be the duty of the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, and at no cost to the city, to remove or relocate as necessary its telecommunication system; provided, that nothing herein shall affect any rights under an existing franchise, license or agreement, to reimbursement of such relocation costs. 
(12)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of lines shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 15 working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary line changes. 
(13)  All necessary easements over and under private property or North Carolina Department of Transportation property shall be arranged for by a grantee. The city neither promises nor contracts to obtain or acquire rights-of-way for the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of a grantee's system. A grantee shall provide the city with written verification of the department of transportation approval for the telecommunication system which encroaches upon its rights-of-way, and owner approval for encroachment along any railroad or other rights-of-way on private property. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-88. - [Reserved.]  
Sec. 4.5-89. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
A transfer of ownership or control of the telecommunication system shall comply with the North Carolina Utilities Commission Rules And Regulations where applicable. A grantee shall promptly notify the city of its intent to transfer ownership or control of the telecommunication system and shall provide the city with a true copy of the request to transfer ownership or control made to the North Carolina Utilities Commission and the commission's approval of the transfer. A transferee is required to accept the grantee's franchise and all of its terms, provisions, and any amendments within 15 days of the transfer. Such acceptance shall be in the form approved by the city attorney and attached to the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-90. - Franchise renewal. 
The city may grant or deny renewal of a grantee's franchise subject to the provisions of the Telecommunication Act of 1996, as amended, or other applicable law. The grantee shall own the telecommunication system, but shall have no property right in the public rights-of-way upon the completion of the franchise term. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-91. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. Subject to applicable law, the city reserves the right to revoke a franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with a franchise in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under the franchise: 
(1)  If a grantee defaults in the performance of any of the material obligations under this article, the franchise or such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee. 
(2)  If a grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and other insurance coverage or the security fund as required in this article. 
(3)  If a grantee violates any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this article or the franchise and after notice thereof shall continue the violation and not remedy the same within 60 days. 
(4)  If a grantee attempts to evade any of the provisions of this article or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or grantee's subscribers. 
(5)  If a grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt. 
(6)  If a grantee materially misrepresents facts in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(7)  If the transferee of a grantee fails or refuses to accept the franchise as required in this article. 
(b)  Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. A grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond a grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest whether held directly or indirectly. 
(c)  Pending litigation. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over a grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this article or the franchise. The city and grantee will abide by the terms of any stay order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(1)  The city shall make written demand that a grantee comply with any material requirement; limitation, term condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of a grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the city shall place its request for termination of the grantee's franchise upon a regular council meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be served upon such grantee at least seven days prior to the date of such council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once, seven days before such meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation within the ity. 
(2)  The council shall hear any persons interested in the franchise and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(3)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as reasonably defined by the city, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(4)  If the council shall determine such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the council shall, by resolution, declare that the grantee's franchise shall be terminated and the performance bond and letter of credit forfeited. 
(e)  Disposition of system. In the event a grantee's franchise is revoked or otherwise terminated, the city may in its sole discretion order the complete removal of the telecommunication system from the city within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city, require the original grantee to maintain and operate its system as set forth in subsection (i) hereinafter, or the functioning system, at the option of the city, may become the property of the city. 
(f)  Restoration of property. In removing its telecommunication system, grantee shall not excavate or disturb pavement, curb, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or other surfaces in the public rights-of-way. The grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation and boring that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways in as good a condition or better as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its telecommunication system without affecting the electrical, television, telephone or other telecommunication cable, wires or attachments or the utilities. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way and cables, wires, attachments, and poles after removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance, performance bond and letter of credit as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this paragraph and the franchise. 
(g)  Abandonment. If such removal and restoration is not completed by grantee within 180 days after notice by the city, all of the grantee's property remaining in the public rights-of-way shall, at the option of the city, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of the city, become the property of the city. 
(h)  Restoration by city; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by subsection (f) above, or any other work required by city ordinance, within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the city the cost thereof within 15 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the city may recover such costs from the security fund provided by grantee. The city may also seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation of the franchise, the city may require the grantee to continue to operate the system for a period of six months from the date of such expiration or revocation, or until such time as is mutually agreed upon by the city and grantee. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-92. - Receivership and foreclosure. 
(a)  Termination by insolvency. Any franchise shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Such receiver or trustee shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of the franchise, and the receiver or trustee within said 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and 
(2)  Such receiver, or trustee shall, within said 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
(b)  Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the city may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee thereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The North Carolina Utilities Commission shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in accordance with its rules and regulations, and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-93. - Performance bond and letter of credit. 
(a)  Security fund. 
(1)  At the time a franchise is accepted, the grantee shall issue and deliver to the city a letter of credit from a federally-insured banking institution and a performance bond issued by a surety licensed in the State of North Carolina in amounts to be determined by the city council, and incorporated into the franchise. The bond and letter of credit shall be a security fund. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said bond and letter of credit shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this section. 
(2)  The security fund shall serve as security for: 
a.  The faithful performance by a grantee of all the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise; 
b.  Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city occasioned by grantee's unexcused or uncured failure to comply with all lawful rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to the franchise; 
c.  The payment by grantee of all liens and taxes, and all damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any act or default of grantee, and all other payments due the city from grantee pursuant to this article and the franchise; 
d.  The costs and expenses incurred by the city as a result of grantee's abandonment of the telecommunication system at any time during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto; and 
e.  The damages or loss of revenue caused by a grantee's assignment of the franchise without the approval of the North Carolina Utilities Commission. 
(3)  A grantee shall not use the security fund for other purposes and shall not assign, pledge or otherwise use the security fund as security for any purpose. The security fund shall be maintained during the term of the franchise in the amount specified in the franchise. 
(b)  Change in amount of letter of credit. Upon written application by a grantee, the city may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the letter of credit to be reduced or waive the requirements for a letter of credit subject to the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or denied upon application by a grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's subsequent applications or to the city's right to require the full letter of credit at any time thereafter. However, no application shall be made by a grantee within one year of any prior application. 
(c)  Payment from security fund. 
(1)  If a grantee fails to pay to the city any payment due under the terms of the franchise; or, fails to repay to the city, any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise, the city may then demand payment from the security fund. 
(2)  The letter of credit shall be made payable upon a draft submitted by the city and accompanied by the written statement of an appropriately authorized official for the city that payment is due the city under the terms of the franchise as a result of a default by grantee. The city shall be the beneficiary under the performance bond. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-94. - Insurance. 
(a)  Certificates of insurance. Not later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, a grantee shall furnish to the city, certificates of insurance, approved by the city, for all types of insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this article and the franchise. 
(b)  Insurance policies. 
(1)  All insurance policies maintained pursuant to the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable, endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurance company and the intention not to renew may not be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt by the city manager, by registered mail or certified mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew. 
(2)  Any insurance policy obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk during the term of the franchise. A grantee shall immediately advise the city of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. 
(3)  All contractual liability insurance policies maintained pursuant to the franchise shall include an endorsement covering the indemnity clause set forth in section 4.5-95. 
(4)  All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this article or the franchise shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the State of North Carolina and approved by the State Commissioner of Insurance. 
(c)  General liability insurance. 
(1)  A grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, commercial general liability insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum amount specified in the franchise, combined single limits applicable to claims for bodily injury, personal injury and/or property damage relating to grantee's operations, maintenance and construction under the franchise. 
(2)  Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. 
(3)  At any time during the term of the franchise, the city may request that the city be named as an additional insured under grantee's commercial general liability insurance policy and the grantee shall comply with such request. 
(d)  Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city hereunder, shall limit the liability of a grantee under this article or the franchise or for damages. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-95. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Release, indemnity and hold harmless. As a condition of the grant of a franchise, the grantee shall release, indemnify, keep and save harmless the city, its agents, officials and employees, from any and all responsibility or liability for any and all damage or injury of any kind or nature whatsoever (including death resulting therefrom) to all persons, whether agents, officials or employees of the city or third persons, and to all property proximately caused by, incident to, resulting from, arising out of, or occurring in connection with, directly or indirectly, the design, construction, installation, maintenance, or operation of a telecommunication system by the grantee (or by any persons acting for the grantee or for whom the grantee is or is alleged to be in any way responsible), whether such claim may be based in whole or in part upon contract, tort (including alleged active or passive negligence or participation in the wrong), or upon any alleged breach of any duty or obligation on the part of the grantee, its agents, officials and employees or otherwise. 
(b)  Claims. The provisions of this section shall include: 
(1)  Any claims for equitable relief or for damages (compensatory or punitive) against the city, its agents, officials, and employees including alleged injury to the business of any claimant and shall include any and all losses, damages, injuries, settlements, judgments, decrees, awards, fines, penalties, claims, costs and expenses. Expenses as used herein shall include without limitation the costs incurred by the city, its agents, officials and employees, in connection with investigating any claim or defending any action, and shall also include reasonable attorneys' fees by reason of the assertion of any such claim against the city, its agents, officials or employees; 
(2)  Any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; and 
(3)  Any claims arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state, or local statute, ordinances or regulation applicable to grantee in its business. 
(c)  Broad construction. Any security fund or insurance protection required by the grantee or the city, shall in no way limit the grantee's responsibility to release, indemnify, keep and save harmless and defend the city as herein provided. The intention of this article is to apply and construe broadly in favor of the city the foregoing provisions subject to the limitations, if any, set forth in N.C.G.S. 22B-1. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-96. - Liquidated damages. 
(a)  Liquidated damages. The city and the grantee understand and agree that grantee's violation of any of the time and performance requirements set forth in this article or in the franchise may result in damage to the city and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance. Accordingly, subject to applicable law, whenever the city determines, consistent with subsection (b) hereinafter, that the grantee has violated any such requirement, the city may charge the grantee and collect from the security fund, as necessary, the following liquidated damages: 
(1)  For failure to provide "as built" maps, the sum of $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
(2)  For failure to comply with the construction or maintenance standards, the sum of $1,000.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
(3)  For failure to comply with all conditions of city permits, the sum of $1,000.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues. 
(b)  Unavoidable delay. No charge shall be made to the security fund for an unavoidable delay. For purposes of this section, "unavoidable delay" means that period of time during which the grantee is delayed from complying with the time and performance requirements of the franchise because of acts of God, strikes, lockouts or other industrial disturbances, acts of public enemy, orders of any kind of the government of the United States or of the state or any civil or military authority, insurrections, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, storms, floods, washouts, drought, arrest, restraining of government and people, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities or equipment, shortages of labor, materials, supplies or transportation, or any other similar cause not reasonably within the control of the grantee, but not including reasonably anticipated weather conditions for the city's geographic area or reasonably anticipated difficulties with equipment, suppliers or shippers. 
(c)  Procedure for imposition of liquidated damages. 
(1)  Whenever the city finds that a grantee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this article or the franchise, a written notice shall be sent to grantee informing it of such violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. Grantee shall begin corrective action within five days after receipt of such notice. Grantee may, within five days of receipt of notice, notify the city that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred; provided, however, that if the last day of the five-day period falls on a day on which the city hall is closed, the period shall be extended to include the next day on which city hall is open for business. Such notice by grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by grantee and shall stay the running of the above-described time. In the event grantee fails to request a hearing, then grantee shall be deemed to have waived any defense whatsoever to the violation alleged. 
a.  The city or its designee shall hear grantee's dispute at a meeting called in a timely manner. Grantee shall be afforded reasonable notice of the meeting and afforded a reasonable opportunity to participate in and be heard at this meeting. The city or its designee shall supplement any decision with written findings of fact. 
b.  If after hearing the dispute the claim is upheld by the city, the grantee shall have five days from such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. At any time after that five-day period, the city may draw against the security fund all damages due it as determined by the city. 
(2)  The time for a grantee to correct any violation or liability may be extended by the city if the necessary action to correct such violation or liability is of such a nature or character to require more than five days within which to perform, provided grantee commenced the corrective action within the five-day period and thereafter uses reasonable diligence, as determined by the city, to correct the violation or liability. 
(3)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-97. - Reports and other requirements. 
(a)  Maps and report. Grantee shall file with the city engineer a complete set of "as built" maps of the grantee's system and an annual report consisting of any revisions to the system "as built" maps filed with the city. This information shall be submitted in electronic form compatible with standard geographic information systems applications as used by the city and shall contain data as specified in the franchise. The city may prepare the required information in the specified format for a commercially reasonable fee as specified in the fees and charges manual. 
(b)  Financial and ownership reports. The grantee shall submit annually to the city a list of the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of the grantee and of any parent corporation. 
(c)  Proof of bond, letter of credit and insurance. Grantee shall submit to the city the required performance bond, letter of credit, and all policies of insurance required by this article, or certified copies thereof, and written notice of payment of the required premium. 
(d)  Reporting changes in information. Grantee shall promptly, and in any event within ten days, notify the city of any changes to any information required to be submitted pursuant to this section. The city shall be entitled to rely on the information that grantee has provided for any reason, whether or not related to the administration of the franchise or this article. 
(e)  Confidential information. With respect to any information that a grantee supplies to the city pursuant to a franchise or this ordinance that is confidential or a trade secret within the meaning of N.C.G.S. 66-152(2) or N.C.G.S. 132-1.2, or other state or federal law, grantee shall be responsible for making the appropriate designation and taking appropriate action as set out in the applicable law at the time it is supplied to the city, to protect said information from unauthorized disclosure. The city will not disclose any such information to any person without grantee's express written permission, except as directed by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, or as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-98. - Equal opportunity policy. 
The grantee shall afford equal employment opportunity to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, or handicap, as required by federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-99. - Notices. 
Local address. Grantee shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. Grantee shall also maintain with the city, a local office and telephone number for the conduct of matters related to the franchise during normal business hours. The grantee shall advise the city of such address(es) and telephone numbers and any changes thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-100. - Failure of city to enforce franchise, no waiver of the terms thereof. 
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this article or the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such provisions, terms or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-101. - Severability. 
(a)  Invalidity. If any term, condition or provision of this article or the franchise or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof and the application of such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances, other than those as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby, and this article and the franchise and all the terms, provisions and conditions thereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and grantee shall comply. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the grantee and the city. 
(b)  Court action. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the event that any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction declares any portion of this article or the franchise deemed by the city to be material, invalid in whole or in part; requires grantee to perform any act which is inconsistent with any portion deemed by the city to be material or requires grantee to cease performing any act deemed by the city to be material, the city shall so notify grantee and the city and grantee shall, in good faith, renegotiate that term or those terms of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-102. - Rights cumulative. 
All rights and remedies given to the city and grantee by this article and the franchise shall be in addition to and cumulative with any and all other rights or remedies, existing or implied, now or hereafter available to the city and grantee, at law or in equity, and such rights and remedies shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically given by the franchise or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to time and as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by the city and grantee and the exercise of one or more rights or remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or remedy. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-103. - Acceptance of grantee required. 
This article and the franchise and all of their terms, provisions, and any amendments shall be accepted by a grantee in writing within 15 days of the grant of a franchise by the city council and within 15 days of proper passage of any amendments to this article or the franchise and when accepted shall be filed with the city clerk who shall record the same. Such written acceptance may be upon or at the end of a copy of the franchise ordinance and it shall state and express the acceptance of this article and the franchise and its terms, conditions, provisions, and amendments; and the grantee shall agree in said written acceptance to abide by, to observe and perform the same according to all of its terms and provisions, and shall declare that statements and recitals contained in the article and the franchise are correct and that it has made and does make the agreements and statements set forth in this article and the franchise and accepts the validity of the terms and conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 4.5-104. - Existing franchises. 
(a)  This article shall not abrogate, repeal or otherwise affect existing valid franchises, agreements, or licenses; provided that any such franchise, agreement, or license may upon renewal or extension thereof, be made subject to this article. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to cable television services provided under a franchise issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 2496 covering cable television service providers, and within the scope of the franchise authorized thereby; provided, further, however, that no cable television franchise or franchise agreement shall be construed as authorizing a cable television franchisee to provide telecommunications services beyond the scope of the cable television franchise without complying with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to public utilities that have been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the North Carolina Utilities Commission pursuant to N.C.G.S. Chapter 62, which certificate governs the operations of said public utility within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 9-23-03)  
Chapter 5 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Municipal cemeteries, G.S. 65-37 et seq.; North Carolina Cemetery Act, G.S. 65-46 et seq.; authority to establish and operate cemeteries, G.S. 160A-341; regulation of city cemeteries, G.S. 160A-348; inscription on gravestone or monument charging commission of crime, G.S. 14-401.3. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Burials prohibited except in specified cemeteries. 
No human body shall be buried within the corporate limits of the city except in established cemeteries licensed by the state cemetery commission or in church cemeteries. 
(Code 1965, § 9-2)  
Sec. 5-2. - Excavations. 
No person shall excavate any earth in any cemetery or remove any earth therefrom, except by the consent or under the direction of the city council or of some other officer legally authorized in the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 9-3) 
State Law reference— Removal of graves, G.S. 65-13.  
Sec. 5-3. - Depth of graves. 
All graves in any cemetery in the city over 4½ feet in length shall not be less than five feet deep. 
(Code 1965, § 9-4)  
Sec. 5-4. - Interment of additional body in grave. 
No person shall open any grave in any cemetery within the city and inter therein any additional body. 
(Code 1965, § 9-6)  
Sec. 5-5. - Permit to exhume body. 
No person shall exhume any human body in any cemetery in the city without a written permit from the duly authorized representative of the state or county. 
(Code 1965, § 9-7) 
State Law reference— Exhumations, G.S. 130A-390.  
Sec. 5-6. - Interfering with walks, decorations or general arrangement. 
No person shall perform any work in a cemetery in such manner as to interfere with the walks, decorations or general arrangement of the cemetery, except with the permission of the duly authorized representative of the state or county. 
(Code 1965, § 9-9)  
Sec. 5-7. - Use as playground. 
No person shall use any part of any cemetery within the city as a playground. 
(Code 1965, § 9-10)  
Sec. 5-8. - Vehicles. 
No person shall drive any vehicle in any cemetery, except on driveways or roadways provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 9-11)  
Sec. 5-9. - Sale of merchandise or food. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise or any fruit, drink or beverage or any other thing of value within the limits of any cemetery in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 9-12)  
Sec. 5-10. - Disturbing graves or injuring or removing cemetery property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any of the following: 
a.  Tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure or thing placed in any cemetery in the city; 
b.  Fence, railing or other structure or thing placed in any cemetery; or 
c.  Fence, railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure or for the ornamentation or protection of any cemetery; 
(2)  Willfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree, flower, shrub or plant planted or growing in any cemetery; or 
(3)  Commit any other depredation within the limits of any cemetery. 
(Code 1965, § 9-13) 
State Law reference— Defacing or desecrating grave sites, G.S. 14-148; desecrating, plowing over or covering up graves, G.S. 14-149.  
Sec. 5-11. - Dogs in Riverside Cemetery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or cause his dog or any dog for which he is responsible to go upon the grounds of Riverside Cemetery at any time unless said dog is leashed at all times and said leash is held by the person responsible for the dog. Dogs subject to this provision shall be kept on the paved roads within the cemetery and not allowed to defecate or urinate on any grave site, headstone or monument. Any fecal matter deposited by a dog shall be removed from the cemetery by the person responsible for the dog. The main cemetery gate may be posted any time a funeral or other service is in progress and no dogs shall be permitted in the cemetery during such times. This provision shall not apply to dogs assisting persons with sight disabilities, or other disabled persons who require the assistance of a dog. 
(Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 7-8-97)  
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4009, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2011, amended Ch. 6 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-3, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2888, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2002. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; historic preservation, ch. 8; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 12; police, ch. 13; subdivisions, ch. 17; trees, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Investigation of fires and inspection of premises, G.S. 58-79-1 et seq.; fire protection, G.S. 160A-291 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
(a)  An ordinance of the City of Asheville adopting a fire prevention code, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Asheville; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefrom; repealing Ordinance No. 2888 of the City of Asheville and all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith. 
(b)  In the event of conflicts with North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail as allowed by G.S. 143-138(e). 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 6-2. - Amendments. 
The North Carolina Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted and shall be amended and changed in the following respects: 
(a)  Chapter 1 is amended by the addition of the following sections: 
103.2 Appointment. The Fire Marshal's Office is established as a division of the City of Asheville Fire Department and this division shall operate as the department of fire prevention defined in section 103.1. The Fire Chief shall appoint fire code enforcement officials, certified by the State of North Carolina, and these fire code officials shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the City of Asheville. 
103.3 Employees. In accordance with the prescribed personnel policies and procedures of the City of Asheville, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to appoint a Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshals, Assistants, and other related technical officers, inspectors, plan reviewers, and other employees necessary to enforce this code. 
103.4 Liability. The fire code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
103.4.1 Legal defense. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the City of Asheville until the final termination of the proceedings. The fire code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of fire prevention, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
103.5 Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a fire code official carrying out any duties or functions prescribed by this code. For the purpose of this section interfere shall include, but not be limited to, threats or actions concerning employment status or disciplinary action affecting any fire official in connection with actions properly taken under the authority of the Fire Prevention Code, refusal to admit a fire official possessing a warrant pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. Section 15-27.2 to the premise named in that warrant, unwanted physical contact with or restraint of a fire code official, or harassment of a fire code official in connection with official actions whether on or off duty. 
103.6 Impersonation. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use a badge, uniform, or other credentials, so as to impersonate a fire code official for the purpose of gaining entry to any premises, or for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any fire protection device, appliance, material, or service. 
104.10 Fire investigations. The fire code official or other responsible authority designated by the fire chief shall have the authority to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire, explosion or other hazardous condition. Information that could be related to trade secrets or processes shall not be made part of the public record except as directed by a court of law. 
104.10.1 Assistance from other agencies. Police and other enforcement agencies shall have authority to render necessary assistance in the investigation of fires when requested to do so. 
104.10.2 Fire investigation records. The fire department shall keep a record of fire investigations occurring within its jurisdiction and of facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, together with other information as required by the fire chief. 
104.12.1 Fire station parking. The fire chief shall have the authority to regulate parking on streets and other areas adjacent to any fire station or other fire department facility. 
104.13.1 Public Street and Sidewalk Closures. The temporary or permanent closure or obstruction of any public street or sidewalk must be approved by the fire code official prior to such closure or obstruction placement, when such closure or obstruction would affect life safety or fire apparatus response. 
105.1.4 Operational Permits required. Permit fees shall be as specified by the City of Asheville. Failure to pay the required fees and charges shall be a violation of this code. In addition to those permits specified as mandatory by this code, the following optional permit sections are adopted as mandatory permits by the City of Asheville: 
105.6.17 Floor finishing 
105.6.20 Hazardous Materials 
105.6.22 High Piled Storage 
105.6.24 Industrial ovens 
105.6.30 Open Burning 
105.6.31 Use of Torch or Open Flame Device 
105.6.32 Open flames and candles 
105.6.34 Places of assembly 
105.6.39 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities 
105.6.42 Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts 
105.6.44 Tire-rebuilding plants 
105.6.45 Waste handling 
105.6.47 Road and Public Way Obstructions. An operational permit is required for the temporary or permanent obstruction of any fire apparatus access road or public way when such obstruction, in the opinion of the fire code official, would affect life safety, exit discharge, or fire apparatus use. 
107.6 Overcrowding. It shall be unlawful to permit overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved capacity of a building, premise, or portion thereof. The fire code official, upon finding any overcrowding conditions, or obstructions in aisles, passageways, or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a serious menace to like, shall be authorized to cause the performance, presentation, spectacle, or entertainment to be stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected. The fire code official is authorized to order the evacuation of a building, premise, or portion thereof to abate the overcrowded condition. 
106.1 Inspection Schedule Adopted. The inspection schedule specified in section 106 is adopted. This inspection schedule represents a minimum inspection schedule. If fires or other circumstances indicate that more frequent inspections of individual occupancies or classes of occupancies will assist in reducing life and property losses from fire, then more frequent inspection will be undertaken. 
109.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or utilize a building, occupancy, premises, or system regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
109.2 Notice of violation. When the fire code official finds a building, premises, vehicle, system, facility, or outdoor area that is in violation of this code, the fire code official is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for compliance. 
109.2.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail, or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises or the notice of violation shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or both. 
109.2.2 Compliance with orders and notices. A notice of violation issued or served as provided by this code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of violation pertains. 
109.2.3 Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the fire code official is authorized to request the City Attorney of the City of Asheville to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
109.2.4 Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the fire code official. 
109.3 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or their assigns, agent or executor who violates a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be deemed in violation of this code. Violators of this code may be assessed a civil monetary penalty based upon the class of violation and the fee schedule of civil penalties as adopted by the City of Asheville. 
109.3.1 Classes of violations. Violations of this code shall be assigned a violation classification as defined in this section. Determination of the class of violation shall be at the sole discretion of fire code officials of the Asheville Fire Department who are charged with enforcement of this code, unless otherwise specified in this code. As used in this section, an emergency shall be defined as an unexpected situation or event, of a serious nature, requiring immediate action or response by the Asheville Fire Department. 
109.3.1.1 Class D. A violation of the provisions of sections 503.4 and 507.5.4 by a motor vehicle shall be deemed a Class D violation. 
109.3.1.2 Class C. A violation of the provisions of this code which causes an increase of the hazard or menace of fire, explosion, or other hazardous condition or may delay, hinder, or interfere with the operations of the fire department shall be deemed a Class C violation. 
109.3.1.3 Class B. A violation of the provisions of this code which may delay, hinder, or prevent the egress of the occupants in the event of a fire and/or other emergency or acts which may prevent the operation of fire and/or life safety devices and/or systems shall be deemed a Class B violation. 
109.3.1.4 Class A. A violation of the provisions of this code that delayed, hindered, or prevented the egress of the occupants during an emergency or caused a fire or increased the severity of a fire or acts that prevented the operation of a fire and/or life safety system or device during an emergency shall be deemed a Class A violation. 
109.3.2 Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of the civil penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises in accordance with N.C. General Statutes. 
109.3.3 Continuing violations. Each calendar day, or other time period as specified in a written notice, that a violation continues after due notice has been served, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
109.3.4 Appeals of civil penalties. The Fire Marshal shall establish written rules and regulations for a procedure, not inconsistent with the provisions of this code, city policies, and applicable state law, for administering an appeals process regarding civil penalties. This City of Asheville appeal process shall be approved by the Fire Chief and only be applicable to the provisions of sections 109.3 to 109.3.1.4. All other appeals of the provisions of this code shall be referred to the North Carolina Office of State Fire Marshal as provided for in The North Carolina Administrative Enforcement Code and Policies. 
(b)  Chapter 2, section 202 is amended by the addition of the following definition: 
TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES. Traffic calming devices are design elements of fire apparatus access roads such as street alignment, installation of barriers, and other physical measures intended to reduce traffic and cut-through volumes, and slow vehicle speeds. 
(c)  Chapter 4 is amended by the addition of the following sections: 
401.9 Nuisance fire alarms. It shall be unlawful for fire alarm systems to transmit a nuisance alarm which causes a fire department response. A nuisance alarm shall include any unplanned fire department response that is caused by fire alarm testing or an evacuation drills using the fire alarm system. 
(d)  Chapter 4; section 404.2 amended by the addition of items: 
16.  Motor fuel-dispensing facilities 
17.  Unattended self-service stations shall have an approved fire safety plan. 
(e)  Chapter 4 is amended by the addition of the following sections: 
408.12 Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities. Motor fuel dispensing facilities shall comply with sections 408.12.1 through 408.12.2. 
408.12.1 Employee training. Employees shall be instructed by owners or operators of service stations in the following 
1.  Operation of emergency fuel shutoffs required by section 2203.2. 
2.  Dispensing procedures in section 2204. 
3.  Spill control procedures in section 2205.3. 
408.12.2 Spill control equipment. Each motor fuel dispensing facilities shall maintain the following emergency equipment and materials: 
1.  Absorbent materials, in a quantity and type as approved by the fire code official. 
2.  An approved waste container for the containment of the absorbent materials used to mitigate a spill. 
408.13 Unattended Self Service Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities. Approved unattended self service motor fuel dispensing facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of 408.12.1. 
(f)  Chapter 5 is amended by adding sections 503.4.1, 503.4.2, 503.4.2.1, and 507.5.4.1 and amending section 506.1 as follows: 
503.4.1. Traffic calming devices. Traffic calming devices shall be prohibited, unless approved by the fire code official and the City Traffic Engineer. 
503.4.2 Responsibility for obstructions. The owner of a premise shall be responsible to keep fire apparatus access roads on their premises clear of any obstruction which reduces the required width to less than that required by the fire code official. 
503.4.2.1 Responsibility for Vehicles. The registered owner shall be responsible for their vehicle which obstructs a fire apparatus access road. The use of a fire lane for loading and unloading shall comply with NC General Statute 20 -162(b). 
507.5.4.1 Responsibility for Vehicles. The registered owner shall be responsible for their vehicle that violates section 507.5.4 or 507.5.5. 
506.1 Where required. The fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type, listed in accordance with UL 1037, and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. 
(g)  Chapter 6 is amended by the addition of the following section: 
607.4.1 Elevator key type. When a building has multiple elevators, the keys required by section 607.4 shall be a single key type, as approved by the fire code official. 
(h)  Chapter 38 is amended by the addition of the following section: 
3801.5 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by the primary and secondary fire districts, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons. 
(i)  That the limits referred to in certain sections of the N.C. Fire Prevention Code are hereby established as follows: 
3404.2.9.6.1 (Limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): City of Asheville Primary and Secondary Fire Districts. 
3406.2.4.4 (Limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): City of Asheville Primary and Secondary Fire Districts. 
3506.2.4.4 (Limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): City of Asheville Primary and Secondary Fire Districts. 
(j)  Appendix D of the 2012 International Fire Code is adopted and amended by deleting figure D103.1 and Table D103.4 and the addition of replacement sections as follows: 
D103.1 Access road widths. Access road widths shall comply with section 503 and the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 15 percent in grade. 
EXCEPTION: Where an approved automatic sprinkler system is installed, grades steeper than 15 percent but less than 18 percent are permitted, as approved by the fire chief and the city traffic engineer. 
D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
D105.1 Where required. Approved aerial fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for any building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
(k)  Appendix F of the 2012 International Fire Code is adopted. 
(l)  Appendix J of the 2012 International Fire Code is adopted and amended as followed. 
J101.8 (2) The fire department shall conduct inspections to verify compliance with this section of the code in accordance with section 106 and shall notify the owner, or the owner's agent, of any required updates to the sign in accordance with fire department designations and the owner, or the owner's agent, shall comply within 30 days. 
(m)  Appendix K is added as follows: 
Appendix K Fire Limits 
Fire District No. 1(Primary Fire District) Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Spruce Street and Walnut Street and running thence southerly along the centerline of Spruce Street to its intersection with the centerline of Eagle Street; thence southerly, crossing Eagle Street to the centerline of Velvet Street; thence with the centerline of Velvet Street southerly and westerly, crossing South Market Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Market Street; thence northwesterly, crossing South Market Street to the centerline of Wilson Alley; thence along the centerline of Wilson Alley to its intersection with the centerline of Sycamore Street; thence with the centerline of Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline of Biltmore Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Biltmore Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Aston Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Aston Street to its intersection with the centerline of Asheland Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Asheland Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Patton Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Patton Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Otis Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Otis Street to its intersection with the centerline of Battery Park Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Battery Park Avenue to it intersection with the centerline of Page Avenue; thence northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of Page Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Haywood Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Haywood Street to its intersection with the centerline of Hiawassee Street; thence easterly and southeasterly along the centerline of Hiawassee Street to its intersection with the centerline of North Lexington Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of North Lexington Avenue, which becomes the centerline of Broadway, to its intersection with the centerline of Bordeaux Place; thence easterly with the centerline of Bordeaux Place to a point in the centerline of Bordeaux Place which is 150 feet east of the centerline of Broadway; thence southerly along a line parallel to and 150 feet east of the centerline of Broadway to the intersection of that line with the southern margin of the right-of-way of the connector road from Merrimon Avenue which crosses Broadway to the westbound entrance ramp of Interstate 240; thence easterly with the southern margin of the right-of-way of said connector to its intersection with the centerline of Merrimon Avenue; thence northerly with the centerline of Merrimon Avenue which becomes the centerline of Broadway, to its intersection of the centerline of Woodfin Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Woodfin Street to a point in the centerline of Woodfin Street which is an extension of the western boundary of the property described in Deed Book 1156 at Page 639 in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County; thence southerly to the northwestern corner of said property; thence southerly with the western boundary of said property to it intersection with the northern right-of-way margin of Walnut Street; thence southerly to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Walnut Street to its intersection with the centerline of Spruce Street, to the point and place of beginning. 
Fire District No. 2 (Secondary Fire District) Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Church Street and Banks Avenue and running thence southerly along the centerline of Church Street to its intersection with the centerline of Buxton Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Buxton Avenue to it intersection with the centerline of Millard Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Millard Street to its intersection with the centerline of Coxe Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Coxe Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Banks Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Banks Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Church Street, the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 6-3. - Third party inspection reporting system. 
Records of all required monthly, quarterly, and annual system inspections, tests, and maintenance, as required by section 604.6, 901.6, 904.11, 909.20 and their respective referenced National Fire Protection Association standards shall be provided to the City of Asheville through an approved third party inspection reporting system and reporting parties shall pay any fees associated with that service to the city's third party service provider. 
(Ord. No. 4349, § 1, 9-23-14)  
Chapter 7 - DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997, repealed former ch. 7, and various other provisions of the Code and enacted provisions designated as a new ch. 7 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Asheville Downtown Commission, § 2-76; Asheville Tree/Greenway Commission, § 2-156; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; historic preservation, ch. 8; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; nuisances, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 12; solid waste management, ch. 15; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; trees, ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, JURISDICTION, AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7-1-1. - Authority; title. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the City of Asheville by the General Assembly of the State of North Carolina in provisions of the North Carolina General Statutes, which include, but are not limited to, Articles 8, 15, and 19 of Chapter 160A; Articles 4 and 14 of Chapter 113A; and Part 6 of Article 21 of Chapter 143 and in the Charter and Related laws of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-1-2. - Purpose. 
These regulations have been adopted in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the City of Asheville, North Carolina, as adopted, in order to promote the health, safety, morals, good order, general welfare and diversity of the community; in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city's jurisdiction; to provide for sound, orderly, systematic urban development; to create a balance between the rights of the community and the rights of the individual; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to insure a fair and adequate distribution of light and air among buildings; to prevent the overcrowding of land while discouraging urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public services; to conserve the value of buildings and land; to promote the economic and industrial prosperity of the city, to preserve the city's unique scenic character; to conserve the natural and historic resources and environmental quality of the city; to encourage the continued use and reuse of existing buildings, to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation in order to prevent the pollution to water and other damage to lakes, watercourses, and other public and private property by sedimentation; to safeguard the natural resources of the city by regulating stormwater run-off; to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions; and, to protect and conserve the heritage of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-1-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Jurisdiction; general. The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as identified on the map of the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Asheville. This territorial jurisdiction map will be, after the effective date of this chapter, recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County and filed in the Office of the city Clerk of the City of Asheville. 
(b)  Asheville Regional Airport. All provisions of this chapter shall apply to that property which is known as the Asheville Regional Airport and which is more particularly described in 1979 N. C. Sess. Laws Ch. 256. The heights of any manmade structures on this property shall be governed and approved, however, by the applicable rules and regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2860, § 1a, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3381, §§ 1(a), (b), 7-25-06; Ord. No. 4233, § 1a, 9-24-13)  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICIAL MAP, RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Official zoning maps; identification. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are effective at the same time this chapter is effective by the adoption by the city council of a series of maps entitled "City of Asheville, North Carolina Official Zoning Maps," (hereinafter "zoning maps"). These zoning maps, together with all amendments adopted by the Asheville City Council, are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. These zoning maps shall be retained permanently in the office of the planning and development department of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
The following rules of interpretation shall be applicable to the zoning maps: 
(1)  District designation. A district name on the zoning maps indicates that the regulations pertaining to the district designated by that name, or abbreviation of same, extend throughout the whole area bounded by the district boundary lines within which such name, or abbreviation, is shown, except as otherwise provided. 
(2)  District boundary; determination. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning maps, the following rules shall be used to interpret the zoning maps: 
a.  Where a district boundary is shown to coincide approximately with a property line or city limit line, the property line or city limit line shall be considered to be the district boundary, unless otherwise indicated. 
b.  In cases where a district boundary line is located within a street or alley right-of-way or easement, railroad or utility line right-of-way or easement, river, or stream, it will be considered to be in the center of the street or alley right-of-way or easement, railroad or utility line right-of-way or easement, river, or stream. If the actual location of such right-of-way, easement, river, or stream varies slightly from the location as shown on the zoning map, then the actual location shall control. 
c.  In cases where a district boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street line or other physical feature, this distance shall control. 
d.  Where a boundary line is shown and its location is not fixed by any of the rules of this section, and no dimensions are shown, the location of the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning maps unless there exists a metes and bounds description of the boundary line. If such a metes and bounds description exists, it shall control. 
e.  Where the zoning map shows a district boundary dividing a lot, each part of the lot shall conform with the standards established by this chapter for the zoning use or overlay district in which that part is located. 
f.  In circumstances not covered previously in this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-2-3. - General rules of construction. 
(a)  Interpretation and application of these regulations. 
(1)  In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions of the chapter will be construed to be the minimum requirements adopted to promote the purposes set forth in section 7-1-2. 
(2)  The words "shall", "must", and "will", are mandatory in nature, implying an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The word "may" is permissive in nature. 
(3)  Except where specifically defined in this chapter, all words shall carry the standard dictionary meanings. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(5)  Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. 
(6)  Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender and vice versa. 
(7)  Any act authorized by this chapter to be carried out by a specific official of the city is, by implication, authorized to be carried out by a designee of such official. 
(b)  Fractional requirements. When any requirement of this chapter results in a fraction of a unit, a fraction of one-half or more will be considered a whole unit and a fraction of less than one-half will be disregarded. When applying this requirement to the calculation of the number of units permitted on a parcel of land, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  This requirement shall apply only to multi-family residential development of five units or greater, not to duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes on individual parcels. However, it shall apply to any multi-family residential use (including two, three, and four-unit buildings) as part of a larger multi-family residential project or mixed-use development within the NCD and UR districts. 
(2)  In situations where the number of dwelling units allowed on a property is a fractional number, all fractions of one-half or greater will be rounded up to the nearest number. For example, a property on which 8.4 units could be constructed will be limited to eight units, while a property on which 8.5 units could be constructed will be allowed nine units. 
(3)  Such projects receiving increased density under this subsection must also comply with all development standards found elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Relation of this chapter to any pending actions. The adoption of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, notice of violation, citation or proceeding which may be pending at the date this chapter becomes effective. All rights and liabilities that have been received or created and any violation that has occurred under any previous provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville which have been superseded by this chapter are still valid and may be preserved and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3208, § 1, 1-25-05)  
Sec. 7-2-4. - Conflict or inconsistency with other laws, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
(a)  Relation of this chapter to other regulations. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any other law, ordinance, or regulation. However, where conditions, standards, or requirements imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than standards imposed by any other law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. In cases where reference is made to the North Carolina General Statutes, or any provision thereof, said reference shall be to the current language of said statute or provision. Whenever a process is prescribed by this chapter, and said process contains requirements in addition to those prescribed by state law, the process prescribed in this chapter shall be deemed supplemental; state law shall control. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions of this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the limitations, requirements, or standards contained in different provisions of this chapter in applying them to an individual use or structure, the more restrictive provision shall apply. However, the regulations for overlay districts set forth in article IX of this chapter shall control in the event of any conflict between those regulations and regulations which are set forth in article VIII of this chapter for the underlying district. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this chapter and any caption, figure, illustration, or map contained herein, the text shall control. 
(c)  Conflicts with covenants, deed restrictions, etc. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(a), 11-22-05)  
Sec. 7-2-5. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
A-frame sign means a two-sided sign, hinged or attached at the top of the sign panels, identifying, advertising, or directing attention to a business(es), product(s), operation(s), or service(s) sold or offered in the building in front of which the sign is located. 
Abandoned sign or sign structure means a sign or sign structure which was erected on property in conjunction with a particular use, said use having been discontinued for a period of 90 days or more or a sign of which the contents pertain to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies or which has occurred. 
Accelerated erosion means any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result of land-disturbing activities. 
Access means ingress and egress to land bordering streets and roads. 
Accessory apartment means a separate and complete dwelling unit that is contained on the same lot as the structure of a single-family dwelling or business. 
Accessory dwelling means a residence located on premises with a main nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises and, as applicable, his or her family. 
Accessory dwelling unit means a separate and complete dwelling unit that is contained on the same lot as the structure of a single-family dwelling or business. 
Accessory dwelling commercial caretaker means a residence located on premises with a main nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises and, as applicable, his or her family. 
Accessory structure means a structure that is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or use, is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use and is subordinate in areas, extent and purpose to the principal building or principal use served. An accessory structure must be on the lot on which the principal use is located. For the purpose of the flood protection regulations only, accessory structure is the same as appurtenant structure. 
Accessory use means a use of a nature customarily subordinate or incidental to, and located on the same lot as, the principal use of any structure or property. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the City of Asheville Stormwater System or receiving waters, which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Acre means 43,560 square feet. 
Adaptive reuse refers to the process of adapting old structures for new purposes while retaining some of the architectural details that make the building unique. 
Addition for purposes of flood protection regulations, an addition is an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction, unless the addition, renovation or reconstruction to any building, that was constructed prior to the initial flood insurance study for that area, and the addition, renovation or reconstruction does not equal 50 percent of the present fair market value of the structure and the first floor area does not increase more than 20 percent. Where a fire wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. 
Adequate erosion control measure, structure, or device means one which controls the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person conducting the land-disturbing activity. 
Administrative officer/official means one who performs ministerial or administrative functions for a department of the City of Asheville. 
Adult day care home means a facility where an individual, agency or organization provides supervision or care in a home-like environment for a maximum of six adults in need of care because of physical or mental disability in a place other than their usual place of abode. 
Adult day care centers means a facility where an individual, agency or organization provides supervision or care during the day time for more than six adults in need of care because of physical or mental disability in a place other than their usual place of abode. 
Adult establishment means any structure or use of land that is an adult establishment as defined in N.C.G.S., sec. 14-202-10 (or its successor). This definition shall also include any operation that receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar month from the sale of sexually oriented devices as defined in N.C.G.S., sec. 14-202-10 or any operation which has sexually oriented devices as a preponderance (either in terms of the weight and importance or the volume of the materials to be sold) of its items for sale. This definition shall not include any bona fide therapeutic massage service offered by a licensed or registered medical professional or other person certified by a state or nationally recognized organization; nor shall this definition include any private or public fitness center or nonprofit community recreational facility and service organization, either of which provides massage therapy as a service incidental to the operation of a fitness center. 
Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or sorting the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. Regulations addressing agriculture that does not include animals are governed by this chapter. Regulations addressing agriculture involving animals (such as but not limited to bees, dairying, pasturage agriculture, animal or poultry husbandry) are in chapter 3. All agricultural practices may be subject to further state and federal regulations. 
Airside (commonly referred to as "aeronautical surfaces" or "airfield") includes those areas and/or facilities on which aircraft operations are carried out including: runways, taxiways, hangars, apron and gate areas, and all areas between these features necessary for the safe and easy movement of the aircraft and support services. Airside includes the portion of the terminal facility that is past the security screening checkpoint and is not accessible to the general public without proper security credentials or an airline boarding pass. Airside areas outside the terminal facility are also usually access controlled and are not open to the general public. Airside may or may not include open green-space. 
Alley means a public way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration means any change because of construction, repair, maintenance or otherwise to buildings located within an historic district or designated as an historic property. 
Alternative structure means, for antenna-mounting purposes, a structure which is not primarily constructed for the purpose of holding antennas but on which one or more antennas may be mounted. The term "alternative structures" includes, but is not limited to, buildings, silos, water tanks, pole signs, lighting standards, steeples and electric transmission towers. 
American flag means the national flag of the United States of America which shall include thirteen horizontal stripes, alternate red and white; and the union of the flag shall be fifty stars, white in a blue field. 
Amphitheaters and auditoriums. See Performance center. 
Ancillary nonresidential use means employee or customer parking, landscaping and buffer areas, stormwater detention and related facilities associated with a principal non-residential use. The definition shall not include structures, outdoor storage, storage containers, display of goods, storage of abandoned or inoperable vehicles, or vehicles for sale. 
Animated sign means any sign using flashing or intermittent lights, sound, color changes or other mechanical or electrical means to give motion to the sign or the impression of motion or movement to the sign or any sign with visible moving, revolving or relocating parts; provided, however, this shall not include time, date and temperature or electronic message signs as hereinafter defined. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. 
Antenna array means two or more antennas that operate as components of a complete antenna suite for a single wireless telecommunication facility. 
Antenna, concealed means an antenna that is designed and erected on or in a building or alternative structure in such a way that it blends in with the existing façade and/or is located such that it is not readily visible to an individual at adjacent street level. 
Antenna, dual-band/multi-band means an antenna with separate elements for two or more commercial wireless service frequency bands (example: Cellular and PCS or specialized mobile radio). 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Applicant means the party applying for permits or other approval required by this chapter. 
Appraised value means the value assigned to a structure by the Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser. 
Appurtenance means an accessory, something added to the main structure or land such as a stone wall. 
Appurtenant structure means for the purpose of the flood protection regulations only, a structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds, and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building. 
Aquaculture means the hatching, raising and breeding of fish or other aquatic plants or animals for sale or personal use. 
Aquatic buffer means a linear strip of land, free of built-upon area, adjacent to a lake or natural water course. 
Archeological resource means material evidence of past human activity which is found below the surface of the ground or water, portions of which may be visible above the surface. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated zone AO on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: See "special flood hazard area (SFHA)." 
Art gallery means a facility that contains a room or series of rooms where works of art are exhibited on a regular basis. 
Assisted living facilities means a structure or structures containing two or more rooming units limited in occupancy and occupied by persons unable to live independently and may include spouses or partners (except for rooms or units occupied by resident staff personnel), and which provide indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation service and major dining areas, and common recreation, social, and service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents. 
For the purposes of this chapter, no facility offering independent dwelling units for habitation by those who are not resident staff to the facility, shall be considered an assisted living facility. For the purposes of this definition, an independent dwelling unit shall be any unit designed for human habitation which contains facilities for sleeping, bathing, and kitchens or food preparation areas consisting of a device for warming food, a sink to wash dishes and utensils, and a refrigerator. 
ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Attached sign means any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building, including, but not limited to, a wall, window, or projecting sign, or a sign on a canopy, awning or marquee. 
Attic means habitable or uninhabitable space within a building situated within the structure of a pitched roof and above the uppermost regular story. 
Authorized registered professional means a person registered, licensed, or certified pursuant to the North Carolina General Statutes and authorized by law to prepare the analysis, plans and specifications, and provide the certifications required by the various provisions of this chapter. 
Automobile service station. See Motor vehicle service facility. 
Auto repair establishment. See Motor vehicle service facility. 
Auto salvage-wrecking yard means a lot or parcel of land on which the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts occurs. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of two or more motor vehicles, which, for a period exceeding 30 days, have not been capable of operating under their own power and/or from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile salvage-wrecking yard. The use is not allowed in any zoning district in the City of Asheville. 
Awning means a temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building, and which may include a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting building. 
Bank means a mild to steep rise of land which borders and confines the flow of stormwaters or floodwaters and conveys them to some downstream discharge point; not a financial institution. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has not been provided in a "special flood hazard area", it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the "freeboard", establishes the "regulatory flood protection elevation." 
Basement means: 
(1)  For the flood protection regulations found in section 7-12-1 of this chapter, basement shall mean the lowest level or story of a building which has its floor subgrade on all sides. 
(2)  For all other provisions of this chapter, basement shall mean the lowest level or story of a building which has its floor subgrade on any side. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a private resident-occupied dwelling unit with four to eight guest rooms where overnight lodging accommodations, with or without a morning meal, are provided to transients for compensation and where the bed and breakfast inn is operated primarily as a business. 
Berm means an earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
Best management practices manual or BMP manual means the most recent version of the City of Asheville's manual of design, performance, and review criteria for stormwater management practices. Provided however, to the extent such a manual does not exist or its use has been discontinued, then the manual shall be the one adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (NCDENR) and supplemented by the NCDENR Low-Impact Design Manual once adopted. 
Block means a small section of the city enclosed by neighboring and intersection consecutive cross streets often rectangular in shape occupied by or intended for buildings for commercial, institutional or residential uses. Blocks in special circumstances may also include a length of street not bounded by a typical cross street but by significant topographic barriers or manmade features such as a ridge line, steep slope area, ravine, river, parks, bridges, cemeteries, un-subdivided acreage or other jurisdictional boundaries. This definition also includes the term "blockface." 
Bluff means a steep headland, promontory, riverbank or cliff. 
Board of adjustment means a board established by the Asheville City Council pursuant to N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-388 (or its successor). 
Boarding house means a resident-occupied dwelling unit which provides housing for compensation to more than four unrelated individuals; is enclosed within one structure with only one kitchen and other shared common areas such as a dining room, living room or study area, and no dining facilities or kitchens in the lodgers' rooms. In no case shall tenant rooms be rented or leased for intervals of less than one month. 
Borrow means fill material which is required for on-site construction and is obtained from other locations. 
Broadcast tower means a structure situated on a lot that is intended for transmitting television or radio signals. 
Buffer means an area of natural or planted vegetation, or an area of such vegetation in conjunction with berms, fences, or walls serving as a separation between two areas or land uses (see also "bufferyard"). 
Bufferyard means a linear strip of land combined with a vertical element such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, which physically separates and screens incompatible land uses. 
Buffer zone means for the floor protection regulations found in section 7-12-1 of this chapter, buffer zone shall mean the strip of land adjacent to a lake or natural watercourse, the width of which is measured from the edge of the water to the nearest edge of the disturbed area, with the 25 percent of the strip nearer the land disturbing activity containing natural or artificial means of confining visible siltation. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, property or business activity. The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one building. The connection of two buildings by an enclosed corridor connector where the buildings connected are not less than 50 feet apart at all points, and the connecting corridor is not less than 50 feet in length nor more than 15 feet in inside width, one story in height, and the outside walls of which contain not less than 30 percent glazing, shall not be deemed to make them one building provided the corridor has no other use than as a passage from one building to the next. 
Building addition means new construction involving an existing building where the gross floor area of the structure is increased or where a portion of the gross floor area is relocated. 
Building façade means the face of a building that delineates the edge of conditioned floor space. 
Building frontage means for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, building frontage shall mean the linear length of only that portion of a building used by an individual tenant in a multiple tenant development and which faces a public street or alley. 
Building frontage, primary signs means for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, building frontage, primary signs shall mean the linear length of only that portion of a building that serves as the individual tenant's primary entrance in a multiple tenant development. 
Building frontage, secondary signs means for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, building frontage, secondary signs shall mean the linear length of only that portion of a building that serves as the individual tenant's secondary entrance in a multiple tenant development. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the ceiling of the highest occupied floor to the primary level of fire department access; for the purposes of determining height in the central business district, height is the vertical distance measured from a single point beginning at the primary pedestrian entrance to the surface level of the highest occupied floor. 
Building line means the line, parallel to the street line, that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the front lot line. 
Building permit: See "permit, building." 
Built upon area means that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel area such as roads, parking lots, and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. "Built-upon area" does not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool. 
Business incubator means a facility or program operated by an organization, government agency, or institution that provides space, assistance, and training and/or services for start up businesses. The services may include, but shall not be limited to, shared resources for office management, copying, filing, reception duties, and similar support services. Space, services, and resources are provided to start up businesses for a limited time. 
Caliper means a horticultural method of measuring the diameter of nursery stock. For trees less than four inches in diameter, the measurement should be taken at six inches above ground level. For trees greater than four inches in diameter up to and including 12 inches, the caliper measurement must be taken at 12 inches above the ground level. For trees greater than 12 inches in diameter, the trunk is measured at breast height (diameter at breast height or DBH), which is four and one-half feet above the ground. 
Campground means an area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including cabins and tents and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an open air or natural character. 
Camper-trailer park means any place, area, or tract of land maintained, offered, or used for the parking of two or more camper-trailers used or intended to be used for sleeping or non-permanent living. 
Canopy means a permanent attached structure which projects from and is supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or decoration and which extends beyond the building. 
Cat café means any premises used to house or contain homeless, orphaned, or unwanted cats and that is owned, operated, or maintained by an organization that is licensed by the State as an animal shelter and devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals for the purpose of adoption, and which incorporates retail sales to support the interaction of patrons with cats, such as a café, bookshop, or other permitted use. 
Cemeteries, animal means a parcel of land, including associated buildings and/or structures, used for the interring of animal remains. This definition shall not be construed to include the private burial of family pets on private property. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document showing approval by the historic resources commission for work proposed in a historic district or on a historic landmark. 
Certificate of compliance means a document issued by a building safety department upon satisfactory completion of a building, plumbing, mechanical, electric or gas system, and/or issued by the fire department upon satisfactory completion of a fire protection system. A certificate of compliance does not grant authority to occupy a building prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building safety department and the fire department upon final inspection of a new or remodeled/renovated building, or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building for compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code or the Asheville Fire Prevention Code and other applicable laws and ordinances. A certificate of occupancy is the sole authorization for occupancy of a building or part of a building as described herein. 
Change of use means the act of eliminating the type of land use in a structure or on a lot and replacing it with another type of land use; or the act of adding another type of land use in a building or on a lot which did not previously exist there. A change of use may or may not involve any type of new construction or building renovation. 
Changeable copy sign means any permanently unframed sign, illuminated or not, which is principally devoted to and designed for changeable copy text and graphics, but which specifically excludes time/date/temperature signs and electronic message signs as hereinafter defined. Changeable copy signs may involve either manual or automatic changeable copy. No changeable copy sign may have its copy changed more than two times in a 24-hour period. Any automatic changeable copy sign which changes more than two times in a 24-hour period shall be defined to be an electronic message sign. Portable or moveable signs are not considered changeable copy signs. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to confine the water. 
Channel alterations means a change of the water-carrying capacity or flow characteristics of a natural or artificial channel by clearing, excavation, bank stabilization or other means. 
Channel stabilization means erosion prevention and velocity control in a channel using jetties, drops, revetments, vegetation, and other measures. 
Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products. 
Child day care centers means a facility operated by an individual, agency, or organization which provides supervision or care on a regular basis to children who are not related by blood or marriage to, and who are not the legal wards or foster children of, the supervising adult. 
Child day care homes means a facility run by an individual or family, which provides supervision or care on a regular basis in the individual's or family's home for children who are not related by blood or marriage to, and who are not the legal wards or foster children of, the supervising adult. Maximum enrollment shall be eight children. 
City means City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
City of Asheville Stormwater System means the conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, right-of-way, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, and other stormwater facilities) which is (a) owned or operated by the municipalities of the City of Asheville; (b) designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, (c) not a combined sewer system; and (d) not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). 
Civic, social service, and fraternal organizations means facilities designed for a group of people formally organized for a common interest (usually cultural, religious, or entertainment) and who have regular meetings and formal written membership requirements, which may provide living quarters when oriented to college or university students. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, codified at 33 USC § 1251 et seq. 
Clearance means the vertical distance from the established finished grade to the lowest edge of the sign. 
Clinic, medical, dental, psychiatric, optical means a building or portion of a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients in fields such as (but not limited to) medical, dental, psychological, or chiropractic care that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Cluster development means the grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project provided there is no increase in the overall density of the development. This term includes non-residential development as well as single-family residential subdivisions and multi-family developments that do not involve the subdivision of land. 
Cluster home means the configuration of dwellings such that each single-family dwelling is on its own lot; and such that one or more of the building's sides is located directly on a lot line; and such that one or more of the sides of each building directly abuts one or more of the sides of adjacent buildings. 
Clustering of buildings means a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. 
Collector street means a street whose principal function is to carry traffic between cul-de-sac, local, and subcollector streets and streets of higher classification but which may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
Collocation means the installation of new wireless facilities on previously-approved structures, including towers, buildings, utility poles, and water tanks. 
Combiner means a device which allows two or more wireless service providers to share an antenna or antenna array by combining signals being transmitted and separating signals being received. 
Commemorative sign means any sign erected in remembrance of a historical person, place or event or which denotes, honors, celebrates or acknowledges a historical person, place or event. 
Commercial wireless service provider means persons who operate radio systems requiring an FCC license and who employ those facilities to provide point-to-point microwave links for wireline communication services, fixed wireless (including microwave), or mobile wireless communication services to third parties for compensation. Commercial wireless service providers include, but are not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, competitive local exchange carriers (CLEC) utilizing point-to-multipoint microwave, and point-to-point microwave links for wireline communication services. 
Common plan of development means a construction or land disturbing activity is part of a larger common plan of development if it is completed in one or more of the following ways: in separate stages; in separate phases; or in combination with other construction activities. It is identified by the documentation (including, but not limited to, a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, loan application, drawing, plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, permit application, zoning request, or computer design) or physical demarcation (including, but not limited to, boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot; it can include one operator of many operators. 
Community facilities means an area and/or structure where a group of people living in the same locality (community) and having common interests gather for neighborhood meetings and/or recreational activities. This includes community, non-profit facilities such as, but not limited to, places of worship, recreation/community centers (which may include ballfields), schools, libraries, and volunteer fire departments. 
Community identification sign means any sign erected to identify a specific community in an area or locality for which boundaries and characteristics have been established by that community and recognized by the planning and development director for the city. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. 
Comprehensive plan means the official public planning document adopted by city council as the long range advisory guide addressing the general, social, economic, and physical development of the community. 
Commercial uses means service and retail facilities accessory to a multi-family development. 
Commercial uses accessory to residential uses means service and retail facilities accessory to a multi-family development. 
Conditional use means a use permitted only through approval of the city council under the standards of section 7-16-2; that must also meet all regulatory standards for the applicable district as outlined in section 7-8. 
Conditional use permit means permit authorizing the use of a property(ies) for a specific use which has been approved in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 7-5-5 of this chapter. 
Confined animal feeding operations means an operation or business where the animal (or poultry) is confined inside a building for at least 60 percent of its life with waste products collected from the building and treated and/or disposed of either on-site or off-site. 
Construction means the erection of any on-site improvements on any parcel of ground whether the site is presently improved, unimproved or becomes unimproved by demolition, destruction of the improvements located thereon by fire, windstorm or other casualty. 
Construction screening means temporary and opaque material attached to a perimeter fence or barrier surrounding an active construction site for the purpose of minimizing the visual nuisance and safety issues of the subject site. 
Construction sign means a sign whose message is limited to identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other persons involved with the construction project or to the name of the building being constructed, the intended purpose of the building and the expected completion date. 
Controlled access facility means interstate, other freeway, expressway, or parkway links that provide for the expeditious movement of high volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. 
Convention, conference, and/or exhibit center means a facility designed to accommodate significant numbers of persons and used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product display, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including food and beverage preparation and service for on-premises consumption. 
Corner lot means a lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more streets. 
Cottage development means a cluster of small detached single-family residences constructed to specific standards and arranged around common open space generally at higher density than the underlying zoning would allow for traditional detached single-family residential development. 
Cottage home means a small detached single-family residence constructed to specific design standards and arranged around common open space as part of a cottage development. 
Crematories, animal means a facility designed for the cremation of animal remains. 
Critical facilities means adult day care centers, child day care centers, assisted living facilities, hospitals, and medical centers. 
Critical root zone means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed and protected from construction disturbance in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone is delineated by a concentric circle with the tree trunk as the center. The radius of the critical root zone equals one foot for every one inch of tree diameter. Example: a 20-inch diameter tree will have a critical root zone radius of 20 feet. 
Cul-de-sac means a short local street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
DBH: See "diameter at breast height." 
Datum: See "regulatory flood datum." 
Days means unless otherwise specified herein, calendar days. 
Deciduous means a plant with foliage that is shed annually. 
Demographic means the study of the characteristics of human populations, such as size, growth, density, distribution, and vital statistics. 
Demolition means the complete or constructive removal of a building on any site. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
Denuded area means any area deprived of its protective vegetative cover and left in that exposed condition. 
Design storm means a soil conservation service Type II, 24-hour duration storm with a specified return or interval or as otherwise specified by the stormwater administrator. 
Designated landscape buffer means a strip of real property with a minimum width of 20 feet where existing vegetation or new plantings are designed to mitigate adverse impacts between dissimilar zoning designations as described in subsection 7-11-3(d)1. 
Designation means the creation of an historic district or an historic property through the passage of an ordinance by the appropriate governing body. 
Detached house: See "dwelling, single-family detached." 
Detached canopy means a disconnected, separate roof-like structure, including protective coverings over islands at gas stations. 
Detention basin means a facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to concurrently detain the excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet. 
Developer means a person undertaking any or all the activities covered by this chapter, or for whose benefit such activities are commenced or carried on. 
Development means any human change or alteration to the unimproved or improved state of land, including, but not limited to changes or alteration to vegetation, soil, geology, hydrology, buildings or other structures for any residential, commercial, industrial, utility, or other uses, including, but not limited to, all areas for vehicular access, circulation, and parking and including, but not limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating and drilling operations and any subdivision of land. 
Development identification sign means a sign bearing only the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Development plan means a plan or plans, prepared to scale, accurately showing all information required by these regulations with respect to the development proposal. 
Development, zero lot line means a type of development which allows a residential dwelling to be built with its outside edge close to, or immediately adjacent to the line delineating the property on which it is built from the property next to it. The intent of this development pattern is that, when done in multiples, such an arrangement should maximize yard use by each occupant, without compromising distances between dwelling units. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the standard measure of trees which are existing on a site. The diameter of the trunk is measured at four and one-half feet from the ground. If the tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk should be measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Directional sign means a sign or guide whose sole purpose is to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises on which it is displayed. Examples include: "in," "out,", "entrance," "exit," and "driveway." 
Director of building safety means the director of building safety for the City of Asheville, North Carolina or his/her staff member delegated with the authority and responsibility to carry out his/her duties. 
Director of public works means the director of public works for the City of Asheville, North Carolina or his/her staff member delegated with the authority and responsibility to carry out his/her duties. 
Director of public works and engineering means the person designated to serve as city engineer by the Asheville City Manager. 
Discernible means, for purposes of regulating wireless telecommunication facilities, capable of being distinguished with the unaided eye from its surroundings as a telecommunication tower. 
Discharge point means the point at which run-off leaves a tract of land. 
Disposal means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
District means a division of an area or geographic unit marked out by law for a particular purpose. 
Diversion means a channel or ridge or combination thereof which is constructed across sloping land either on the contour or at a predetermined grade which purpose is to intercept and divert surface runoff. 
Dormitory means any facility that provides living accommodations with or without meals for persons not members of the same family group, in one room or a series of closely associated rooms, under joint occupancy and single management; and the use of which is associated with an institution or business which provides as its primary function, services, employment, or education to people who require temporary housing during the time of their association with said business or institution. 
Drainage area means a contiguous area of land of such elevation and configuration, with respect to a given point on the earth's surface or a given station along a watercourse, that the entire surface run-off from it flows to that point, also referred to as a watershed. 
Drive-through facility or establishment means a customer service facility located either within the principal structure or within an accessory structure, which is intended to enable the customer to transact business with a customer service person located within the principal structure (or with an automated service machine) without exiting the motor vehicle. It is presumed that the motor vehicle exits the premises immediately upon the transaction of business. 
Driveway width means narrowest width of driveway measured parallel with the edge of the traveled way (street or highway). 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets, sleeping rooms, and a kitchen. A dwelling unit rented or leased for intervals of less than one month is considered a "lodging" use under this UDO. 
Dwellings, duplex means a building that contains two dwelling units on one lot. The units must share a common wall, floor, or ceiling. 
Dwellings, multi-family means any building or buildings which contain more than two residential dwelling units on a single lot including, but not limited to, apartment houses and condominiums. 
Dwellings, single-family detached means a single dwelling unit on its own lot that is developed with open yards on all sides, but excluding manufactured homes, mobile homes, recreational motor vehicles or trailers. (See Fig. 2-1) 
Dwellings, single-family zero lot line means the location of a single-family dwelling on a lot so that one of the building's sides is located directly on a side lot line. (See Fig. 2-1) 
Dwellings, townhouse means two or more single-family dwelling units having a common wall or zero setback separating units where land underneath each dwelling unit is sold with that unit. (See Fig. 2-1) 
Dwelling, upper story means multifamily dwelling(s) in an upper story. 
Easement means a grant of one or more property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
Eating and/or drinking establishment means an establishment (such as but not limited to a restaurant, pub, winebar, brewpub) that offers the sale of food and/or beverages (that may include alcoholic beverages) for consumption on or off the premises. 
Eave line means the point where a cornice or projection occurs at the top of an exterior building wall. 
Electric transmission towers means metal, wooden or concrete towers and poles used to suspend wires transporting electricity between generating plants and substations supplying electricity to distribution and feeder lines. 
Electronic gaming operation means a business enterprise, whether principal or ancillary, where persons utilize electronic machines, including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games including, but not limited to, sweepstakes, lotteries, games and/or games of chance where cash, merchandise, or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not value of such distribution is determined by electronic games played or be predetermined odds which have a finite pool of winners. This term includes, but is not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes, or cybercafes. Electronic gaming operations do not include operations associated with the official N.C. State Education Lottery or any nonprofit operation that is otherwise lawful under state law (for example, church or civic organization fundraisers) nor shall it include arcade games of skill. 
Electronic message signs means signs which display changeable information in an easily comprehensible way and for which the message changes more than two times in a 24-hour period. All messages shall be visible for a minimum of three seconds and shall be kept accurate. Electronic message signs shall include tri-panel message systems. These will not be deemed to constitute changeable copy or animated signs and are permitted only on marquee signs. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Elevation certificate the Elevation Certificate is an important administrative tool of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). It is to be used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with section 7-12-1 of this chapter, to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment or Revision (LOMA or LOMR-F). Elevation Certificates must be prepared and certified by a registered professional land surveyor, engineer, or architect who is authorized by commonwealth, state, or local law to certify elevation information. Community officials who are authorized by local law or ordinance to provide floodplain management information may also sign the certificate. 
Encroachment means placement of a structure(s), paved or graveled areas, soil, and/or fill material or dumping of materials within a specified area. For the purposes of the flood protection regulations only, encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Energy dissipater means a structure or shaped channel section with mechanical armoring placed at the outlet of pipes or conduits to receive and break down the energy from high velocity flow. 
Ephemeral streams mean watercourses without a well-defined channel that flow only in direct response to recent precipitation. Ephemeral streams are generally dry within 72 to 120 hours after a rainfall event. Any waters not determined to be perennial or intermittent under the definitions set forth in this section shall be deemed ephemeral waters. 
Equipment enclosure means an enclosed structure, cabinet, or shelter used to contain radio or other equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals. 
Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, install, place, replace, locate, relocate, affix, attach, display, alter, use, create, paint, draw, illuminate, or in any other way bring into being or establish. 
Erosion means the wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity or any combination thereof. 
Evergreen means a plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round. 
Existing construction for purpose of flood protection regulation in the determination of rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures". 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots or spaces for rent or sale, for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of this chapter and for purposes of the flood protection regulations only, it shall be completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management regulations. 
Expansion means any construction that increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area. 
Externally illuminated sign means any sign which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it, for example, by means of floodlights or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, exterior architectural features shall be construed to mean the style, material, size and location of all such signs. 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction means areas located outside the corporate limits of the City of Asheville which have been included as areas for planning and regulation of development of the City of Asheville pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-360 (or its successor). 
FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
Façade means the exterior wall of a structure or building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building, including parapets and wingwalls. 
Façade, RF-transparent means a façade used to conceal antennas and other components of a wireless telecommunication facility which is constructed of materials that allow the free passage of radio frequency or other electromagnetic signals. 
Facility means a stormwater management facility, and shall include all land, materials, and appurtenances used in construction and operation of said facility. Facilities include, but are not necessarily limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, and storm sewers. 
Fall zone means the area in which a telecommunication tower may be expected to fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage; or a group of not more than five unrelated persons; or a number of persons not exceeding two, who are separate from, and in addition to, the persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage. For the purposes of this chapter, all members of a family shall live and cook together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit. 
Family care home means a residential dwelling unit provided by an agency, organization or individual with or without resident support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six resident handicapped persons with disabilities, as "person with disabilities" is defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 168-21 (or its successor). This definition shall include homes designed for the support of those in recovery from substance abuse or other homes for disabled persons that are not required licensing by the state. 
Farm means land used for the production and activities relating to or incidental to the production of crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms of agricultural products having a domestic or foreign market. See "agriculture." 
Farmers market means an open air market that consists of individual vendors, who set up booths, tables or stands, to sell produce, meat products, fruits and sometimes prepared foods and beverages. The products sold at the market may include non-food items however, no more than 25 percent of the items sold shall be non-food items. 
FCC means Federal Communications Commission. 
Fill means the placing, storing or dumping of any material such as, but not limited to, earth, clay, sand, gravel, concrete, rubble, or waste of any kind, upon the ground, in depressions or in excavations, which tends to result in increasing the ground surface elevation; also material so placed. 
Fire chief means the principal fire code enforcement official of the City of Asheville. 
Fire official means the designee of the fire chief for purpose of enforcement of the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
Fish hatchery, fish farm means a facility used for the production of fish, not including processing and packaging for consumption or use. 
Flag lot means a parcel of land shaped like a flag with access to the bulk of the area of the lot being provided by a narrow strip connecting to a publically maintained street or a private street built to public standards, and meeting the dimensional standards in this chapter. 
Flashing sign means a sign illuminated by direct or indirect artificial light that flashes on and off in regular or irregular sequences, including, but not limited to strobe light. 
Flea market, outdoor means a commercial activity, not contained in a fully enclosed building, where two or more spaces, stalls, tables, or stands are made available for a fee to the general public. Such spaces, stalls, tables, or stands are used for the purpose of the display and sale, exchange, or barter of merchandise. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudslides (i.e. mudflows) which are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)a. of this definition. 
Flood control works means any manmade construction, such as, but not limited to, a dam, levee, groin, or jetty, designed to alter the flood potential of the body of water on or adjacent to which it is built. 
Flood fringe area means the area of the floodplain lying outside the floodway but within the area of special flood hazard. A significant probability of damage due to flooding exists in this area. 
Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
Flood maps means the flood boundary and floodway maps for Asheville, N.C. as provided by the FEMA, including amendments and updates, pursuant to the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (Public Law 93-234) as amended. 
Floodplain means any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by flooding. Includes both the floodway and the flood fringe area. The susceptibility of this area to flooding may pose hazards for building construction. 
Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain development permit means any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this section, prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means this section and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Flood profiles means a graph or longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood to a location along a river or stream, as provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, pursuant to the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (Public Law 92-234) as amended. 
Floodprone area: See "Floodplain". 
Flood zone means a geographic area shown on the flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
Floodproofing means structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures subject to flooding which will reduce or eliminate flood damages to the structure, building contents, water and sewer facilities, and utilities. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas in which development must be restricted in order to permit the unrestricted flow of the waters of the regulatory flood. 
Floor means the top horizontal surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. For the purposes of the flood protection regulations, found in section 7-12-1 of this chapter, the term shall not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Fraternities and sororities. See Civic, social service, and fraternal facilities. 
Freeboard means the height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard establishes the "regulatory flood protection elevation". 
Freestanding pole sign means a sign which is permanently affixed to the ground by a pole or other structure and which is not part of the building. This shall not be considered to include signs or canopies. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Functionally equivalent service means FCC-licensed providers of commercial mobile radio services (CMRS) classified as cellular, personal communication services (PCS), paging, specialized mobile radio (SMR) and enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR). 
Funeral establishment means a building used for the activity of preparation of deceased human beings for burial or cremation is the primary use of the premises. Secondary uses may include the display of the deceased, consummation of rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation, the storage of funeral vehicles and funeral supplies necessary for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, and for the sale of caskets, urns, and other funeral supplies. 
Gasoline sales means any building, structure, or area of land used for the retail sale of automobile fuels, oils, and accessories, which may also include the sale of propane or kerosene. 
Gated community means a subdivision, neighborhood or residential community where any vehicular or defined pedestrian access to more than one parcel is unavailable to the general public as the result of a barrier that may include, but would not be limited to, gates, security personnel, fences or walls. This definition would not include gates or other barriers limiting access to an individual parcel. 
Gift shop. See Retail sales. 
Golf course means outdoor facility with at least nine holes, including par three courses, and including driving ranges as accessory uses, but not including putt-putt, miniature golf, or driving ranges as a principal use. 
Governmental sign means any sign erected by or on the order of an authorized public official which includes, but is not limited to, traffic control signs, street name and identification signs, warning and directional signs, public notices or signs of a similar nature. 
Governmental user means federal, state or local governments, or agencies or instrumentalities thereof, volunteer fire departments or rescue squads which operate radio systems (including microwave) requiring an FCC license and which employ those facilities exclusively for intra-governmental or inter-governmental public service, public safety or administrative purposes. 
Grade means, for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, the lowest point at which a sign is attached to the ground. 
Grading means any operation intended for or resulting in the change of the surface elevation or contours of a site; to change the surface cover, either natural or manmade, of a site; to add, relocate, or remove buildings or other structures; to relocate watercourses or bodies or water, either natural or manmade; and shall include, but not be limited to, ditching, excavating, filling, trenching, dredging, tunneling, road building, clearing and grubbing of trees and stumps. 
Grading means for the purposes of the Hillside Area Development standards (section of this chapter), grading shall mean any manipulation of the ground forms and the natural vegetation growing upon it. 
Grading permit: See "permit, grading and stormwater." 
Greenhouse means a building or structure constructed for the protection or cultivation of edible or ornamental plants. A greenhouse located in a residential district is subject to accessory structure size standards. Plants may be grown for sale or resale to an off-site commercial establishment only if deliveries are made directly from the site by the owner of the property; and no commercial traffic to or from the site may be allowed. 
Greenway means a linear park established as an open space connector which may link other parks, nature reserves, cultural features, historic sites, and neighborhoods to each other. 
Gross floor area means the sum of the total horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of any party walls, if the portions of the building separated by such party walls are to be treated separately. The term gross floor area shall include any area with a ceiling height of seven feet or greater, all elevator shafts, stairway shafts, and other areas of the building except up to 1,000 square feet of the floor space occupied by mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment designed to serve only the occupants of the building shall not be included in the calculation of gross floor area when such devices are located in the basement, first floor, or penthouse of said building. Additionally, gross floor area includes areas covered by canopies and like structures under which an active use is occurring such as drive-through service, gasoline pumping, loading and/or storage of materials, and similar activities. Gross floor area does not include the floor area in parking structures/decks. 
Ground cover means any natural vegetative growth or other material which renders the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion. 
Ground floor means the floor of a building that is at or nearest to the level of the ground around the building. It does not include the floor of a basement. 
Ground sign means a freestanding sign flush to the ground and not elevated upon poles or stanchions and not attached to the building. 
Groundwater recharge means the infiltration of water into the earth, which may increase the total amount of water stored underground or only replenish supplies depleted through pumping or natural discharge. 
Group home means a residential home provided by an agency, organization or individual for persons who need sheltered living conditions for rehabilitation, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in N.C.G.S., sec. 122C-3(11)b (or its successor). 
Guarantee in lieu of construction of improvements means cash, irrevocable letters of credit, bonds, or similar financial instruments deposited with and accepted by the city to insure that improvements required as part of a development will be satisfactorily completed. 
Guest room means an individually secured sleeping room or a suite, with or without sanitation facilities, but which does not contain a kitchen. 
Habitable structure means for the purpose of the flood protection regulations only, any structure which by virtue of its design, size, or appurtenances, is suitable for occupation as a residence or use for commercial purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, houses, condominiums, townhomes, restaurants, retail establishments, manufacturing buildings, commercial buildings, office buildings, manufactured homes, restroom facilities, and similar uses. Final decision as to whether any structure is considered habitable will be determined by the floodplain administrator. 
Hardship means a practical difficulty in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. Unless otherwise indicated, financial difficulties, in and of themselves, do not constitute a hardship. 
Hazardous material means (a) any substance defined under Section 101(14) of CERCLA; (b) any biological agent and/or other disease-causing agent as defined in Section 101(33) of CERCLA; (c) any substance listed by the U.S. Department of Transportation as a hazardous material in 49 CFT Part 172.101 and Appendices; and (d) hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR Part 261.3 or 49 CFR Part 171.8. 
Hazardous materials storage means businesses manufacturing or storing materials listed as HI1 hazardous materials identified in the North Carolina State Building Code. 
Hazardous waste management facility means, as defined in NCGS 130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste. 
Height: See "building height." 
Height means, for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is highest, and the base of the sign at grade. 
Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
High quality water zones means areas which are within one mile of and drain to high quality waters. 
High quality waters means those waters classified as such in 15A NCAC 2B.0101(e)(5) - General Procedures, which is incorporated herein by reference to include further amendments, pursuant to N.C.G.S., sec. 150B-14(c). 
Historic district means an overlay district established by the Asheville City Council for an area deemed to be of special significance in terms of its history, prehistory, architecture, and/or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and/or association. 
Historic landmark means any individual site, building, structure, object or artifact, above or below ground or water, which is found to be of special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical, architectural or cultural importance and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association and which is designated a historic landmark by either the Asheville City Council or the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners following recommendation by the Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County. 
Historic resources commission means a joint preservation commission established under Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes (or its successor), with members appointed by the Asheville City Council and by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners. 
Historic structure means, for flood protection regulations only, any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic dis trict or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic preservation programs that have been certified by either (1) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or (2) directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs; (d) designated pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City of Asheville or Buncombe County. 
Home occupations means an accessory use of a dwelling unit or an accessory structure for limited non-residential purposes which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence. 
Home occupation sign means a sign used for a home occupation as defined in section 7-2-5 of this chapter. 
Homestay means a private, resident occupied dwelling unit, with up to two guest rooms where overnight lodging accommodations are provided to transients for compensation and where the use is subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. A homestay is considered a "lodging" use under this UDO. 
Hotel, extended stay means a commercial lodging establishment, under single management with on-site supervisory personnel, containing 21 or more individual units each providing accommodations for sleeping, sanitation and a kitchen and which may contain ancillary facilities or services such as restaurants, bars, coffee shops, exercise rooms, swimming pools, spas and meeting rooms. 
Hotel, large means a commercial lodging establishment, under single management with on-site supervisory personnel, containing 21 or more guest rooms offered to the general public for transient lodging accommodations and which may contain ancillary facilities or services such as restaurants, bars, coffee shops, exercise rooms, swimming pools, spas and meeting rooms. 
Hotel, small means a commercial lodging establishment, under single management with on-site supervisory personnel, containing seven to 20 guest rooms offered to the general public for transient lodging accommodations and which may contain ancillary facilities or services such as restaurants, bars, coffee shops, exercise rooms, swimming pools, spas and meeting rooms. 
Housing certificate means a document issued by the building safety department upon satisfactory completion of an inspection of a dwelling or dwelling unit for compliance with the Asheville Minimum Housing Code. 
Hydraulic: See "structure, hydraulic." 
Identification sign means a sign used to identify, indicate or advertise the name, logo or other identifying symbol of a building, business, profession, institution, service, or entertainment conducted on the lot upon which the sign is located. 
Illicit connection means a connection to the City of Asheville Stormwater System which results in a discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for the City of Asheville MS4). 
Illicit discharge means any activity not exempted herein which results in a discharge to the City of Asheville Stormwater System or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Impervious means the condition of being impenetrable by water. 
Impervious surface means any surface which in whole or in part, restricts or prevents the natural absorption of water into the ground. Such surfaces may include, but not be limited to, compacted earth, traffic-bearing gravel, concrete, asphalt, or other paving material, and all area covered by the footprint of buildings or structures. Uncovered slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool, pond, or other water body are considered pervious. 
Improper disposal means any disposal other than through an illicit connection that results in an illicit discharge, including, but not limited to the disposal of used oil and toxic materials resulting from the improper management of such substances. 
Incidental sign means a single face professional or announcement sign attached wholly to a building, window or door containing information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored and other similar accessory information. 
Industrial uses means uses that involve the assembly, packaging, processing, production, and manufacturing of goods. 
Industrial uses, light means uses that involve the assembly, packaging, processing, production, and manufacturing of goods if such activities are conducted wholly within an enclosed building; and if operated in a manner that prevents external effects of the activity such as (but not limited to) smoke, soot, dirt, vibration, odor from being detectable at any property line. 
Infill development refers to new development that occurs within established urban areas where the site or area is either vacant or has previously been used for another urban purpose. 
Inflatable balloon sign means a sign which is inflated with air or other gases. Self-propelling aircraft and hot air balloons not tethered to the ground or a structure which include advertising are specifically excluded. 
Initiate means to start work or construction of a project; by grading the site, preparing the site for foundation or footings, etc. 
Intermittent stream means a natural drainage way that is shown as a dashed blue line on the most recent version of the USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle maps or depicted as a dashed line on the most recent version of the maps of the Soil Survey of Buncombe County from the U.S. Department of Agriculture shall be considered an intermittent stream for the purposes of this section. 
Internally illuminated sign means any sign designed to provide artificial light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign. 
Inundation means a covering of the ground surface with water. 
Island or median means an unpaved area within a parking lot or street, usually surrounded by a curb or other raised element, which is surrounded by a paved or gravel surface on at least three sides. 
Joint identification sign means a sign bearing the name of individual tenants located within a multiple tenant development and which may include the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Junkyard means a parcel of land on which waste material or inoperative vehicles and other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold. The use is not allowed in any zoning district in the City of Asheville. 
Jurisdictional perennial or intermittent surface waters means those surface waters shown on either the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geological Survey (USGS)." 
Kennel means any premises where domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, are boarded, trained, or bred for commercial or animal control purposes. 
Kitchen means an area within a structure that is used or designed to be used for the preparation or cooking of food and that contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Cooking appliances or rough in facilities for such appliances including, but not limited to: ovens, convection ovens, stoves, stove tops, built-in grills or built-in microwave ovens or similar appliances, 240 volt electrical outlets or any gas lines, or 
(2)  A sink less than 18 inches in depth with a waste line drain 1½ inches or greater in diameter, or 
(3)  A refrigerator exceeding five cubic feet in capacity or space opening with an electrical outlet that may reasonably be used for a refrigerator exceeding five cubic feet in capacity. 
Lake or natural watercourse means any stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay, creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary, and any reservoir, lake or pond, natural or impounded, in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension, and which could be damaged by accumulation of sediment. 
Land-disturbing activity means any use of the land by any person in residential, industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, highway and road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the natural cover (including cutting and removal of trees) or existing stable topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. 
Landside includes those parts of the airport serving passengers and general public including: roadways, parking facilities, surface transportation, the pre-security portion of the terminal, and other public areas of the airport buildings. Landside is generally open to public access and has no special security access requirements. 
Landowner means any person who owns a legal or equitable interest in real property, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and personal representative of such owner. The landowner may allow a person holding a valid option to purchase to act as his agent or representative for purposes of submitting a plan or application under this chapter. 
Lawn means an area that consists of open, grass-covered land and is maintained at a low, even height, in close proximity to a residential or commercial structure. 
Letter of credit means a written instrument issued by a financial institution at the request of a customer where the financial institution promises to honor drafts or demands for payment from a person named in the instrument upon compliance with conditions set forth in the instrument. 
Level III development is a land use that meets the designated thresholds found in 7-5-9(a) and 7-5-9.1(a). 
Level spreader means a stormwater BMP consisting of a non-erodible linear structure constructed at virtually zero percent grade that serves the purpose of converting concentrated stormwater flow into diffuse sheet flow that discharges into a vegetated area. The main purposes of level spreaders are to prevent erosion and to increase the interaction between stormwater and the vegetation and soils in a filter strip or aquatic buffer. Under diffuse, sheet flow conditions, the vegetation and soils bring about pollutant removal via filtration, infiltration, sorption, and volatilization. 
Light emitting diode (LED) means diodes (electronic components that let electricity pass in only one direction) that emit visible light when electricity is applied, much like a light bulb. When many LEDs are side-by-side, they can create pictures and images. 
Live-work unit means a building or space within a building that is used jointly for office/business uses allowed in the applicable zoning district and for residential use where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. For the purposes of applying density requirements, a live-work unit shall be regarded as the equivalent of 0.5 residential unit. 
Loading and service area means an area which is used for trash or garbage collection, vehicular loading and unloading, outdoor storage or repair, or for covered storage where the structure has no walls to screen views. 
Local government means any county, incorporated village, town or city, or any combination of counties, incorporated villages, towns, and cities, acting through a joint program pursuant to the provisions of the Act. 
Local street means a street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. 
Logo means a business symbol or trademark. 
Lot means, for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof, upon which one or more main structures for a single use are to be erected. 
Lot coverage means the amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by a building, accessory building or impervious surface, usually measured in terms of percentage of a lot. 
Lot of record means a lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat as of December 31, 1959. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured along the street frontage. 
Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building. 
Lowest floor means, for the flood protection regulations found in section 7-12-1 of this chapter, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles and/or accessory storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Maintain means for the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, maintain shall mean to clean, paint, repair or replace defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic design or structure of the sign. 
Maintenance for the purposes of stormwater, soil erosion and sedimentation control, illicit discharge and connection regulations of section 7-12-2 means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working conditions, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter and to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Major subdivision: See "subdivision, major." 
Major thoroughfare street means major streets that provide for the expeditious movement of high volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and which does not meet the standards established by the North Carolina Residential Building Code. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for sale for manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home park (community) means a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for dwelling purposes. This definition shall include recreational buildings, service buildings, and areas necessary to provide laundry, sanitation, storage, vending machines, and other similar services provided by the facility operator for the use and convenience of the manufactured home occupants. 
Map, official zoning: See "zoning map." 
Marquee means a sign of a theater, auditorium, fairground or museum which advertises current and scheduled events. Marquees may include, incorporate or consist of electronic message signage. 
Market value means the building value, not including the land value, and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values. 
Massing means the physical volume or bulk of a structure. 
Maximum extent practicable means to control and treat stormwater runoff in the most effective way that can be obtained at a reasonable cost given the state of the art stormwater management and the specific conditions of the site and project. In no case shall maximum extent practicable represent a standard of management that is less effective than any applicable standard set forth in North Carolina law, including, but not limited to, 15A NCAC 2H .1008, 15A NCAC 2H .0126 and 15A NCAC 2H .1014, or in any applicable part of the City of Asheville's Best Management Practices Manual. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For flood protection regulations only, mean sea level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
Mechanical equipment means equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which is related to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and similar purposes. 
Mezzanine means a low-ceilinged story between two main stories of a building; especially an intermediate story that projects in the form of a balcony. 
Menu board means a freestanding or wall mounted sign primarily designed for the display of menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through service. 
Microbrewery means a small facility for the brewing of beer that produces less than 15,000 barrels per year. It may often include a tasting room and retail space to sell the beer to patrons on the site. 
Microcell means a wireless telecommunication facility for which all electronics (if not located within an existing and approved building) are contained in equipment enclosures which occupy less than 40 cubic feet and for which all antennas are eight feet or less in height and have a combined surface area of less than 30 square feet. 
Minor subdivision: See "subdivision, minor." 
Minor thoroughfare street means minor thoroughfares perform the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system. Minor thoroughfares may be used to supplement the major thoroughfare system by facilitating a minor through-traffic movement and may also serve; abutting property. 
Mixed use development means a development project integrating different types of land uses within one or more structures; for example residential units above office and retail facilities. 
Mobile food site means an individual parcel where mobile food vending is permitted to occur on a permanent basis. 
Mobile food vending means commercial food service sales by a mobile food vendor on a parcel of land outside of right-of-way areas. Sites approved for permanent mobile food vending are classified as a mobile food site. 
Mobile food vendor means an individual who owns and operates a vehicle (truck or trailer with a maximum of two axles) that includes a mobile kitchen or similar facility that supports the sale and/or preparation of food and non-alcoholic beverages which is licensed and approved to walk-up customers. Use of the term "mobile kitchen" in the ordinance [chapter] will be understood to include mobile kitchens and similar facilities. 
Mobile home: See "manufactured home." 
Moderate slope means any constructed slope with a grade of 25 percent (4:1) to a grade of 50 percent (2:1). 
Modification means, for purposes of regulating wireless telecommunication facilities, the addition, removal, repositioning (other than downtilt adjustments), alteration or other material change in the number or type of antennas employed in a wireless telecommunication facility; changes in the height, size, shape or appearance of telecommunication towers; and increases in the number or size of equipment enclosures or other improvements at an existing or approved wireless telecommunication facility. 
Modular home means any structure intended to be used as a residential dwelling unit which is constructed away from the site for which it is ultimately intended, meets all standards established by the North Carolina Residential Building Code, is certified as a modular home by the North Carolina Department of Insurance, is transported to its ultimate destination, assembled, and placed on a permanent foundation, and is not designed to be readily moved from that site. 
Motor vehicle and boat service and repair means a building, structure, or area of land designed and used for the care, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles or recreational boats including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and bodywork. 
Motor vehicle service facility means any building, structure, or area of land used for minor motor vehicle repairs and maintenance, including the incidental sale of oil and related accessories if allowed in the zoning district. 
Movie theaters means an establishment devoted to showing motion pictures. Such establishments may include related services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. 
Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) means a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on or under the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the planning and development director only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs. 
Multi-family residential building means a building containing three or more dwelling units. 
Multiple tenant development means a development in which there exists a number of individual and separate occupiable spaces and in which there are appurtenant shared ancillary facilities (such as parking areas or pedestrian mall areas) with each space having a separate and operable public entrance opening onto or leading to the area of shared facilities. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means a vertical control, corrected in 1929, used as reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural erosion means the wearing away of the earth's surface by water, wind, or other natural agents under natural environmental conditions undisturbed by man. 
Neighborhood contact person means representative of a neighborhood or area for the purpose of providing notice regarding proposed projects, hearings, and meetings, as required by this chapter. The representative must provide, in writing, to the planning and development department the neighborhood or area he/she represents and a map which clearly delineates the neighborhood or area represented. 
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. For the purposes of the flood protection regulations only, new construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Nightclub means a place of entertainment generally open primarily in the evening offering entertainment such as music, space for dancing and/or a stage area; and usually serving alcoholic beverages and some food for consumption on the premises. Night clubs also include cabarets and lounges. 
Nit means a unit of illuminative brightness equal to one candle per square meter, measured perpendicular to the rays of the source. 
Non-encroachment area means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as designated in the flood insurance study report. 
Non-residential development means all development other than residential development, agriculture, and silviculture. 
Nonconforming occupied lot means a lot which contained a structure on the effective date of this chapter or at the time the lot was brought into the city's jurisdiction but which does not meet the minimum requirements for width, area, front, side, or rear yard, height and/or open space for the zoning district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming open uses of land means an open use on a lot when the only structures are incidental and accessory to the principal open use which was in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter or at the time the lot was brought into the city's jurisdiction and which would not be permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which it is located. Uses such as storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking yards, and golf driving ranges are examples of open uses. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform with the standards of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use of structure means a use of a structure which existed prior to the effective date of this chapter, or at the time the lot on which the structure is sited was brought into the city's jurisdiction, and which would not be permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming vacant lot means a lot which does not meet the dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, but which was recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter or prior to the time the lot was brought into the city's jurisdiction. This definition shall not be interpreted to include lots recorded prior to the adoption of this chapter which were in violation of any prior subdivision regulation of the city. 
NPDES permit means the permit for stormwater discharges issued to the City of Asheville or other entities, as applicable, pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the federal stormwater discharge regulations (40 CFR 122.26). 
Off-premises sign means any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered at a site other than the site where such sign is displayed. 
OHWM: See "ordinary high water mark." 
Official zoning map: See "zoning map." 
On-premises sign means any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying or directing attention to a business, products, operations or services sold or offered on the lot site where the sign is located. 
Open space means an area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and water courses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots, or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel. 
Ordinary high water mark (OHWM) means the point on the bank of the river to which presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics. 
Ordinary repairs and maintenance means work done on a building to prevent it from deterioration or to replace any part thereof in order to correct any deterioration, decay or damage to a building or any part thereof in order to restore such building as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. c;p0; Outdoor storage means outdoor storage means the outdoor placement or leaving of goods for a continuous period longer than 24 hours for future use, disposal, or preservation; often associated with the sale, rental, distribution, or utilization of products, supplies, and/or equipment. It is normally accessory to another use. This excludes hazardous material storage, warehousing and distribution, and outdoor retail sales. 
Outfall for the purposes of section 7-12-2 means the point where the City of Asheville Stormwater System discharges to waters of the United States. 
Overlay district means a zoning district, as established in article IX of this chapter, which applies supplementary or replacement regulations to the underlying zoning district. 
Owner means this term shall have the same meaning as the term "landowner." 
Parapet means that portion of a building wall that rises above the roof line. 
Park means any public or private land managed primarily as vegetated open space for recreational, aesthetic, or educational use. 
Park (applicable to Central Business District) means one of the following sub-categories depending on the description below: 
Large public park: An open space area with access to one or more streets that functions as a stand-alone green space. They may include active and passive uses, and usually have both hardscape features and planted landscapes. Large public parks often include a range of attractions and amenities such as public gathering areas, seating, performance areas, sculptural elements, fountains, and richly detailed landscapes. Large public parks provide crucial open space that improves the quality life for residents and visitors. Large public parks will be at least one acre in size. Pack Square Park is an example of a large public park in Asheville. 
Small public park: An open space area with access to at least one street that functions as a stand-alone green space at a neighborhood scale. They may provide for active and passive use, and provide hardscape and planted landscape areas. Although they are smaller than large public parks, they can be expected to have one or more amenities for active or passive use. In the downtown Asheville Central Business District small public parks will be at least 5,000 square feet, and up to one acre in size. Pritchard Park and Triangle Park are examples of small public parks in Asheville. 
Pocket park: A landscaped small area intended for passive use only that may include significant hardscape elements (such as - but not limited to - benches, artwork, fountains, and lighting) and other amenities geared toward pedestrians. They may be public or privately managed. In the urban environment pocket parks are often secondary spaces left over from development projects that may have limited access to a public street or provide a small respite area at an intersection of streets. Pocket parks provide important open spaces for residents and patrons of downtown. Sculpture and special uses are often appropriate for pocket parks. Pocket parks will be smaller than 5,000 square feet although many pocket parks are substantially smaller than this. Gracies' Garden at the corner of Lexington and Patton Avenues is an example of a pocket park in Asheville. 
Plaza space: A structured open space with access to one or more streets with an emphasis on hardscape elements serving pedestrian needs. They may be public or privately owned and managed. Plaza spaces are often associated with a building or special use for which the plaza functions as an adjacent outdoor room. Landscape elements are secondary in a plaza space and are used to define the hardscape elements and streetscape. Seating, sculptural elements, shade trees and other pedestrian amenities should be included in plaza spaces. Plaza spaces will be at least 5,000 square feet in area. 
Courtyard space: Open space that is generally privately managed and used by business patrons and residents of adjacent buildings. Most courtyards have access to a street although this is not a requirement. Courtyards are usually highly structured with hardscape features with landscaping used to enhance the space. Depending on the use, courtyards may have benches, tables, and other pedestrian amenities. The orientation of the courtyard space and buildings can often create a "heat island" effect that make mitigation by tree planting or shade structures important. 
Peak discharge means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a specific location. 
Pedestrian oriented design means development designed with and emphasis on pedestrian access and interest from adjoining streets and sidewalks. In pedestrian oriented design, buildings are generally placed close to the street and the main entrances are oriented to the street sidewalk; additionally, there are generally windows or display cases along building façades that face the street. Site characteristics of pedestrian oriented design typically include: site grading that enhances the relationship of the building to the adjoining street(s) and sidewalk(s) from the perspective of the pedestrian; parking facilities placed to the side or rear of the building; and the provision of pedestrian oriented amenities, such as outdoor dining areas, landscaping/hardscaping, and seating. 
Perennial stream means streams or natural drainage ways that have essentially continuous flows or are shown as continuous blue lines on the most recent version of the USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle maps and depicted as a continuous line on the most recent version of the maps of the Soil Survey of Buncombe County from the U.S. Department of Agriculture shall be considered a perennial stream for the purposes of this section. 
Performance center means an open, partially enclosed, or fully enclosed facility designed or intended for use for the gathering of people as an audience for presentations such as (but not limited to) music, lectures, or live theater. Performance centers include auditoriums and amphitheaters. 
Performance guarantee: See "guarantee in lieu of construction of improvements." 
Perimeter setback means for a tract or parcel of land in common ownership and developed according to a master plan, the distance from structures to the boundaries of the property. 
Permanent habitation means occupation of a location structure(s), or building(s) by an individual(s) for residential purposes for more than 180 days. 
Permit, building means a permit for work or construction which is regulated by the North Carolina State Building Code in any or all of its volumes. 
Permit, grading and stormwater means the document issued by the city which allows grading and stormwater management operations to commence and to proceed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Permit, provisional means the document issued by the city upon receipt of an apparently acceptable erosion control permit application showing the erosion control measures to be installed and which allows the applicant to install those measures as shown or if modifications are required, as modified. 
Permitted use means a use permitted by right, that must still meet all development standards for the applicable district in section 7-8, which may limit the size or other characteristics of the use. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal entity. 
Person engaged in or conducting land-disturbing activity means any person who may be held responsible for a violation under section 7-12-2 of this chapter, unless expressly provided otherwise by the Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973, as amended. 
Person responsible for the violation means as used in section 7-12-2 of this chapter and in N.C.G.S., sec. 113A-64, the term means (a) the developer or other person who has or holds himself out as having financial or operational control over the land-disturbing activity; or (b) the landowner or person in possession or control of the land when he has directly or indirectly allowed the land-disturbing activity or has benefitted from it or he has failed to comply with any provision of section 7-12-2 of this chapter, the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973, as amended (the "Act") and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the Act, or any order adopted pursuant to this chapter or the Act as it imposes a duty upon him. 
Phase of grading means one of two types of grading, rough or fine. 
Place of worship means a building(s) or structure(s) including, but not limited to, sanctuaries, accessory classrooms, meeting rooms, offices, and housing quarters for religious leaders, that are primarily intended for religious services and which operate as a private, non-profit, tax exempt institution. The term includes, but is not limited to, churches, synagogues, and temples. Child care centers, schools, recreational facilities, and other uses developed as a part of the place of worship shall meet the standards for these uses set forth for the zoning district in which they are located. 
Planned community means real estate with respect to which any person, by virtue of that person's ownership of a lot, is expressly obligated by a declaration to pay real property taxes, insurance premiums, or other expenses to maintain, improve, or benefit other lots or other real estate described in the declaration. For purposes of this act, neither a cooperative nor a condominium is a planned community, but real estate comprising a condominium or cooperative may be part of a planned community. "Ownership of a lot" does not include holding a leasehold interest of less than 20 years in a lot, including renewal options. 
Planning and development director means the planning and development director of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, or his/her staff member delegated with the authority and responsibility to administer this chapter. Any act authorized by this chapter to be carried out by the planning and development director is, by implication, authorized to be carried out by a designee of the planning and development director. 
Plant nursery means a business, usually wholesale, where edible or ornamental plants are grown and stored on open land and/or in an enclosed building awaiting transportation for replanting or resale. 
Plant sales, nurseries and greenhouses means a place of business whose primary function is the sale of merchandise related to planting, maintenance, or harvesting of garden or ornamental plants and related products sold to the consumer in retail quantities, that may include a nursery or greenhouse. 
Planting area means landscape area required for bufferyards, street trees, and parking lot trees. 
Plat means a map, or representation on paper, of a piece of land subdivided into lots, with streets and alleys, usually drawn to scale. 
Pollutant for the purposes of section 7-12-2 means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Portable or moveable sign means any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds or any other device which is intended to be moved from one location to another. 
Post-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
Pre-development state means a site in its condition prior to any development activity. 
Pre-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
Primary public safety provider means an FCC licensed governmental user which uses wireless telecommunication facilities to provide primary communications for law enforcement, fire, ambulance or related emergency services. "Primary public service provider" does not include commercial wireless service providers who provide telecommunication services on a commercial basis to primary public safety providers or who deliver emergency calls from its customers to a public safety answering point (PSAP). 
Principal structure(s) means the main or predominant structure(s) in which the primary use occurs. Parcels may support more than one principal structure when said structures do not vary in gross floor area by more than 20 percent. 
Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground. 
Private business user means persons who operate radio facilities (including microwave) requiring an FCC license solely for intra-company communications and who do not employ those facilities to offer fixed or mobile wireless communication services, or point-to-point microwave links for wireline communication services, to third parties for compensation. 
Private facility means any stormwater management facility not owned and operated by the city, the County of Buncombe or the State of North Carolina. 
Private street means any paved or unpaved area not owned or maintained by a governmental entity, that is meant for the conveyance of vehicular traffic and is not a parking lot, although it may pass through a parking lot and be at times indistinguishable from said parking lot. 
Projecting sign means a sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a building and which projects from the wall. 
Proportion means balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole. 
Public dedications means land offered or dedicated to the public (open space, park land, etc.) for the public's use. 
Public facility means any stormwater management facility not owned and operated by the city, the County of Buncombe or the State of North Carolina. 
Public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Public street means a dedicated public right-of-way in which the roadway has been constructed to public standards for vehicular traffic and has been accepted for maintenance by a governmental entity, but does not include alleys. 
Public utility means any structure or facility transmitting a service provided by a utility company to include private systems such as telephone, electric, water and sewer, gas, power, etc. but not including utility substations, telecommunication towers, concealed telecommunication support structures, and other telecommunications devices. 
Public utilities and related facilities means utility structures including, but not limited to, pumping stations, transformers, utility poles, transmission lines, and pipelines that require a specific location to provide service. No employees are housed in these facilities. 
Receiving waters means the waters into which the City of Asheville Stormwater System outfalls flow and which are located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Asheville and include, without limitation, the lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the City of Asheville. 
Recreational uses, indoor. Indoor recreation means a for-profit establishment providing indoor exercise facilities and/or amusement games, either mechanical or electronic, that can be played by a customer for a fee and for which no money or prizes of significant value are paid out. 
Recreational uses, governmental means facilities owned, operated, or contracted by governmental agencies for public recreational use and may include items or services related to recreation including but not limited to equipment rental or food and beverage concessions. 
Recreational uses, related to residential development means recreational facilities developed in association with, and as an accessory to, planned residential developments and available for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests. 
Recreational uses, restricted to membership, non-profit means recreational uses, such as country clubs, operated for recreational and social benefits of the members, guests or employees and not as a business for profit. 
Recreational vehicle means, for flood protection regulations, a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if its on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
Recycling and resource recovery. See Recycling operation. 
Recycling center. See Recycling operation. 
Recycling collection center means a structure or structures that serve(s) as a neighborhood drop off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as (but not limited to) plastic products, paper products, glass, and metal. Such centers are generally located in parking lots of commercial structures or on the property of public facilities or institutions, such as places of worship or schools. 
Recycling operation means an indoor facility where recoverable resources (such as but not limited to) paper products, certain plastic products, textile products, vehicles, tires, glass and metal) are collected, stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, crushed, disassembled in order to prepare them to be processed to a reusable state. 
Recycling plant means an indoor processing facility at which recoverable resources such as (but not limited to) plastic products, paper products, glass, and metal are received and processed in order to return such products to a raw, reusable state. 
Redevelopment for the purposes of section 7-12-2 means any development or land-disturbing activity that does not result in a net increase in built-upon area and that provides greater or equal stormwater control than the previous development on the tract. 
Reference level is the top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated on the FIRM as zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO. 
Regulation means any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by the city, and adopted by the City of Asheville Council pursuant to this article. 
Regulatory flood means a flood event having a one percent chance of occurring in any given year, although the event may occur in any year (the 100-year flood). 
Regulatory flood datum means an established plan of reference above the crest elevation of the regulatory flood. 
Regulatory flood elevation means the crest elevation, in relation to mean sea level, expected to be reached by the regulatory flood at any given point in an area of special flood hazard. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation means the base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
Remedy a violation means, for flood protection regulations, to bring the structure or other development into compliance with local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of article XVIII of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Renovation means the repair or remodeling of a structure in which the exterior walls, foundation and roof are maintained structurally intact. 
Renovation costs: The following shall be considered when determining if the cost of work exceeds 75 percent of the structure's appraised value as determined by Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser; any structural work that required a building permit, cosmetic work such as but not limited to painting, carpeting, flooring, cabinet installation, façade work and reroofing. Exterior work such as landscaping and sidewalk installation shall not be included in the cost. 
Replacement tower. See Telecommunication tower/support structure - replacement tower. 
Research and technology production uses means uses such as medical, optical and scientific research facilities, software production and development, clinics and laboratories, pharmaceutical compounding and photographic processing facilities, and facilities for the assembly of electronic components, optical equipment, and precision instruments. 
Residential development means a development consisting of buildings for residential uses such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, manufactured homes, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and home occupations. 
Resort means a lodging facility that serves as a destination point for visitors. A resort generally provides recreational facilities for persons. 
Restaurant. See Eating and/or drinking establishment. 
Restricted mountain ridge means, for purposes of regulating wireless telecommunication facilities, a ridge whose elevation is 500 or more feet above the elevation of an adjacent valley floor. 
Retail sales means stores selling retail goods such as, but not limited to: bakeries, bicycle shops, bookstores, candy and pastry etc., convenience stores, copying centers, delicatessens, florists, fruit/vegetable markets, gift shops, video rental stores. The size of such stores and other characteristics are governed by the development standards of the zoning district. 
Retaining structure means a structure specifically designed to keep or hold an element in a particular place, condition, or position. 
Retention basin means a basin designed to retain a permanent pool of water after having provided the planned detention of runoff during a storm event. 
Ridge means the elongated crest or series of crests at the apex or uppermost point of intersection between two opposite slopes or sides of a mountain, and includes all land within 100 feet below the elevation of any portion of such line or surface along the crest. 
Right-of-way means an area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right-of-passage has been recorded for use as a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other special use. 
Riparian means the characteristic of an ecological zone along bodies of water with distinct soils, plants, and wildlife characterized by an increase in moisture and different soil conditions. 
River district design committee means an appointed committee having authority to review and approve requests for River District Design Major Works. 
River resource corridor means a setback running approximately parallel to the sides and banks of the rivers defined and characterized by the location of critical riparian vegetation and habitat associated with the wash. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Roof sign means any sign erected, constructed or maintained on, upon or over the roof of any building structure and which is wholly or partially dependent upon the roof for support. 
Running lights means lighting used in conjunction with the towing of manufactured housing. 
Sanctuary means a room in or that section of a place of worship containing the altar and/or where regularly scheduled primary worship services are conducted. The room or part of the place of worship may be used for other purposes also. 
Sandwich board signs means any portable sign which is single or double faced, which may readily be moved from place to place, and which is intended to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way. 
Satellite dish antenna means a device incorporating surfaces that are either solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TUROs, and satellite microwave antennas. 
Scale means the proportional relationship of the size of the parts to one another and to the human figure. 
School means a public or private institution offering a curriculum of education authorized by the State of North Carolina giving regular instruction at the primary and/or secondary level. This definition includes kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, middle schools and high schools but does not include day care facilities, individual instruction, or classes in a specialized subject. 
Screening means a structure or planting that conceals view from public ways or adjacent property. 
Search ring means the area within which a wireless telecommunication facility must be located in order to meet service objectives of the wireless service provider using the wireless telecommunication facility or wireless support structure. 
Sediment means solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin. 
Sedimentation means the process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion has been or is being transported off the site of the land-disturbing activity or into a lake or natural watercourse. 
Self-service storage facility means a building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of customer's goods or wares. 
Setback means: 
(1)  The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, or rear property line. 
(2)  For the sign regulations found in article XIII of this chapter, setback shall mean the horizontal distance between the leading face of the curb of a street and the closest point of a sign or sign structure on such lot. Where there is no curb, the measurement shall be made from the edge of the pavement. 
Severe slope means a constructed slope with a grade of greater than 50 percent (2:1). 
Shared access means the mutual use of one or more points of ingress or egress by establishments on separate lots. 
Shared parking means the development and use of parking areas on two or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties. 
Shelter means a nonprofit, charitable, or religious organization providing boarding and/or lodging and ancillary services on its premises to primarily indigent, needy, homeless, or transient persons. 
Shrub means a woody deciduous or evergreen plant which consists of a number of small branches from or near the ground. 
Short-term vacation rental means a dwelling unit with up to six guest rooms that is used and/or advertised through an online platform, or other media, for transient occupancy for a period of less than one month. A short-term vacation rental is considered a "Lodging" use under this UDO. 
Siding means the exterior wall covering of a structure. 
Sign means any words, lettering numerals, parts of letters or numerals, figures, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is known, made of any material, except live vegetation, including any surface, fabric, or other material background structure designed to carry such devices, as are used to designate or attract attention. This definition shall not be interpreted to include awnings except for the portion of an awning that contains a message, logo, emblem, or similar wording or symbols and any background that highlights such message, logo, emblem, or similar wording or symbols. Furthermore, this definition shall not be interpreted to include architectural features of a building even when such features (i.e. roof style/color) are identifiable with a certain establishment. Further, this definition shall not include art or works of art provided the art or works of art do not include logos in their traditional form or the name of the business in a manner that would be considered by a reasonable person to advertise the business at whose location the art or works of art are located. The art and/or works of art shall not be located on the sign or sign panel. 
Sign, cabinet means a sign that is mounted on the face of a building or on the ground that is typically rectangular in shape and provides for internal illumination and changing the message of the sign by replacing a single transparent or translucent panel. 
Sign, off-premises digital means an off-premise sign display or device that changes the "static" message or copy on the sign by electronic mean. 
Sign structure means any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of supporting a sign, including any decorative cover for said sign structure. 
Siltation means sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which is settleable or removable by properly designed, constructed, and maintained control measures and which has been transported from its point of origin within the site of a land-disturbing activity and which has been deposited, or is in suspension in water. 
Single-family residential development means any development where 1) no building contains more than one dwelling unit; 2) every dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and 3) where no lot contains more than one dwelling unit. 
Single tenant means a single business establishment, activity, or use which does not share any facilities such as parking, storage areas, entrances, etc. with another use. 
Site means all contiguous parcels of land, including any contiguous bodies of water, under one or diverse ownership, contemplated for development or already developed as a unit, although not necessarily all at one time, and including such portions which the planning and development director determines, because of their characteristics, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Site plan means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately all information required by these regulations with respect to the development proposal. 
Site specific development plan means for the purposes of applying for zoning vested rights approval under section 7-5-15 of this chapter, this term shall mean a plan of land development submitted to the City of Asheville by a landowner or agent for purposes of obtaining one of the following zoning or land use permits or approvals means: 
(1)  Level III site plan approval as defined by section 7-5-8 of this chapter. Said plan shall contain all items of information required by the provisions of section 7-5-8. 
(2)  Level II site plan approval as defined by section 7-5-8 of this chapter. Said plan shall contain all items of information required by the provisions of section 7-5-8. 
(3)  Level I site plan approval as defined by section 7-5-8 of this chapter. Said plan shall contain all items of information required by the provisions of section 7-5-8. 
(4)  Preliminary plat approval of a proposed subdivision as described in section 7-5-7 of this chapter. Said plan shall contain all items of information required by the provisions of section 7-5-7. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a sketch plan nor any other document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall constitute a site specific development plan. Neither an application for nor granting of a variance shall constitute a site specific development plan. 
Siting means the place where something was, is, or is to be located. 
Small engine and appliance service and repair business means a business that functions for the purpose of providing repair and service for small engine equipment and appliances. Small engine equipment and appliances may include: lawn equipment, household appliances, kitchenware and electronics. Vehicles intended for human transportation (mopeds, scooters, etc) are not included in this definition. 
Soffit means the underside of a structural component such as an arch, beam or cornice. 
Soil erosion means any removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water, ice, gravity or wind, or any combination thereof. Erosion includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles. 
Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(35). 
Solid waste disposal site means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year (the 100-year flood), as determined in subsection (b)(2) of the flood protection regulations found in section 7-12-1. 
Special use means a use permitted by right that must meet any stated special additional standards for the use outlined in section 7-16-1, as well as all development standards for the applicable zoning district in article VIII. 
Sports court means any hardscape area lined and marked based on regulation standards for such games including, but not limited to, tennis and basketball but excluding pools, picnic areas and parking lots. 
Sports field means a large field or open space lined and marked based on regulation standards for such games including, but not limited to, football, baseball/softball and soccer but excluding pools, picnic areas and parking lots. 
Stable (adjective) means, for the purposes of the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations, found in section 7-12-2 of this chapter, a characteristic of land, with or without mechanical restraints, which can be expected to remain in its original configuration. All fill slopes shall be compacted full depth to not less than 95 percent maximum density (Standard Proctor), shall be placed on a surface cleared of growth and debris, and properly benched and drained. 
Stable (noun) means a building or land where animals are kept for remuneration, hire, sale, boarding, ride, or show. 
Stadium or arena means a large open or enclosed space used for games or major events, and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators. 
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Static means characterized by a lack of movement, animation, or progression. 
Storage container means any container, storage unit, shed-like container or other portable structure that can be or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind and which is located for such purposes outside of an enclosed building other than an accessory building or shed which complies with all applicable building and land use requirements. 
Storm drainage facilities means the system of inlets, conduits, channels, ditches and appurtenances which serve to collect and convey stormwater through and from a given drainage area. 
Storm sewer means a closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater. 
Stormwater BMP manual: See definition for Best management practices manual or BMP manual. 
Stormwater discharge permit means the stormwater discharge permit issued by the city authorizing stormwater discharge activities in accordance with this chapter and applicable ordinances and regulations. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this section and its terms, including, but not limited to measures that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management facility means for quantitative and qualitative control, a system of vegetative and/or structural measures which control the increased volume and rate of surface run-off and pollutants carried in those waters caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management plan means a plan designed to control stormwater, submitted as a prerequisite to obtaining a stormwater discharge permit. The plan shall be prepared and designed in accordance with this chapter, city regulations, and applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including applicable standards and specifications. 
Stormwater management program or SWMP means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise of all of the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts, and techniques for the control of stormwater and which is incorporated as part of the NPDES permit for the City of Asheville and as part of this chapter. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form. 
Stormwater permit: See definition for Permit, grading and stormwater. 
Stream alteration means a change of the water-carrying capacity or flow of a natural water course. 
Stream bank means the location of the upper edge of the active stream above which the water spreads into the overbank areas on either side of the stream or the elevation of the average annual storm. Where the stream bank is not well defined, it shall be considered the edge of the waterline during a one-year frequency storm. 
Streaming video means electronic video displays utilizing content in motion picture form similar to or otherwise depicting a television screen. 
Street means a paved or unpaved route which provides the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street frontage means that portion of a lot abutting a publicly maintained street or alley. 
Street right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a travelway for vehicles and also available, with the consent of the appropriate governmental agency, for installation and maintenance of sidewalks, traffic control devices, traffic signs, street name signs, historical marker signs, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, gas lines, power lines, and communication lines. The location of any street planned, developed, or built after the effective date of this chapter must be shown on a legally approved plat recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County. 
Street wall means a fenestration detail to improve pedestrian-oriented districts that allows for new development while reflecting the traditional scale of the commercial area and insures adequate air and light at the sidewalk. The street wall corresponds to the base portion of a building in the traditional organizing principle used for taller buildings: base - middle - cap. A variety of tools are available to determine the street wall height based on the location and scale of the district. These tools can include consideration of the relative heights of neighboring buildings or reflecting a one-to-one relationship to the width of the right-of-way. At the height of the street wall one should expect a visual demarcation such as a step back from the front or side of the façade, changes in fenestration details or other visual differentiation. 
Streetscape means the scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and manmade components, including buildings, paving, planting, street furnishings, and miscellaneous structures. 
Structural BMP means the physical structures requiring engineering design and engineered construction that are designed to remove pollutants from stormwater, runoff, reduce downstream erosion, provide flood control, and promote groundwater recharge. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed. For flood protection regulations, a structure is a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facility or infrastructure that is principally above ground. 
Structure, hydraulic means an arrangement of materials intended or operating so as to modify the flow or other action of stormwater or the waters of rivers and streams, including but not limited to: 
berms, breakwaters, catch basins, channels, conduits, culverts, curb inlets, dams, detention basins, dikes, diversions, end walls, flumes, gates, groins, headwalls, intake structures, jetties, levees, orifices, piers, pipes, riprap, sea walls, sediment basins, spillways, swales, weirs. 
Studios, galleries and workshops for artists, artisans, and craftspeople - low impact means places for the creation and sale of artistic products whose creation involves little or no noise, vibrations, or use of heat that can be detected beyond the walls of the place. 
Studios, galleries and workshops for artists, artisans, and craftspeople - high impact means places for the creation and sale of artistic products (such as but not limited to metal work, stone sculpture, glass work and sculpture, fired ceramics, or woodworking) whose creation involves a substantial level of noise, vibrations, or use of heat that can be detected beyond the walls of the place. 
Subcollector street means a street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting properties but which is also designed to be used or is used to connect local streets with collector or higher classification streets. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, corporation, or entity who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. 
Subdivision, major means a subdivision which meets the specifications set forth in the definition of subdivision and involves the division of land into two or more lots where the extension of public streets or private streets built to City of Asheville standards is required. 
Subdivision, minor means a subdivision of land that does not involve the construction of public streets or private streets built to City of Asheville standards. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Improvements, modifications, and additions to existing buildings are counted cumulatively for at least five years. (See definition of substantial improvement). For the purposes of the flood protection regulations only, substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See "Substantial Improvement". 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. When an existing building is structurally altered such that the first floor area is increased by more than 20 percent. Improvements, modifications, and additions to existing buildings are counted cumulatively for at least five years. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project of improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety codes specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe conditions; or (2) any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. For the purposes of the flood protection regulations only, substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not, however, include either: (1) any correction of existing violations of state or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. Improvements, modifications, and additions to existing buildings are counted cumulatively for at least five years. 
Surveyor means a person licensed and qualified as a registered land surveyor in North Carolina. 
Suspended or transom sign means a sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface, such as a canopy or marquee, and which is supported by such surface. 
Swale means an elongated depression in the land surface that is at least occasionally wet, may be heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing water. Swales conduct stormwater into primary drainage channels and provide water quality treatment and groundwater recharge. 
Tatoo parlor means an establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of placing designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments to contact or puncture the skin. 
Taxi stand means a business where taxicabs are temporarily parked during hours of operation and including a building which houses the office of the taxi company and the dispatching equipment and/or where taxicabs wait to pickup patrons. 
Telecommunication tower/support structure means a tower, pole, or similar support structure 20 feet or more high, used to mount or support one or more antennas for a wireless telecommunication facility which may be visible or concealed. These may include self-supporting lattice-framed towers, monopoles, or guyed towers. A concealed structure has all structural members concealed within a façade which matches or complements the architectural character of buildings and other structures located on the same parcel as the wireless telecommunication facility. 
Telecommunication tower/support structure, concealed. See Telecommunication tower/support structure. 
Telecommunication tower/support structure—Replacement tower means a telecommunication tower intended to replace an existing approved tower where such replacement tower is (1) at or within 100 yards of the existing tower base, and (2) no higher than the existing tower. 
Temporary portable building means a building intended for nonresidential use for a limited time period, consisting of one or more modules constructed off the ultimate site of use and transported to that site either on its own wheels or otherwise. 
Temporary portable building, construction-related means a temporary portable building directly related to the development of a lot and limited in duration to a time period extending from issuance of the initial zoning permit for such development to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the development. 
Temporary sign means a sign with or without a structural frame, not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground and intended for a limited period of display; provided, however, this shall specifically exclude portable or moveable signs which are hereinafter prohibited. 
Temporary structure means a structure without any permanent foundation or footing which is intended to serve a specific temporary event or use/operation and is to be removed upon the completion of that event or use/operation. 
Temporary use means an activity or use of land which is temporary in nature and, which, having met certain requirements and conditions, may be permitted for a period of limited duration, and which may utilize "temporary structures" for the duration of the event. 
Ten-year storm means the surface run-off resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in ten years, and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of run-off, for the watershed of interest, under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
Thoroughfare plan means a plan for the development of existing and proposed major streets that will adequately serve the future travel needs of an area in an efficient and cost effective manner. 
Through lot means a lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street. 
Time/date/temperature sign means a sign containing numerals or letters, which may be alternately displayed, and which alternating portion only shows the time, date and/or temperature. This sign shall not be considered a flashing or an animated sign. 
Tongue means a part of the towing apparatus used in transporting a manufactured home. 
Top of bank: See definition for Stream bank. 
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) means a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a waterbody can receive and still meet water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the pollutant's sources. A TMDL is a detailed water quality assessment that provides the scientific foundation for an implementation plan. The implementation plan outlines the steps necessary to reduce pollutant loads in a certain body of water to restore and maintain water quality standards in all seasons. The Clean Water Act, Section 303, establishes the water quality standards and TMDL programs. 
Tower base means the foundation, usually concrete, on which the telecommunication tower is situated. For measurement calculations, the tower base is the actual or geometric center of the tower. 
Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the tower base to the highest point on a telecommunication tower, including any antennas or other equipment affixed thereto, but excluding any lightning protection rods extending above the tower and attached equipment. 
Tower site means the land area which contains, or will contain, a proposed telecommunication tower, and related equipment enclosures and other improvements. 
Townhouse: See "dwellings, townhouse." 
Toxic substance means any substance or combination of substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their off-spring or other adverse health effects. (See hazardous materials) 
Tract means this term shall have the same meaning as the term "site." 
Traffic engineer means the traffic engineer for the City of Asheville, North Carolina or his/her staff member delegated with the authority and responsibility to carry out his/her duties. 
Trademark means a name, symbol, or other device identifying a product which is officially registered and legally restricted to the use by its owner. 
Transition area means an area of a higher-intensity use district which is close to a lower-intensity use district, in which special design and other criteria are applied in order to protect the lower-intensity uses from effects of the higher-intensity uses. 
Transmitter tower means a structure situated on a lot that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications. 
Transportation comprehensive plan means a document which through research and analysis has established current deficiencies or future needs of any system of roads, railways, airports, and paths, sidewalks, or other means or modes of conveyance, either separately or jointly, and which recommends actions to be undertaken for the alleviation of current deficiencies or the provision for future needs for any area or portion of a political jurisdiction. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least two inches and a height of at least ten feet, and typically has one main stem and many branches. 
Tree, large means any tree whose height under average regional growing conditions will exceed 35 feet in height at maturity. 
Tree, small or understory means any tree whose height under average regional growing conditions will be less than 35 feet in height at maturity. 
Tree save area means required tree preservation and/or replanting areas. 
Twenty-five year storm means the surface run-off resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 25 years, and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of run-off, from the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
Two-story requirement means that for new construction, a second floor is provided as a full occupiable floor and a mezzanine level will not be sufficient to meet the requirement. Civic uses such as places of worship, arenas, auditoriums, theaters and performance centers will not be required to meet a two-story requirement. 
Umbrella sign means a sign painted or printed on an umbrella. 
Uncovered means the removal of ground cover from, on, or above the soil surface. 
Undertaken means the initiating of any activity, or phase of activity. 
Upper story means any story above the ground story or floor. 
Use by right means the use(s) of a piece of property identified as a permitted use(s) by this chapter in the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Utility pole means a structure that is designed for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting. 
Utility service area means area containing freestanding or surface mounted utility equipment which is not screened from the street by a building, is less than 100 feet from the street right-of-way; and which is more than five feet long along the side which faces the street or adjacent property. This includes equipment belonging to public and private utilities and privately owned equipment. Examples include: mechanical equipment, transformers which are part of underground systems, switchgear boxes, booster boxes, and utility boxes. 
Utility substation means a structure or facility for transforming or transmitting a service provided by a utility company to include private utility systems such as telephone, electric, water, sewer, gas, power, etc., but not including telecommunication towers, concealed telecommunication support structures, or other telecommunication devices. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter which grant permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Vegetative canopy means trees which create a roof-like layer of spreading branches. 
Vehicle salvage yard. See Recycling operation. 
Vehicular use area (VUA) means all driving surfaces including: parking, drive aisles, driveways, loading areas, and maneuvering areas that are paved or gravel. 
Velocity means the average speed of flow through the cross section of the main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. The cross section of the main channel shall be that area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks. Overload flows are not to be included for the purpose of computing velocity of flow. 
Violation means the failure of a use, structure, or other development to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter. A use, structure, or other development without the elevation certification, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Visible means capable of being seen by the unaided eye in the daylight. 
Wall means an upright structure of masonry, wood, plaster or other building material serving to enclose, divide or protect an area. 
Wall sign means any sign painted or attached flat against and parallel to the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and/or which projects from that wall or surface. 
Waste means surplus materials resulting from on-site construction and disposed of at other locations. 
Water dependent structure means any structure for which the use requires access to or proximity to or siting within surface waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures. 
Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Watershed means a geographical area comprised of one or more drainage areas, which serve a common point. 
Watershed overlay zone means those areas as listed on the Watershed Overlay Zone Inventory and which is inclusive of all critical areas of water supply watersheds, high quality waters, outstanding resource waters as delineated by the state, and TMDL reports. 
Wetland means areas that are inundated or saturated at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life requiring saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Those areas regulated under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act as identified under guidelines employed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers in evaluating permit applications under 33 USC 1344 and applicable federal regulations. Wetlands also include areas defined by the State of North Carolina as "isolated wetlands." 
Wind sign means a suspended or tethered sign made of flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic, or waterproof paper, including but not limited to, banners, pennants, spinners, streamers, or balloons. 
Window sign means a sign which is permanently painted on, permanently attached to or designed to be visible through a window, excluding displays of merchandise. 
Wireless telecommunications facility means the set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying support structure or tower, including antennas, transmitters, receivers base stations, power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment necessary to provide wireless data and telecommunications services to a discrete geographic area." 
Wireless telecommunication facility, co-located means a wireless telecommunication facility located (or proposed to be located) upon or within a supporting structure or building which hosts one or more existing and approved wireless telecommunication facilities. 
Wireless telecommunication facility, concealed means a wireless telecommunication facility with all antennas camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface upon which they are mounted, or which has all facility components concealed behind a façade or parapet wall. 
Wireless telecommunication facility, microcell means a wireless telecommunication facility for which all electronics (if not placed within an existing and approved building) are contained in equipment enclosures which occupy less than 40 cubic feet and for which all antennas are eight feet or less in height and have a combined surface area of less than 30 square feet. 
Wireless telecommunication facility, temporary means a vehicle-mounted or portable wireless telecommunication facility including portable towers, antennas, equipment enclosures, generators and associated electronics, cabling, wiring and hardware. 
Working days means days, exclusive of Saturday and Sunday, during which weather and soil conditions permit land disturbing activity to be undertaken. 
Yard means any open space located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except for such structures and projections as are expressly permitted in these regulations. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall consist of the horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest point of the foundation wall of the main building. (see "setback"). 
Yard/garage sales means the sale or offering for sale of items of personal property to the general public on a lot containing a dwelling or dwelling units. 
Zero lot line development. See Development, zero lot line. 
Zoning permit means a permit issued by the City of Asheville stating that a particular development project, change in use, or addition, is in compliance with the ordinances of the city pertaining to use of the land on which such use is situated. A zoning permit is typically issued after all other approvals relating to chapter 7 have been obtained. 
Zoning vested right means a right pursuant to N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2535, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2565, § 1, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 2662, § 1, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1a., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2740, § 1(c), 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2741, § 1, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2742, § 1(c), 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2860, § 1b., 10-10-01; Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1(a), 1(b), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1a, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1a, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(1), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1a, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3261, § 1(a), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3262, §§ 1(a, b), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3271, § 1(a), 8-9-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(a), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3277, § 1, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 3329, § 1(a), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(a), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(a), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(a), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3436, § 1(a), 1-23-07; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(h), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3466, § 1(c), 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3479, § 1(b), 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3480, §§ 1(d), (e), 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(a), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3489, § 1(a), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3521, §§ 1(a), (b), 8-21-07; Ord. No. 3571, § 1(a), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3572, §§ 1(a)—(c), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3579, § 1(e), 1-22-08; Ord. No. 3582, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3619, § 1(a), 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3642, § 1a, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3677, § 1a, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1a, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3739, § 1b, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3791, § 1k, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3792, § 1a, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3793, § 1e, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3810, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1a, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3876, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3897, §§ 1(a), (b), 9-14-10; Ord. No. 3906, § 1a, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1a, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3929, §§ 1c, d, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 3959, § 1a, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4007, § 1a, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4064, § 1f, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4152, § 1a, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 4168, § 1a, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 4233, § 1b, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 4328, § 2a, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 4328, § 2a, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 4342, § 1b, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 4416, § 1a, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 4431, § 1a, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 4448, § 1a, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 4470, § 1a, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4492, § 1a, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 4560, § 1a, 2-14-16; Ord. No. 4579, § 1, 4-25-17; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(a), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4646, § 1(b), 11-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1a—c, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 4686, § 1f, 7-24-18) 
 
figure 2-1 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2407, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 1, 2, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2436, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2469, § 1, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 2502, § 1, 7-28-98)  
ARTICLE III. - DECISION-MAKING, ADMINISTRATIVE AND ADVISORY BODIES 
 
Sec. 7-3-1. - Asheville City Council. 
(a)  Powers and duties. Without limiting any authority granted to the Asheville City Council by law or regulations, the Asheville City Council shall have the following powers and duties with respect to this chapter, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To adopt new text for and amendments to the text of this chapter; 
(2)  To adopt new zoning maps and amendments to the zoning maps; 
(3)  To adopt amendments to the comprehensive plan and to adopt a new comprehensive plan; 
(4)  To review and approve requests for conditional use permits; 
(5)  To adopt River District Design Guidelines; 
(6)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Asheville City Council elsewhere in this chapter and in other laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2437, § 1(a), 11-25-97; Ord. No. 3032, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(b), 1-24-06)  
Sec. 7-3-2. - Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Powers and duties. Without limiting any authority granted to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission by law or regulations, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To review all new text for and proposed amendments to this chapter, and proposals to zone or change the zoning of all property regulated under this chapter, and to make recommendations to the Asheville City Council for final action thereon; 
(2)  To perform studies and surveys of the present conditions and probable future development of the city and its environs, including, but not limited to, studies and surveys of land uses, population, traffic, parking, and redevelopment needs; 
(3)  To formulate and recommend to the Asheville City Council the adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan and other plans, as necessary, for the city and its environs; 
(4)  To review the terms of this chapter from time to time, as it deems appropriate, and to recommend to the Asheville City Council any changes that the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission considers necessary to regulate properly the development and use of land, buildings, and structures; 
(5)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission elsewhere in this chapter and in other laws and regulations. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. 
(1)  The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members. Five members who are residents of the City of Asheville shall be appointed by the Asheville City Council. The remaining two members shall be residents of the extraterritorial area of the City of Asheville and appointed by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners to represent the extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation areas of the City of Asheville. Provided, however, if there is an insufficient number of qualified residents of the extraterritorial area to meet the number of members who are to be appointed by the board of county commissioners, the commissioners may appoint as many other residents of the county as necessary to make up the requisite number. The county appointee(s) shall meet the standards for proportional representation of the city's extraterritorial zoning area established by N.C.G.S., 160A-362 (as amended). All members shall have equal rights, privileges, and duties regardless of whether the matter at issue arises within the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  All members shall serve three-year terms. All members shall serve a maximum of two terms. 
(3)  Officers of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall be elected in accordance with the rules of procedure for the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(4)  Vacancies shall be filled by the Asheville City Council or the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners, as applicable, as they occur. 
(c)  Meetings. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at least monthly, on a day and at a time scheduled by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(d)  Rules and records. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall formulate and adopt the rules of procedure under which it will operate. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(c), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(d), 1-8-08)  
Sec. 7-3-3. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment for the City of Asheville shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To hear and decide applications for approval of variances from the terms of this chapter, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 7-6-1 of this chapter, except where this chapter places responsibility for hearing or considering such a variance with another body. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, permit, decision, or determination issued or made by an administrative officer of the city in enforcing any provision of this chapter, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 7-6-2 of this chapter. (However, see section 7-12-2(q), Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, for special review procedures pertinent to appealing administrative decisions on erosion control plans and section 7-12-5, Stormwater Management, for special review procedures pertinent to appealing administrative decisions on stormwater management plans.) 
(3)  To serve as the city's housing code appeals board in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Asheville, or its successor. 
(4)  To hear and decide applications for approval of reasonable accommodations under federal law for handicapped or disabled persons proposing to live in a family care or group home, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 7-6-3 of this chapter. 
(5)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth elsewhere in this chapter and in other laws and regulations. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. 
(1)  The board of adjustment for the City of Asheville shall consist of five regular members and seven alternate members. Four regular members and five alternate members who are residents of the City of Asheville shall be appointed by the Asheville City Council. The other regular member and two alternate members shall be appointed by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners pursuant to N.C. Session Law 2013-30. 
(2)  All members shall serve three-year terms. All members shall serve a maximum of two terms. 
(3)  Officers of the board of adjustment shall be elected in accordance with the rules of procedure for the board of adjustment of the City of Asheville. 
(4)  Vacancies shall be filled by the Asheville City Council or the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners, as applicable, as they occur. 
(c)  Meetings and voting. 
(1)  Meetings and hearings of the board of adjustment for the City of Asheville shall be held at such times as are set by the board of adjustment. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four-fifths of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari regarding the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the board for calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. 
(d)  Rules and records. The board of adjustment for the City of Asheville shall formulate and adopt the rules of procedure under which it will operate. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question. Final disposition of appeals shall be by recorded order indicating the reasons of the board therefore, all of which shall be a public record. 
(e)  Administering oaths and issuing subpoenas. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. section 160A-388(f), the chairperson of the board, the acting chairperson, and the clerk to the board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses appearing before the board in any matter. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before the board of adjustment, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The board, through the chair, or in the chair's absence anyone acting as chair, may also issue subpoenas and compel the production of evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 4274, §1a, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 4403, § 1b, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 7-3-4. - Historic resources commission. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County is designated as a "historic preservation commission" pursuant to Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, or its successor, and shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To undertake an inventory of properties of historical, archaeological, architectural, and/or cultural significance; 
(2)  To recommend to the Asheville City Council areas to be designated by ordinance as "historic districts"; and to recommend to the Asheville City Council and the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners individual structures, buildings, sites, areas, or objects to be designated by ordinance as "landmarks"; 
(3)  To acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included interest, including options to purchase, to properties within established districts or to any such properties designated as landmarks, to hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same, and to exchange or dispose of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property; 
(4)  To restore, preserve and operate historic properties; 
(5)  To recommend to the Asheville City Council that designation of any area as a historic district or part thereof, or to recommend to the Asheville City Council and the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners that designation of any building, structure, site, area, or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for cause; 
(6)  To conduct an educational program with respect to historic properties and districts within its jurisdiction; 
(7)  To cooperate with the state, federal, and local governments in pursuance of the purposes set forth in Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, or its successor. The governing body of the commission, when authorized by the Asheville City Council or the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners, may contract with the state, or the United States of America, or any agency of either, or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law; 
(8)  To enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee or agent of the commission may enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; 
(9)  To prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation element as part of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(10)  To review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolitions, or new construction within historic districts, or for the alteration or demolition of designated landmarks; 
(11)  To negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site, area, or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when such action is reasonably necessary or appropriate; and 
(12)  To adopt and amend guidelines for alterations, demolitions, and new construction within historic districts and for the alteration or demolition of designated landmarks. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. 
(1)  The Historic Resource Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County shall consist of 12 members. Six members who are residents of the City of Asheville shall be appointed by the Asheville City Council and six members shall be appointed by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners. All members of the commission shall reside within the city or county. A majority of the members of the commission shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, archaeology, or architecture or related fields. All members shall have equal rights, privileges, and duties regardless of whether the matter at issue arises within the city or the county. 
(2)  All members shall serve three-year terms. Members may be reappointed for additional terms at the discretion of the appointing governing body, provided that all members serve a maximum of two terms. 
(3)  Officers of the historic resources commission shall be elected in accordance with the rules of procedure for the historic resources commission. 
(4)  Vacancies shall be filled by the Asheville City Council or the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners, as applicable, as they occur. 
(c)  Meetings. The Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County shall hold meetings at such times as are set forth in the rules of procedure for the historic resources commission. 
(d)  Rules and records. The Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County shall formulate and adopt the rules of procedure under which it will operate. The historic resources commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3896, § 1, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 7-3-5. - Technical review committee. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The technical review committee of the City of Asheville shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To review and comment on all plans and applications for conditional use permits (see section 7-5-5); 
(2)  To review and comment on all preliminary plats for major subdivision (see subsection 7-5-8); 
(3)  To review and comment on modifications to the subdivision standards (see subsection 7-5-8(c)); 
(4)  To review and comment on all plans and applications for proposed developments subject to Level III site plan review (see subsection 7-5-9(a)); 
(5)  To review and comment on all site plans for proposed developments subject to Level II site plan review (see section 7-5-9(b)); 
(6)  To review and comment on all plans and applications for conditional zoning requests (see section 7-7-8); 
(7)  To assist the staff of the planning and development department with any other plan reviews, land development studies, or other land development related matters as necessary; and 
(8)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the technical review committee of the City of Asheville elsewhere in this chapter and other laws and regulations in the city. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  The technical review committee of the city shall consist of one representative from each of the following city departments: planning and development, engineering, fire, building safety, public works, and water resources; a representative of the Metropolitan Sewerage District of Buncombe County, and a member of the Asheville Tree Commission. 
(2)  Representatives of the police department, North Carolina Department of Transportation, Progress Energy, Public Service Company of North Carolina, AT&T, other city departments, other governmental agencies and other area utilities may serve on the technical review committee in an ex-officio capacity. Representatives of city departments shall be appointed by the city manager, representatives of area utilities shall be appointed by that utility and representative of the tree commission shall be appointed by the tree commission or public works director. 
(3)  All members shall serve until a replacement is named according to the method of appointment set forth above. 
(4)  The city manager or his/her designee shall conduct the meetings of the committee in accordance with the established rules and procedures. 
(c)  Meetings. The technical review committee of the City of Asheville shall hold at least two meetings in a given month and such other regular or special meetings as the committee deems necessary to conduct the business before it. Scheduled meetings may be canceled in the event that there is no business to come before the committee in a given month, or the scheduled meeting date falls on a recognized city holiday when city offices are closed. 
(d)  Rules and records. The technical review committee shall formulate and adopt the rules and procedures under which it will operate. The technical review committee shall incorporate all review comments and recommended conditions of approval in the form of a staff report that shall be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2619, § 1(a), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 3032, § 1(b), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(d), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(e), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3681, § 1, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 3984, § 1a, 6-14-11)  
Sec. 7-3-6. - Specifications review committee. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The City of Asheville's Specifications Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To hear appeals and recommend action to Asheville City Council on such appeals regarding the disapproval or modification by an administrative officer of the City of an erosion control plan; 
(2)  To determine the amount of civil penalty to assess in instances of violations of section 7-12-2 or section 7-5-13 in accordance with subsection 7-18-2(b)(2); and 
(3)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the City of Asheville's Specifications Review Committee elsewhere in this chapter and other laws and regulations. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. 
(1)  The City of Asheville's Specifications Review Committee shall consist of the planning and development director or his/her designee, the director of city engineering or his/her designee, the director of building safety or his/her designee, and the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(2)  All members shall serve until a replacement is named by the city manager or appropriate city department director. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  The City of Asheville's Specifications Review Committee shall hold meetings as needed to hear appeals or set civil penalties. 
(2)  Meetings shall be scheduled at a time agreed upon by the committee, the planning and development department, and the person making the appeal or subject to the civil penalty. 
(3)  Meetings of the specifications review committee shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Rules and records. The City of Asheville's Specifications Review Committee shall follow procedures for review as outlined in applicable sections of this chapter. Civil penalties shall be set in accordance with subsection 7-18-2(b)(2) of this chapter. The staff of the engineering department shall record relevant notes from the meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1(c), 1(d), 3-12-02)  
Sec. 7-3-7. - Urban forestry commission. 
(a)  Powers and duties . The Urban Forestry Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in division 7 of article III of chapter 2 of this Code and such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Urban Forestry Commission in this chapter and in other laws and regulations. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies . The membership and term of office of and method of filling vacancies for the Urban Forestry Commission shall be as set forth in division 7 of article III of chapter 2 of this Code. 
(c)  Meetings . The Urban Forestry Commission shall hold meetings in accordance with its adopted rules of procedure. 
(d)  Rules and records . The Urban Forestry Commission shall formulate and adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of division 7 of article III of chapter 2 of this Code. 
(e)  Name . Any and all references to the "Tree Commission" or the "Asheville Tree Commission" elsewhere in the City Code shall be understood to refer to the Urban Forestry Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2619, § 1(b), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 4781, § 2, 11-26-19)  
Sec. 7-3-8. - Asheville Downtown Commission. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in Division 3 of article III of Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. In addition, for purposes of this chapter, the Asheville Downtown Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Review and make comment on major works projects within the Downtown Design Review Overlay District in accordance with the Downtown Design Review Guidelines; 
(2)  Adopt and amend guidelines for alterations, demolitions, and new construction in the Downtown Design Review area; and 
(3)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Asheville Downtown Commission elsewhere in this chapter and in other laws and regulations. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. The membership and term of office of and method of filling vacancies for the Asheville Downtown Commission shall be as set forth in Division 3 of article III of Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(c)  Meetings. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall hold meetings in accordance with Division 3 of article III of Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(d)  Rules and records. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall formulate and adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of Division 3 of article III of Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-3-9. - City of Asheville Planning and Development Department. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The city's planning and development department, under the direction and supervision of the planning and development director, shall have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter: 
(1)  To review all applications for development approval for compliance with the terms of this chapter; 
(2)  To serve on and coordinate the activities of the technical review committee established in section 7-3-5; 
(3)  To provide the city council, the planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, the historic resources commission of the city and Buncombe County, the tree commission and the downtown commission with reports and recommendations regarding matters before those bodies, either as required by this chapter, other laws and regulations, or upon the request of the body; 
(4)  To enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter in accordance with article XVIII of this chapter; 
(5)  To provide final review and approval of plans, plats, and permits as set forth in this chapter; and 
(6)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the city's planning and development department elsewhere in this chapter and other laws and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2619, § 1(c), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 7-3-10. - Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The city's Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in division 13 of article III of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. In addition, for purposes of this chapter, the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To review and make comment on major works projects within the River District Design Review Map Area which includes River District zoned parcels as well as parcels of other zoning classifications within the riverfront area, in accordance with the River District Design Review Guidelines. A map and guidelines document shall be adopted by the city council and shall be made available to the public through the development services center; and 
(2)  Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission elsewhere in this chapter and other regulations of the city. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies. The Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission shall follow the membership requirements set forth by city council in division 13 of article III of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  The city's Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission shall hold meetings as needed to review requests for river district design review/major works projects in the River District Design Review Area. 
(2)  Meetings shall be scheduled at a time agreed upon by the committee, the staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review, and the person(s) presenting the request for river district design review of a major works project. 
(d)  Rules and records. The Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission shall follow procedures for review as outlined in section 7-5-18 of this chapter, and may adopt its own rules and procedures, including the requirements of this chapter. The staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review shall record relevant notes from the meetings 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2437, § 2, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 4265, 1-14-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4265, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, deletes § 7-3-10 which pertained to River District Design Review Committee and derived from Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997; and Ord. No. 2437, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1997. Ord. No. 4265 dissolved the River District Design Review Committee and transferred duties/function to the Asheville Area Riverfront Commission.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
 
Sec. 7-4-1. - Role of the comprehensive plan. 
It is the intent of the City of Asheville to administer this chapter in accordance with the city's current, adopted comprehensive plan. This plan sets forth the goals and policies which serve as the basic policy guide for development in the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. These goals and policies may be amended from time to time to meet the changing requirements of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-4-2. - Review of and amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Annual review. The comprehensive plan for the City of Asheville will be monitored and reviewed annually by the planning and development department and a report submitted following this review to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission and the Asheville City Council. If the commission or council determines that the report raises issues which merit an amendment to the plan, then the council may initiate an amendment in accordance with the provisions set forth in (b) below. 
(b)  Amendments to the comprehensive plan. Amendments to the City of Asheville comprehensive plan shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  An amendment to the comprehensive plan may be approved only by the Asheville City Council, either on its own initiative or at the request of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission or any other person or agency. 
(2)  Asheville City Council and the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing (jointly or separately) on each amendment or group of amendments initiated. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided and the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 7-5-20 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing this public hearing from being held at the same time as a public hearing for the rezoning of a particular tract or parcel affected by the amendment. 
(3)  In considering the amendment, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission and Asheville City Council shall review the proposed amendment, the factors set forth in subsection 7-4-2(b)(4) below, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. Based on this information, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit a report and recommendation to the Asheville City Council regarding whether or not the proposed amendment should be adopted. 
(4)  In deciding whether to recommend or adopt a proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission and the Asheville City Council shall consider whether the amendment is necessary based on one or more of the following factors: 
a.  There has been a change in projections or assumptions (such as demographic trends or the availability of public facilities) on which the comprehensive plan is based; 
b.  Issues or needs have been identified which are not adequately addressed in the comprehensive plan; or 
c.  The amendment will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the City of Asheville. 
(5)  Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the Asheville City Council may: 
a.  Adopt the proposed amendment; 
b.  Revise and adopt the proposed amendment; 
c.  Reject the proposed amendment; 
d.  Refer the matter back to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration or hearing; or 
e.  Conduct an additional hearing on the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 7-5-1. - Permits and approvals. 
(a)  Permits and approvals. Any development within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction may require one or more of the following permits and approvals in order to ensure that the development is consistent with the goals and purposes of this chapter and with the public health, safety, and general welfare. Permits and approvals include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
Zoning permits (section 7-5-2) 
Temporary use permits (section 7-5-3) 
Use by right, subject to special requirements, (section 7-5-4) 
Conditional use approvals (section 7-5-5) 
Manufactured housing rental community approval (section 7-5-7) 
Subdivision plat approvals (section 7-5-8) 
Site plan review (section 7-5-9) 
Downtown design review (section 7-5-10) 
Certificate of appropriateness approval (section 7-5-11) 
Floodplain development (section 7-5-12) 
Erosion and sedimentation control plans (section 7-5-13) 
Stormwater permits (section 7-5-14) 
Zoning vested rights approvals (section 7-5-15) 
Sign permits (section 7-5-16) 
Driveway access permits (section 7-5-17) 
Riverfront design review (section 7-5-18) 
Certificate of occupancy (section 7-5-19) 
Procedures are set forth in this article for reviewing and granting of these permits and approvals. 
Applications for all permits identified above may be made at the City of Asheville Development and Permitting Center, unless otherwise specified. All required permits may be applied for simultaneously at the development and permitting center and all required fees may be paid at this location. Development and permitting center staff shall process the application(s) and distribute the plans to the appropriate staff persons for review and approval. Staff of the development and permitting center serve as the primary contact for information regarding the approval status of the requested permits. 
The review procedures described in article V are those required by the City of Asheville. Other agencies, specifically the Metropolitan Sewerage District of Buncombe County (MSD), have separate procedures which must be followed in order to obtain plan approval and/or acceptance of improvements. These agencies must be contacted to obtain information regarding the proper procedure for approval of plans and of construction. 
(b)  Relationship between different permits and approvals. Building permits and certificates of occupancy are typically the final forms of approval for most development within the City of Asheville and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy may be contingent upon the applicant previously having received one or more other permits or forms of approval. For example, site plan approval is required prior to the issuance of a zoning permit to assure that all requirements of this chapter are being met and erosion control plan approval is required prior to issuance of a grading permit. Zoning and building permits will be issued for a development project only after all conditions precedent to the construction of the development imposed under the provisions of this chapter have been met. Each section of this article describes a different type of permit or approval which may be required for a particular project. 
(c)  Simultaneous processing of applications. 
(1)  This section intends to accommodate, where possible, the simultaneous processing of applications for different permits and approvals which may be required for the same project, in order to make the review process as short as possible. Possibilities for concurrent filing and processing of applications include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  A site plan along with a use by right, subject to special requirements; 
b.  A site plan along with a variance request; 
c.  A preliminary subdivision plat along with an erosion control plan; 
d.  A site plan along with a certificate of appropriateness request; 
e.  A site plan along with a downtown design review application; and 
f.  A site plan along with a traffic impact study. 
(2)  No application for the rezoning of property shall be accepted or processed while an application for any of the approvals or permits listed in section 7-5-1(a) above is pending for the same property or vice versa. 
(3)  Some forms of approval depend upon the applicant having previously received another form of approval. Approvals such as site plan approval require the applicant to take certain action within some time period following the approval to avoid having the approval lapse. The applicant should note that each of the permits and approvals set forth in this section has its own review sequence and should take this into consideration when planning the development. 
(d)  Application and review fees. Requests for review of various permit and approval applications required by this section are subject to the payment of various fees in order to defray the city's administrative costs. The fees for different types of permits and approvals are set forth in the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. These fees are determined by the Asheville City Council and are periodically revised by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 3, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(e), (f), 1-24-06)  
Sec. 7-5-2. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  Purpose. A zoning permit shall be required for the construction or development of any new use within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville. In addition to new uses a zoning permit shall also be required for expansions of existing uses, as well as for changes of use. The procedure set forth below shall be followed to obtain a zoning permit for the construction of single-family and duplex residential development and for other uses which do not require permits and/or approvals, other than a driveway access permit and a soil erosion and sedimentation plan approval for projects disturbing less than 10,000 square feet, as set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required prior to applying for a zoning permit. Applicants are encouraged to call or visit the planning and development department prior to requesting a zoning permit to determine what information is required for the application. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for a zoning permit may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent, specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent files the application, the agent shall provide documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. An application fee, as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for a zoning permit shall contain the information required on the application form, including a site plan showing the dimensions of the proposed use and its location on the property or site. Other information necessary to show that the use or structure complies with the standards set forth in this chapter shall also be provided. 
(4)  Annual zoning permits. An annual zoning permit is required for certain land uses including homestays and short-term vacation rentals. Annual zoning permits must be renewed each year before the expiration date and in accordance with the terms of this UDO. Failure to timely renew the annual zoning permit will result in an expiration of that permit, and can result in a voluntary forfeiture of all legal rights and claims to continue that use. See section 7-17-3. 
(d)  Staff review. The planning and development director shall review the application and determine whether it is complete within ten working days of its submittal. If the application is found to be incomplete, the planning and development director shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies. No further steps shall be taken to process the application until the applicant corrects the deficiencies. The planning and development director shall issue a zoning permit only upon finding that the proposed use or structure satisfies the requirements set forth in article VIII of this chapter. Provided the application is complete, failure by the planning and development director to determine completeness of the application within ten working days shall result in the refund of any application fee paid. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for zoning permit requests. 
(f)  Formal review. No formal review of zoning permit requests is required. Requests shall be reviewed by appropriate city staff to assure compliance with all applicable regulations and requirements. 
(g)  Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements requiring zoning permits set forth in this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established in section 7-6-1. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning and development director shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-2. 
(i)  Permit validity. Upon the approval of a zoning permit, the applicant shall have one year to obtain the required building permit(s). Failure to commence building permits within this time shall render the zoning permit void. The planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. Upon issuance of a building permit(s), the zoning permit shall remain valid as long as a valid building permit exists for the project. Any unapproved change in the approved plans shall render the zoning permit invalid. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the conditions of the zoning permit shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 4637, § 1d, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-5-3. - Temporary use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. To insure that proposed temporary uses comply with the requirements of this chapter, no use that is classified as a temporary use in the zoning district in which it is located shall be placed or established on the property without first receiving a temporary use permit from the planning and development department. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required prior to applying for a temporary use permit. Applicants are encouraged to call or visit the planning and development department prior to requesting a temporary use permit to determine what information is required for the application. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filling of application. An application for a temporary use permit may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent, files the application, the agent shall provide the planning and development director with documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. A permit fee, as established by City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be submitted with the application. In addition, a permit shall be obtained from the fire department as required by the fire prevention code. If the temporary use is deemed an event of public interest or will require the expenditure of money or use of resources by the city (beyond routine administrative costs) in connection with the implementation of the public safety plan described in subsection (3) below, the applicant shall pay for these expenses prior to the initiation of the temporary use or provide a bond or other satisfactory security for the payment thereof, as identified and estimated by the city. These expenses may include, but are not limited to, the pro-rated salary of city or other government employees necessary for the conduct of the temporary use. City-sponsored or co-sponsored events may be exempt from these fee requirements. City council may also waive fees for events deemed to have special economic development benefits. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for temporary use permit shall contain the information required on the application form. The application shall be accompanied by a sketch plan showing the boundaries of the property, the use of adjacent properties, the location of the temporary use or structure on the property, access and parking provisions, restroom facilities, and other information sufficient to show that the temporary use or structure complies with the standards set forth in this chapter and chapter 4 of the fire prevention code. 
a.  Persons seeking issuance of a temporary use permit for an event shall file an application with a minimum of ten days prior to the proposed event date, unless this time frame is reduced by the planning and development director. 
b.  Persons seeking issuance of a temporary use permit for an event of public interest shall file an application with a minimum of 21 days prior to the proposed event date, unless this time frame is reduced by the planning and development director. For uses involving the expected congregation of 100 or more persons at any one time (otherwise described as "assembly" uses in the building code), the event shall be deemed an event of public interest and shall also provide an approved public safety plan identifying the means by which public safety will be ensured during the conduct of the temporary use. This public safety plan may include, but is not limited to, such information as: ingress and egress to and from the site; fencing, screening or buffering to control noise and/or crowds; provisions for parking and/or overflow parking; staffing for security and crowd control at the event; and any additional information that may be required by the police or fire chief. The applicant shall be responsible for public expenses associated with the public safety plan as provided in subsection (2) above. If determined necessary by the police chief or fire chief, the public safety plan will be coordinated with other affected agencies involved in public safety operations, including but not limited to the Buncombe County Sheriff, the Buncombe County Emergency Management Director, appropriate rural fire district personnel and the North Carolina Division of Alcohol Law Enforcement. 
c.  Persons seeking issuance of a temporary use permit for an event on public property shall file an application with the parks and recreation department in accordance with the City of Asheville Special Events Guideline. 
(d)  Staff review. The planning and development director shall review the application and determine whether it is complete within ten working days of its submittal. If the application is found to be incomplete, the planning and development director shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies. No further steps shall be taken to process the application until the applicant corrects the deficiencies. Provided the application is complete, failure by the planning and development director to determine the completeness of the application within ten working days shall result in the refund of any application fee paid. The planning and development director shall issue a temporary use permit only upon finding that the proposed use satisfies the requirements set forth in section 7-14-2 of this chapter. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for temporary use permit requests. 
(f)  Formal review. No formal review of temporary use permit requests is required. Requests shall be reviewed by appropriate city staff to assure compliance with all applicable regulations and requirements. 
(g)  Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established in section 7-6-1. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning and development director shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established in section 7-6-2. 
(i) Permit validity. The temporary use permit shall be valid only for the time period stated on the permit, as set forth in section 7-14-2. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the conditions of the temporary use permit shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(k)  Public emergencies. In the event of a natural disaster, catastrophic event or public emergency the city manager or her/his designee may waive any temporary use permit procedures and authorize the placement of temporary use facilities which are deemed necessary or desirable in conjunction with the management of the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2535, § 3, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 3162, § 1, 9-14-04; Ord. No. 3480, § 1(c), 6-12-07)  
Sec. 7-5-4. - Uses by right, subject to special requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. Uses by right, subject to special requirements, are uses permitted by right, provided that the special requirements set forth in subsection 7-16-1 are met. The special requirements are intended to insure that the uses fit the intent of the zoning districts within which they are permitted, and that the uses are compatible with other development permitted within the zoning districts. Review and approval of these uses are handled by the planning and development director, who has no discretion to modify the special requirements. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. A pre-application conference is not required for approval of uses by right, subject to special requirements. Applicants are encouraged, however, to contact the planning and development director to discuss the special requirements. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for a permit for a use by right, subject to special requirements, may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent files the application, the agent shall provide documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a permit for a use by right, subject to special requirements, shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. A permit fee, as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be submitted with the application. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for a permit for a use by right, subject to special requirements, shall contain all information described in Appendix B (Checklists for applications). The application shall be accompanied by a site plan meeting the requirements for site plans set forth in Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards). 
(d)  Staff review. The planning and development director shall review the proposed use and determine if the special requirements for that use have been met. If the special requirements have been met, the use shall be approved. Failure to meet all the special requirements shall result in denial of a permit for the proposed use. The planning and development director shall approve or deny the proposed restricted use or request more information, if needed, within ten working days of submittal. If the application is found to be incomplete, the planning and development director shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies. No further steps will be taken to process the application until the applicant corrects the deficiencies. The planning and development director shall approve the use only upon finding that the proposed use satisfies all applicable requirements set forth in this chapter. Provided the application is complete, failure by the planning and development director to review the application within ten working days shall result in the refund of any application fees paid. 
(e)  Public notification. Public notification is not required. 
(f)  Formal review. Formal review is not required. 
(g)  Variances. Variances from the special requirements constitute "use variances" and shall not be permitted. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of decisions of the planning and development director regarding applications for a use by right, subject to special requirements, shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established in section 7-6-2. 
(i)  Permit validity. The permit for a use by right, subject to special requirements, shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance. Failure to initiate construction or otherwise begin the permitted use within this time shall render the permit void. The planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. 
(j)  Violations. Failure to establish or maintain the special requirements is considered a violation of this chapter and shall subject the offender to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-5-5. - Conditional use approvals. 
(a)  Purpose. Conditional uses are established to provide for the location of those uses which are generally compatible with other land uses permitted in a zoning district but which, because of their unique characteristics or potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and the city as a whole, require individual consideration of their location, design, configuration, and/or operation at the particular location proposed. Such individual consideration may also call for the imposition of individualized conditions in order to ensure that the use is appropriate at a particular location and to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any use identified in article VIII of this chapter as a conditional use in a zoning district shall not be permitted without the approval of the city council in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this subsection 7-5-5. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. 
(1)  Conference. Every applicant for a conditional use is required to meet with the planning and development director in a pre-application conference prior to the submittal of a request for approval of a conditional use. The purposes of this conference are to provide additional information regarding the review process and assistance in the preparation of the application. 
(2)  Neighborhood meeting. It is highly recommended that the developer meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed conditional use will be located. This meeting, which should be held at the pre-application stage, will allow the developer to explain the proposed use and to be informed of the concerns of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for a conditional use permit may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent files the application, the agent shall provide documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. A permit fee, as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be submitted with the application. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for a conditional use permit shall contain all information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications); and a notation of the pertinent deed number of the subject property with book and page reference from the Buncombe County Register of Deeds. 
(d)  Staff review. 
(1)  Planning and development staff review. Following submittal of the application and site plans for the conditional use, they shall be reviewed by the planning and development director for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Provided the application and site plan are complete, failure by the planning and development director to review the application and site plan within ten working days shall result in the refund of any application fees paid. 
(2)  Submittal of plans to technical review committee ("TRC"). The planning and development director shall present the site plans for the conditional use to the TRC at its next regular meeting. The TRC shall review the site plan for compliance with existing federal, state, and local regulations. This review shall be made by the members of the TRC and by any other agencies or officials as determined by the planning and development director. 
(3)  Action by technical review committee. Upon submittal and review of a complete application for a conditional use permit, the TRC may make one of the following recommendations: 
a.  Approval. If the TRC recommends approval, the planning and development director shall forward the recommendation and the conditional use application to the Asheville City Council for all applications except Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts. The recommendation and conditional use application for Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be forwarded to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b.  Approval with conditions. If the TRC recommends approval with conditions, the applicant may revise the plan to meet the conditions of the approval and resubmit it. The revised plan shall be reviewed by the planning and development director and, if it meets all of the conditions, the conditional use application for all requests, except Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts, shall be scheduled for a public hearing at the next available meeting of the Asheville City Council. Applications for Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be scheduled for a public hearing at the next available meeting of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. If the plan is not revised to meet conditions within 60 days after action by the TRC or the applicant does not request a public hearing by providing written notice to the planning and development director, the request shall be deemed denied. 
c.  Denial. If the TRC recommends denial of the request, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. The site plan may be revised to address the reasons for denial and resubmitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A recommendation for denial by the TRC shall be considered final action on the request unless, within 30 days from receiving the written recommendation of the TRC, the applicant requests a public hearing by providing written notice to the planning and development director. The applicant may revise the site plan to address the reason for denial and resubmit the revised plan or the applicant may appeal the decision of the TRC to the planning and zoning commission. The applicant may not resubmit the revised site plan and appeal the TRC decision. 
d.  Timing. The TRC shall make its recommendation within ten working days of reviewing the application and site plan. Provided the application and site plan are complete, failure by the TRC to make its recommendation within ten working days of reviewing the application and site plan shall result in the refund of any application fees paid. 
e.  Formal review. 
1.  Public hearing. Upon receipt of a notice from the planning and development director or the applicant requesting a public hearing on the application and site plan for a conditional use permit, a public hearing shall be scheduled. A public hearing before the Asheville City Council shall be held for all conditional use permit applications except those for Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts. For Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts, the initial hearing shall be before the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. Following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, a public hearing shall be held by the city council for consideration of Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts. 
2.  Action by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Review of conditional use permit request. A public hearing on the application and site plan for Level III site plan projects, development standard bonuses for residential districts, and applications for ancillary nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be scheduled by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission following review and approval or conditional approval of the application by the technical review committee. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the request its next available meeting after receiving the recommendations of the TRC. 
(e)  Formal review. 
(1)  Public hearing. Upon receipt of a notice from the planning and development director or the applicant requesting a public hearing on the application and site plan for a conditional use permit, a public hearing shall be scheduled. A public hearing before the Asheville City Council shall be held for all conditional use permit applications except those for Level III site plan projects and applications for ancillary non-residential uses in residential districts. For Level III site plan projects and applications for ancillary non-residential uses in residential districts, the initial hearing shall be before the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. Following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, a public hearing shall be held by city council for consideration of Level III site plan projects and applications for ancillary non-residential uses in residential districts. 
(2)  Action by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  Review of conditional use permit request. A public hearing on the application and site plan for Level III site plan projects and applications for ancillary non-residential uses in residential districts shall be considered by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission following review and approval or conditional approval of the application by the technical review committee. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the request at its next available meeting after receiving the recommendation of the TRC. 
b.  Decision by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. The planning and zoning commission, after conducting the public hearing may: (1) recommend approval of the proposed conditional use; (2) recommend approval with conditions of the proposed conditional use; (3) table the application pending submittal of additional information; or (4) recommend denial of the application. The decision on the conditional use application shall be by a simple majority vote of those members of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission present at the meeting at which the action is taken. The recommendation of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall be presented to the Asheville City Council at their next available meeting, unless the parties involved agree to another time. 
(3)  Action by the Asheville City Council. 
a.  Review of conditional use permit request. A public hearing on those conditional use applications reviewed by the planning and zoning commission from the TRC shall be scheduled by the Asheville City Council following action by the planning and zoning commission. A public hearing on all other conditional use applications shall be scheduled following action by the TRC. The Asheville City Council shall consider the request within 35 days of receiving information regarding the conditional use permit application from the planning and development director. 
b.  Decision by city council: The Asheville City Council, after conducting the public hearing, may: (1) deny approval; (2) table the application pending submittal of additional information; or (3) approve the proposed conditional use permit. The minutes of the Asheville City Council shall state if the proposed conditional use meets or does not meet each of the standards set forth in subsection 7-16-2(c) of this chapter and all other requirements set forth by this chapter for the proposed conditional use. The decision on the conditional use application shall be by a simple majority vote of those members of the Asheville City Council present at the meeting at which the action is taken. 
If approved by the city council, no permits may be issued related to the approved conditional use permit pertinent to the specific property until the property owner has recorded the approved plan and conditions at the Buncombe County Register of Deeds including notation of the pertinent deed number with book and page reference. 
c.  Transfer of approval. A conditional use approval is not transferable from one property to another, but may be transferred to a subsequent owner of the property. 
d.  Resubmission of denied applications. No application for approval of a development project (conditional use, site plan, project plan) under any approval process (Level I, Level II, or Level III), shall be filed with or accepted by the planning and development department if that project is identical or substantially similar to a conditional use or conditional zoning application which has been denied by the city council within one year of the final action by the city council denying the request. 
(f)  Public notification. Notice of public hearings or public meetings required under this section for conditional use approvals shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. 
(g)  Project phasing. If a project approved as a conditional use is to be developed in phases, a master plan for the entire development site must be approved by the Asheville City Council at the same time and in the same manner the conditional use permit application is considered. 
Final plans for phases of the conditional use may be submitted in stages and shall be approved by the planning and development department staff provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  All stages shall be shown with precise boundaries on the master plan and shall be numbered in the expected order of development. 
(2)  Each phase must be able to exist independently of subsequent phases by meeting all applicable laws and regulations as if the phase were a separate project. 
(3)  All the data required for the project as a whole shall be given for each stage shown on the plan. 
(4)  A proportionate share of the open space and common facilities shall be included in each stage of the development. 
(5)  The phasing shall be consistent with the traffic circulation, drainage, and utilities plan for the entire master plan for the conditional use. 
(6)  Each phase of the conditional use must comply with any and all conditions attached to the approval of the conditional use permit by the Asheville City Council. 
(h)  Variances. In issuing conditional use permits, the city council may prescribe dimensional requirements (height, setback, etc.) that are different from the requirements of the corresponding general zoning classification, and may prescribe development and design standards that are different from those set out in article XI; provided, that any request for a modification to a dimensional requirement or development and design standard that is less restrictive than would be applicable for the underlying general zoning classification must be specifically described in any notices required for the public hearing on the conditional use permit application, and must be set out separately in any ordinance issuing said conditional use permit, together with an explanation of the reason for the modification. Except as modified pursuant to this paragraph, all standards and requirements applicable to the underlying general zoning district must be met. Variances to the standards established by any conditional use permit shall not be allowed. 
(i)  Appeals. An appeal from the decision of the Asheville City Council regarding a conditional use application and site plan may be made by an aggrieved party and shall be made to the Superior Court of Buncombe County in the nature of certiorari. Any such petition to the Superior Court shall be filed with the court no later than 30 days after a written copy of the decision of the city council is received by the applicant. 
(j)  Permit validity. Approvals of a conditional use application and site plan shall be valid for two years from the date of approval by the Asheville City Council. An extension of up to one additional year may be granted by the Asheville City Council upon submittal by the application of sufficient justification for the extension. Appropriate conditions may be added to the initial approval or extension approval to guarantee site maintenance and security. Failure to obtain a zoning permit or otherwise being the permitted use, within this time shall render the conditional use approval void. The planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period up to six months upon submittal by the application of sufficient justification for the extension. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any time limitations prescribed by statute or by other ordinances in this chapter. 
Permits for the phased development of a conditional use project shall remain valid for the time approved by the Asheville City Council as part of the conditional use approval of the master plan for the conditional use. 
(k)  Violations. Violations of the conditional use permit or of any of the conditions attached to the approval shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 4, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2771, § 1a.—d., 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2843, § 1(a), 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2871, §§ 1(g)—1(k), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 3064, §§ 1(a), (b), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3206, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3369, § 1(b), 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(a)—(c), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3530, § 1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3709, § 1a, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3757, § 1a, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3947, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 7-5-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3328, § 1(g), adopted Jan. 24, 2006, deleted § 7-5-6 in its entirety. Former § 7-5-6 pertained to planned unit development (PUD) approvals and derived from Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997 and Ord. No. 2843, § 1(b), adopted Aug. 28, 2001.  
Sec. 7-5-7. - Manufactured housing community (MHC) approval. 
(a)  Purpose. The review procedure for manufactured housing communities is required for developments which propose the provision of two or more manufactured homes or manufactured home spaces for rent. This review procedure is designed to assure that the communities comply with the design standards set forth in subsection 7-9-5. Public comment, particularly from owners of neighboring property, is provided for through this review procedure. 
The manufactured housing community review process is a two-part procedure which involves the approval of a master plan, as well as the rezoning of the property to the manufactured housing community overlay district. The manufactured housing community overlay district is not mapped or affixed to particular parcels until after an application by a developer and approval by the Asheville City Council. 
When applied to a specific geographic area, the manufactured housing community overlay district shall have the effect of allowing development to be designed, reviewed, approved, constructed and managed according to the provisions of section 7-9-5, rather than as required by the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. 
(1)  Conference. Prior to the submittal of an application for approval of a manufactured housing community, the applicant is required to meet with the planning and development director in a pre-application conference. The purposes of this conference are to provide clarification and assistance in the preparation and submission of plans for approval. The sketch plan, as described below, shall be presented for review during the conference. 
(2)  Sketch plan. 
a.  Required for review. A sketch plan is required for review by the planning and development director for all proposed manufactured housing communities. 
b.  Preparation. The sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards) and submitted to the planning and development department. 
(3)  Neighborhood meeting. It is highly recommended that the developer meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed project is located. This meeting, which should be held at the pre-application stage, will allow the developer to explain the proposed project and to be informed of the concerns of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for approval of a manufactured housing community may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent files the application, the agent shall provide documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a manufactured housing community shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. Fees as established by the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable when the site plan is submitted. 
(3)  Information required. 
a.  General. Each application for a manufactured housing community shall contain all of the information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications). 
b.  Site plan required. A site plan depicting the proposed manufactured housing community shall be required for all proposed rental communities. 
c.  Preparation by registered professional. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, licensed architect, or licensed engineer and shall be prepared in accordance with Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards). 
d.  Submittal of plans. Fifteen copies of the site plan must be submitted to the development and permitting center at least 14 days prior to the technical review committee meeting at which it is to be reviewed. 
(d)  Staff review. 
(1)  Planning and development staff review. Following submittal of the site plan for the manufactured housing community, it shall be reviewed by the planning and development director for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Submittal of plans to technical review committee (TRC). The planning and development director shall present site plans for manufactured housing communities to the technical review committee at its next regular meeting. The technical review committee shall review the site plan for compliance with existing federal, state, and local regulations. This review shall be made by the members of the technical review committee and by any other agencies or officials as determined by the planning and development director. 
(3)  Action by technical review committee. 
a.  Timing. The technical review committee shall take action within ten working days of reviewing the site plan. Provided the application is complete, failure by the technical review committee to take action within ten working days shall result in the refund of any application fees paid. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
b.  Approval. If the site plan is approved by the technical review committee, the planning and development director shall present the site plan and the manufactured housing community (MHC district) designation for review and approval at the next regular meeting of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
c.  Conditional approval. If the site plan receives conditional approval from the technical review committee ("TRC"), the applicant shall revise the plan based upon the conditions of the approval and resubmit it. The revised plan shall be reviewed by the planning and development director and if it meets all the approval conditions, the site plan and the MHC District designation shall be presented for review and approval at the next available regular meeting of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. If the plan is not revised within 60 days after conditional approval from the TRC to meet the conditions, the request shall be deemed denied. 
d.  Denial. If the site plan is denied approval by the technical review committee, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. The site plan may be revised to address the reasons for denial and resubmitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Formal review. 
(1)  Action by Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  Public hearing. Upon receiving the application and site plan for a manufactured housing community from the planning and development director, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development. 
b.  Review of site plan and manufactured housing community (MHC) district designation. The site plan and MHC District designations shall be reviewed at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission following review and approval or conditional approval of the plan by the technical review committee. 
c.  Recommendation for approval of MHC district designation and approval of site plan. If the site plan is approved and the MHC district designation is recommended for approval by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the planning and development director shall notify the city clerk and present the MHC district designation for review and consideration at the next regular meeting of the Asheville City Council. 
d.  Approval of MHC district designation and conditional approval of site plan. If the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission recommends approval of the MHC district designation and grants conditional approval to the site plan, the applicant shall revise the plan based upon the conditions of the approval and resubmit it. The planning and development director shall review the revised plan and if it meets all of the approval conditions and is otherwise unchanged from the original, shall signify on the plan the change of status from conditional approval to approval. The planning and development director shall then present the MHC district designation for review and consideration at the next regular meeting of the Asheville City Council. The applicant shall have 60 days to revise the plan in accordance with the approval conditions or it shall be deemed denied. 
e.  Denial of the MHC district designation and/or site plan. If either the MHC district designation or the site plan is recommended for denial, the entire project is considered denied. If the project is denied, the applicant shall be informed in writing of the reasons for denial. If the MHC district designation is denied, the request cannot be reconsidered until one year after the date of action taken by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission to deny the request. 
f.  Timing. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the request at its next regular meeting, unless parties agree to another time. 
(2)  Action by Asheville City Council. 
a.  Review of MHC district designation. Following review and recommendation for approval by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the MHC District designation shall be presented for review and consideration at the next available meeting of the Asheville City Council. The public hearing will be scheduled as provided by city council's rules of procedure. The city council does not review the preliminary master plan unless the decision of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission is appealed. 
b.  Approval of MHC district designation. If the Asheville City Council approves the MHC district designation, the applicant may then apply for all appropriate construction permits and proceed toward construction. 
c.  Denial of MHC district designation. If the Asheville City Council denies the MHC district designation, the applicant will be informed in writing of the reasons for denial. If the Asheville City Council denies the MHC district designation, the provisions of section 7-7-7 (Waiting Period for Subsequent Applications) shall apply. 
d.  Timing. The Asheville City Council shall consider the request within 35 days of receiving the request for consideration of the MHC district designation. 
(3)  Public dedications. Asheville City Council approval and acceptance are required for the public dedication of any properties, streets, easements, or rights-of-way. When public dedications are required, the request will be presented for review and approval at the next available meeting of the Asheville City Council. The Asheville City Council shall take action within 30 days of reviewing the request for public dedication. Approval of public dedications shall be a condition of project approval. 
(f)  Public notification. Notice of public hearings or public meetings required under this section for manufactured housing community approval shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. 
(g)  Project phasing. If a project is to be developed in phases, a master plan for the entire development site must be approved by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the beginning of construction on any phase. 
Final plans for the phases of the manufactured housing community development may be submitted in stages and shall be approved by the planning and development department staff provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  All stages shall be shown with precise boundaries on the master plan and shall be numbered in the expected order of development. 
(2)  Each phase must be able to exist independently of subsequent phases by meeting all applicable laws and regulations as if the phase were a separate project. 
(3)  All the data required for the project as a whole shall be given for each stage shown on the plan. 
(4)  A proportionate share of the open space and common facilities shall be included in each stage of the development. 
(5)  The phasing shall be consistent with the traffic circulation, drainage, and utilities plan for the entire master plan for the rental community. 
(h)  Variances. Variances from the requirements of this chapter for manufactured housing communities may be approved by the Asheville City Council upon the recommendation of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. Requests for variances shall be identified in the public notices required by subsection 7-5-7(f). 
(i)  Appeals. If the site plan is denied or granted conditional approval, or if no action is taken within ten days by the technical review committee, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days after denial, conditional approval, or lack of action by the technical review committee. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, grant conditional approval, or deny the site plan. 
If the MHC district designation is denied, or if the site plan is denied or granted conditional approval, or if no action is taken within 35 days by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Asheville City Council within 30 days after denial, conditional approval, or lack of action by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. The Asheville City Council shall approve, grant conditional approval, or deny the plan. 
(j)  Permit validity. Approval of the site plan for a manufactured housing community and the MHC zoning designation shall be valid for one year from the date of approval by Asheville City Council. Failure to initiate construction, or otherwise begin the permitted use, within this time shall render the manufactured housing community approval void. The planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. 
Permits for phased development of a manufactured housing community shall remain valid for the time approved by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission as part of the master plan approval. 
(k)  Violations. Violations of the approved master plan for the manufactured housing community shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of section 7-18. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2843, § 1(c), 8-28-01; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(d), (e), 7-11-06)  
Sec. 7-5-8. - Subdivision plat approvals. 
(a)  Major subdivisions. 
(1)  Purpose and application. The major subdivision review process is required for those divisions of land into two or more lots where the extension of public streets or private streets built to City of Asheville standards is required. Review of the preliminary plat by the Technical Review Committee ("TRC") is required under the major subdivision review process. Review and approval of the final plat is done by the technical review staff. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. 
a.  Conference. It is required that every applicant for a major subdivision meet with the designated staff in a conference prior to the submittal of a subdivision plat. The purpose of this conference is to provide clarification and assistance in the preparation and submission of plats for approval. 
b.  Sketch plan. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the development services department prior to or at the pre-application conference. Upon submittal of the sketch plan, the designated staff shall conduct an initial review to determine whether the proposed subdivision is a major subdivision. 
c.  Neighborhood Meeting. The developer is required to meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed project is located. This meeting is to allow the developer to explain the proposed project, be informed about neighborhood concerns, and explore opportunities to address those concerns in cooperation with the neighborhood. The meeting must be held in the pre-application stage no more than four months prior to the submittal date and must be at a location and time designed to allow interested neighbors to attend. It is recommended, but not required, that the developer retain a neutral third party to facilitate the meeting. The developer shall provide notice of the meeting by first class mail to all property owners within 200 feet at least ten days before the meeting. A written report of the meeting must be submitted with the major subdivision application. 
(3)  Preliminary plat/site plan submittal. 
a.  Plat/Site plan(s) required. A preliminary plat/site plan(s) for a proposed major subdivision shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor, licensed landscape architect, or licensed engineer and shall be prepared in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance ("UDO"), the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
b.  Filing of application. A complete application packet containing all information as required by the development services director shall be submitted according to the established schedule of the TRC prior to the technical review committee meeting at which it is to be reviewed. 
c.  Public notification. 
1.  Application. Notice of the major subdivision application shall be posted on the property at a conspicuous place at least seven days prior to the TRC meeting at which the major subdivision application will be considered. The sign shall state the words "Notice of Technical Review Meeting" in letters at least six inches high and shall identify the means to contact the appropriate city official or website for information about the application. 
2.  Decision. No later than ten days after a decision on the major subdivision application is made by the TRC, a copy of such decision shall be mailed to property owners within 200 feet pursuant to Section 7-5-20(b)(2). 
d.  Review and action at TRC. The preliminary plat of a proposed major subdivision shall first be reviewed by the designated staff for compliance with the subdivision regulations and other applicable provisions. Unless required to be reviewed by the HRC as set forth in subsection (e) below, the designated staff shall then present the preliminary plat to the TRC at the next regular meeting of the TRC following receipt of the application. Review of the preliminary plat by the TRC will be ministerial in nature, and limited to compliance with the regulations set forth in this UDO. The TRC may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat decision is considered final on the date the TRC renders its decision. 
Once the preliminary plat is approved, the applicant may proceed with infrastructure construction and final plat approval in accordance with such approval. If the preliminary plat is not approved, the TRC shall set forth in writing the reasons for denying approval of the plat. 
e.  Historic overlay districts and local historic landmarks. All lots of proposed subdivisions located in a historic overlay district or of land designated as a local historic landmark shall be reviewed by the Historic Resources Commission ("HRC") for issuance of a preliminary approval to ensure that any potential development on the proposed subdivided lot(s) that would require a certificate of appropriateness would be not be incongruous with the special character of the historic district and/or local historic landmark in terms of building setback, orientation and consistency with the historic development pattern. HRC approval shall precede TRC review, if applicable. The process for HRC review of proposed subdivisions and preliminary approval shall be quasi-judicial; decisions shall be made based on the applicable ordinances and historic guidelines. Subsequent to final subdivision approval, a separately issued certificate of appropriateness(s) will be required for any proposed construction and/or actual site development (if not included as part of the initial subdivision review) prior to issuance of building and zoning permits in accordance with section 7-5-11 of the City Code. 
f.  Approvals. Approval of the preliminary plat for major subdivisions shall be valid for two years from the date of approval by the TRC. The final plat for the major subdivision shall be presented for approval prior to the end of this two-year period. Phased subdivisions shall be exempt from this time limit as set forth in this section, but are instead subject to the phasing schedule appearing in the approved preliminary plat. The applicant may request, in writing, adjustments of the approved schedule and the designated staff may grant extensions of up to 12 months for each phase. An HRC issued subdivision preliminary approval shall be valid for two years from the date of approval by the HRC. 
(4)  Guarantee in lieu of construction of improvements. In lieu of completion of construction of the required improvements and utilities prior to final plat approval, the property owner may submit to the city a performance guarantee as set forth in Article XV. 
(5)  Final plat. The final plat of a major subdivision shall be reviewed by the designated staff for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and for conformity with the approved preliminary plat. Substantial changes from the preliminary plat, as determined by the planning and development director, or their designee, shall require an additional review by the TRC, to ensure compliance with existing regulations. Provided the final plat is complete, and no further review is determined to be required, the designated staff shall act on the final plat of major subdivisions within 30 days of receipt of the plat. Following final plat approval, the applicant shall record the plat for the major subdivision in accordance with this subsection. No lots in a subdivision shall be sold prior to approval by the city and recording of a plat for the subdivision. 
a.  Recordation and signatures. 
1.  Signatures. Upon approval of a final plat for major subdivisions, the plat shall be signed in the appropriate place by the designated staff and by the owner(s). 
2.  Recordation. A final plat for major subdivisions must be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County in compliance with the North Carolina General Statutes within 30 days following approval by the city. No plat shall be considered finally approved until the plat has been recorded. 
3.  Phasing. Final plats for subdivisions developed in phases shall be recorded in accordance with the schedule set forth in the preliminary plat and approved by the TRC. The applicant may request, in writing, adjustments of the approved schedule and the designated staff may grant extensions of up to 12 months for each phase. 
(6)  Acceptance of rights-of-way and easements. The approval of a final plat does not constitute acceptance for maintenance or other purposes of improvements in rights-of-way, such as utility lines, street paving, drainage facilities, or sidewalks. Such improvements, when located within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, may be accepted only by action by the City of Asheville City Council following inspection and approval. 
(7)  Open space dedication and acceptance. Land designated as public open space or a park on a plat shall be considered to be offered for dedication but not accepted until the Asheville City Council has by express action done so. Until such dedication has been accepted, such areas may be used for open space purposes by its owner or by an association representing owners of lots within the subdivision. Land so offered for dedication shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with the proposed public use without the approval of the Asheville City Council. 
(b)  Minor subdivisions. 
(1)  Purpose. The minor subdivision review process is required for those divisions of land into two or more lots which do not require the extension of public streets or private streets built to City of Asheville standards. Review and approval of the subdivision plat by the staff permits a speedy review while insuring that the proposed subdivision meets all requirements established by the City of Asheville. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. It is recommended that every subdivision applicant meet with the designated staff in a conference prior to the submittal of a subdivision plat. The purpose of this conference is to provide clarification and assistance in the preparation and submission of plats for approval. 
(3)  Plan submittal. 
a.  Plan required. Plats for minor subdivisions shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor in accordance with all applicable city standards, including those set forth by the UDO, the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
b.  Filing of application. Plats and a complete application packet containing all information established by the development services director for minor subdivisions shall be submitted to the development services department. 
(4)  Staff review. Unless review by the HRC is required by subsection (5) below, the plat for a proposed minor subdivision shall be reviewed by the designated staff for compliance with these subdivision regulations and other applicable provisions. The review shall also include compliance by the plat with other ordinances and regulations of the City of Asheville. 
Provided the application is complete, the planning and development director shall take action on the plat of the proposed minor subdivision within ten working days of its submittal. Following approval, the applicant shall record the plat for a minor subdivision in accordance with this subsection. 
(5)  Historic overlay districts and local historic landmarks. All lots of proposed subdivisions located in a historic overlay district or of land designated as a local historic landmark shall be reviewed by the HRC for issuance of a preliminary approval to ensure that any potential development on the proposed subdivided lot(s) that would require a certificate of appropriateness would not be incongruous with the special character of the historic district and/or local historic landmark in terms of building setback, orientation and consistency with the historic development pattern. HRC approval shall precede TRC review, if applicable. The process for HRC review of proposed subdivisions and preliminary approval shall be quasi-judicial; decisions shall be made based on the applicable ordinances principles and historic guidelines. Subsequent to subdivision final approval, a separately issued certificate of appropriateness(s) will be required for any proposed construction and/or actual site development (if not included as part of the initial subdivision review) on the lot(s) prior to issuance of building and zoning permits in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-11 of the City Code. 
(6)  Public notification. No public notification is required for minor subdivision review. 
(7)  Final plat approval. 
a.  Recordation and signatures. 
1.  Signatures. Upon approval of a plat for minor subdivisions, the plat shall be signed in the appropriate place by the designated staff and by the owner(s). 
2.  Recordation. A plat for minor subdivisions must be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County in compliance with the North Carolina General Statutes within 30 days following approval by the city. No plat shall be considered finally approved until the plat has been recorded. No lots in a subdivision shall be sold prior to approval by the city and recording of a plat for the subdivision. 
(c)  Fees. For all categories of subdivision, fees as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(d)  Appeals. All appeals from preliminary and final plat approvals shall be to Buncombe County Superior Court in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2564, § 1, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 2724, § 1(a)—(c), 7-11-00; Ord. No. 3032, § 1(c), (d), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(h), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(f)—(h), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3466, § 1(a), 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3572, §§ 1(f), (g), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3708, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3984, §§ 1b—d, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 4492, § 1b, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 4736, §§ 1a—c, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 7-5-9. - Site plan review for development projects except those on parcels zoned Central Business District and located in the Downtown Design Review Overlay District (CBD/DDR). 
(a)  Level III development. 
(1)  Purpose and application. Approval for a Level III development requires a rezoning to one of the expansion zoning districts found in 7-8-2 of this chapter and includes individualized development conditions. Due to their size, these proposals could be expected to have a significant impact upon public services and infrastructure and need to be managed for the benefit of the neighborhood or city as a whole. Such projects must conform to development standards in the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and the Standard Specifications and Details Manual, and goals outlined within the Comprehensive Plan or other adopted plans. Proposed development involving new construction, additions, renovations, and changes of use which fall into one or more of the following categories are considered to be Level III developments: 
a.  New construction and changes of use to a higher impact. 
1.  Industrial building(s), structure(s), or development(s) in the river zoning district with a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or more; 
2.  Commercial building(s), structure(s) or development(s) with a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or more; 
3.  Office or institutional building(s), structure(s) or development(s) with a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or more; 
4.  Any residential development or residential subdivisions containing 50 or more individual dwelling units, or camping/recreation park containing 50 or more individual sites. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Developments defined as a Level III development in any of the expansion zoning districts. 
b.  Additions/expansions. Projects which were not previously approved as a Level III project, but which, with an addition or expansion meets all of the following shall be considered Level III projects: (i) result in a net increase of at least 25 percent or more of the thresholds in section 1(a) above; and (ii) will, with the addition or expansion, reach the minimum thresholds in section 1(a) above. 
c.  Developments which meet all of the following criteria shall be considered one development and shall be reviewed as a Level III project under this section: 
1.  The proposed development and a previously approved development are located within 500 feet of each other; and 
2.  The proposed development and a previously approved development represent different phases of a larger plan that may, or may not, include shared parking facilities, access, utilities or walls; and 
3.  The application for the proposed development is received within three years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a previously approved development. 
(2)  Rezoning required. All Level III developments are allowed only in one of the expansion districts enumerated in article VIII of this chapter and include individualized development conditions and a development plan to accompany the rezoning application. 
(3)  Application procedure. Applications for Level III developments shall follow the conditional zoning process specified in section 7-7-8 of this chapter. 
(4)  Development plan(s) required. A development plan for a proposed Level III development shall be prepared by a licensed design professional in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
(b)  Level II site plan review process. 
(1)  Purpose and application. The Level II site plan review process is required for development applications within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville involving new construction, additions, renovations, and changes of use which would fall into one or more of the following categories: 
a.  New construction and changes of use to a higher impact. 
1.  Industrial buildings(s), structure(s), or developments in the industrial or commercial industrial districts with a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or more, and industrial building(s), structure(s), or developments in the river district with a gross floor area of 50,000 to 99,999 square feet. 
2.  Commercial building(s) or structure(s) with a gross floor area of 35,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet; 
3.  Office or institutional building(s) with a gross floor area of 35,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet; or 
4.  Any residential development or camper-trailer park containing 20 to 49 individual dwelling units. 
b.  Additions/expansions. Projects which were not previously approved as a Level II project, but which, with an addition or expansion meets all of the following shall be considered Level II projects: (i) result in a net increase of at least 25 percent or more of the thresholds in section 1(a) above; and (ii) will, with the addition or expansion, reach the minimum thresholds in section 1(a) above. 
c.  Projects combined. Developments which meet all of the following criteria shall be considered one development and shall be reviewed as a Level II project under this section: 
1.  The developments are located within 500 feet of each other; 
2.  The proposed development and a previously approved development represent different phases of a larger plan that may, or may not, include shared parking facilities, access, utilities or walls; and 
3.  The application for the proposed development is received within three years of a certificate of occupancy for a previous development. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. 
a.  All applicants for Level II site plan review are required to schedule and attend a pre-application conference with city staff prior to submittal of the application. This conference allows the applicant and staff an opportunity to discuss the review process, the requirements for completing the review schedule, contact persons for services and permits, and information regarding site plans, landscaping, and development requirements. Information regarding the need for a grading and erosion control plan, which will have to be approved through the sedimentation and erosion control staff, will be provided at this time. 
The staff can also determine if any special reviews will be required, such as reviews by the historic resources commission, the tree commission, the housing authority of the city, the board of adjustment, or downtown design review staff. 
b.  The developer is required to meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed project is located. This meeting is to allow the developer to explain the proposed project, be informed about neighborhood concerns, and explore opportunities to address those concerns in cooperation with the neighborhood. The meeting must be held in the pre-application stage no more than four months prior to the submittal date and no closer than ten days before submittal, and must be at a location and time designed to allow interested neighbors to attend. It is recommended, but not required, that the developer retain a neutral third party to facilitate the meeting. The developer shall provide notice of the meeting by first class mail to all property owners within 200 feet at least ten days before the meeting. A written report of the meeting must be submitted with the Level II application. 
(3)  Plan submittal. 
a.  Site plan(s) required. A site plan for a proposed Level II project shall be prepared by a licensed design professional and shall be prepared in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
b.  Filing of application. A complete application packet containing all information as required by the development services director shall be submitted according to the established schedule of the TRC prior to the technical review committee meeting at which it is to be reviewed. 
c.  Public notification. 
1.  Application. Notice of the Level II application shall be posted on the property at a conspicuous place at least seven days prior to the TRC meeting at which the Level II application will be considered. The sign shall state the words "Notice of Technical Review Meeting" in letters at least six inches high and shall identify the means to contact the appropriate city official or website for information about the application. 
2.  Decision. No later than ten days after a decision on the Level II application is made by the TRC, a copy of such decision shall be mailed to property owners within 200 feet pursuant to section 7-5-20(b)(2). 
d.  Action by the technical review committee. The site plan for a proposed Level II project shall first be reviewed by the designated staff for compliance with the applicable regulations and other provisions. The designated staff shall then present the proposed site plan to the TRC at the next regular meeting following receipt of the application. Review of the site plans by the TRC shall be ministerial in nature, and limited to compliance with the regulations set forth in this UDO, the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. The TRC may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan. The site plan decision is considered final on the date the TRC renders its decision. 
If the Level II site plan is not approved, the TRC shall set forth in writing the reasons for denying approval of the site plan. 
e.  Approvals. Approval of a Level II site plan shall be valid for one year from the date of approval by the TRC. If a zoning permit is not obtained within one year of the TRC approval, the decision of the TRC shall be null and void. 
(4)  Appeals. Appeals of decisions of the technical review committee regarding developments requiring Level II site plan approval shall be heard by the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 7-6-2 of this chapter. 
(5)  Violations. Violations of the approved site plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(c)  Level I site plan review process. 
(1)  Purpose. The Level I site plan review process is required for development projects within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial jurisdiction involving new construction, additions, renovations, and changes of use which do not meet the requirements of the Level II or Level III site plan review processes as set forth in subsections 7-5-9(b) and 7-5-9(a), but do fall into one or more of the following categories: 
a.  All new developments not meeting the threshold for Level II site plan review, except residential projects containing not more than two dwelling units; 
b.  Additions with a gross floor area of 500 square feet or more (excluding single-family and duplex residential units); 
c.  Additions that displace existing parking; 
d.  Additions that generate the need for more parking; 
e.  Renovations with a total cost exceeding 75 percent of the appraised value of the building, as determined by Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser; 
f.  Changes of use; 
g.  Properties located within 500 feet of each other, under the same ownership and/or developed by the same developer over a period of three years or less shall be considered to be one development and reviewed as such; 
h.  Development projects that require site and/or landscape compliance as referenced in Article XI: Development and Design Standards: section 7-11-1 — General; section 7-11-3 — Landscape and buffering standards; section 7-11-3(f) — Compliance and maintenance; and section 7-11-10 — Outdoor lighting standards. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. A predevelopment conference with the planning and development director prior to the preparation of development plans is recommended. This conference introduces the applicant to the review process and the information required on the site plans, landscaping, development standards, and to the contact persons for services and permits. Information regarding the need for a grading and erosion control plan, which will have to be approved through the Asheville sedimentation and erosion control staff, will be provided at this time. The need for special reviews such as reviews by the historic resources commission, the tree commission, the housing authority of the city, the board of adjustment, or the downtown design review staff, can be determined at this time. 
(3)  Plan submittal. 
a.  Application required. An application shall be required for all Level I site plan review requests. This application shall contain all information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications) and shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards). The application and site plan shall be submitted to the development and permitting center. 
b.  Fees. Fees as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable upon submittal of the application for Level I site plan review. 
c.  Submittal of application. Applications for Level I site plan review, with six copies of the site plans, shall be submitted to the development and permitting center. Applications may be submitted at any time. 
(4)  Staff review. 
a.  Departmental review. Upon receipt of the application for Level I site plan review, the site plans shall be distributed to and reviewed by the affected departments of the city for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws. 
b.  Action by reviewing departments. Provided the application and site plan are complete, all departments of the city reviewing the site plan shall take action within ten working days of receipt by the department of the application. Provided the application and site plan are complete, failure of the planning and development director, or any other department of the city reviewing the site plan, to take action within this time shall result in the refund of any applicable application fees for the application and site plan. The refund of any application fee due to the expiration of ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. Where the issuance of any city permit shall also require the approval of an agency or department of the United States of America or the approval of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, or of any other state or federal agency or department, the transmittal by the city of the documentation required of the city to these entities shall constitute action by the city within the meaning of this section. 
c.  Approval. If the site plan is approved by a reviewing city department, that department shall issue an approval to the city's permitting and development office stating any conditions of the approval and notify the applicant that the reviewing city department has completed its review and issued an approval for those elements for which the department is responsible. Notification may be by telephone, facsimile transmission, electronic mail, the Internet, United States mail, or by private mail, wire or messenger service. In all cases, a written copy of the approval along with any conditions shall be attached to the permit released to the applicant by the permitting and development office. The applicant may then proceed with obtaining zoning, building, construction, and other required permits. Projects that displace existing parking, add parking, or involve a change of use of a building also require approval by the fire department. 
d.  Denial. If the site plan is denied, the reviewing city department shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial using hand delivery, or certified mail with a return receipt requested. Upon notification of denial, the applicant may revise the plan to address the reasons for denial and resubmit it for review or appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Public notification. Public notice shall not be required for Level I site plan review requests. 
(6)  Formal review. Applications for Level I site plan review are not subject to formal review. 
(7)  Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter for developments requiring Level I site plan review shall be considered by the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 7-6-1. 
(8)  Appeals. Appeals of decisions of the planning and development director regarding the Level I site plan review process shall be heard by the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 7-6-2. 
(9)  Permit validity. Approval of site plans and permits for developments requiring Level I site plan review shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. Failure to obtain a zoning permit or otherwise begin the permitted use within this time shall render the site plan approval void. The planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any time limitations prescribed by statute or by other ordinances in this chapter. 
(10)  Violations. Violations of the approved site plan for developments requiring Level I site plan review shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 5—7, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 2619, §§ 1(d)—(f), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2771, §§ 1(e)—(i), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2911, §§ 1(a), 1(b), 4-9-02; Ord. No. 2975, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3027, § 1, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3191, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(i)—(k), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3466, § 1(d), 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3709, §§ 1b, c, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3738, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3757, § 1b, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3791, §§ 1f, g, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3930, § 1a, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 3948, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 3984, §§ 1d—f, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 4209, §§ 1a—c, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 4560, § 1b, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4561, § 1a, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1e, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-5-9.1. - Development approval process on parcels zoned Central Business District and located in the Downtown Design Review Overlay District. (CBD/DDR) 
(a)  Level III development. 
(1)  Purpose and application. Approval for a Level III development for parcels zoned Central Business District and located in the Downtown Design Review Overlay District (CBD/DDR) require rezoning to the Central Business Expansion District and includes individualized development conditions. If a property is currently zoned Central Business District, the only available expansion district for rezoning is Central Business Expansion District. Due to their size and/or height, Level III developments can be expected to have a significant impact upon public services, infrastructure and the character of the downtown environment. Proposed developments in the Central Business District which fall into one or more of the following categories are Level III developments: 
a.  Any new construction and/or changes of use to a higher impact use with a building(s), structure(s) or development(s) having a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or more. 
b.  Any new construction, and/or changes of use to a higher impact, of buildings, structures, or developments that are above 100 feet in height. Height in the Central Business District is measured as specified in 7-8-18 of this chapter. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Projects which were not previously approved as a Level III project, but which, with an addition or expansion meets all of the following shall be considered Level III projects: (i) result in a net increase of at least 25 percent or more of the thresholds in section 1(a) above; and (ii) will, with the addition or expansion, reach the minimum thresholds in section 1(a) above. 
e.  Developments which meet all of the following criteria shall be considered one development and shall be reviewed as a Level III project under this section: 
1.  The proposed development and a previously approved development are located within 500 feet of each other; and 
2.  The proposed development and a previously approved development represent different phases of a larger plan that may, or may not, include shared parking facilities, access, utilities or walls; and 
3.  The application for the proposed development is received within three years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a previously approved development. 
(2)  Rezoning required. All Level III developments must be zoned Central Business Expansion District and include individualized development conditions along with development plans. 
(3)  Application procedure. Applications for Level III development follow the conditional zoning process specified in section 7-7-8 of this chapter. In addition, the following procedures apply: 
a.  Notification for the developer's neighborhood meeting outlined in subsection 7-7-8(d)(3) shall also be provided to physical addresses within the notification area; 
b.  After the review and recommendation by the technical review committee, the development application will be forwarded to the downtown commission. The commission shall schedule a public hearing to receive comments regarding the proposal. Review and action shall be taken in accordance with subsection 7-5-10(b). The downtown commission shall act on the proposed development application within 120 days of receipt. Following a completed review by the downtown commission the plans shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission and shall follow the process outlined for conditional zoning approval. 
c.  Public hearings held by the downtown commission shall be exempt from published notice requirements specified in subsection 7-5-20(b)(1). 
(b)  Level II site plan review process. 
(1)  Purpose and application. The Level II approval is required for development projects on parcels zoned Central Business District and located in the Downtown Design Review Overlay District (CBD/DDR). This process is required for one or more of the following categories of development: 
a.  Any new construction and/or changes of use to a higher impact for a building(s) structure(s) or development(s) having a gross floor area of 20,000 to 99,999 square feet and which are below 100 feet in height. Height in the Central Business District is measured as specified in section 7-8-18 of this chapter. 
b.  Projects which were not previously approved as a Level II project, but which, with an addition or expansion meets all of the following shall be considered Level II projects: (i) results in a net increase of at least 25 percent or more of the thresholds in section 1(a) above; and (ii) will, with the addition or expansion, reach the minimum thresholds in section 1(a) above. 
c.  Developments which meet all of the following criteria shall be considered one development and shall be reviewed as a Level II project under this section: 
1.  The proposed development and a previously approved development are located within 500 feet of each other; and 
2.  The proposed development and a previously approved development represent different phases of a larger plan that may, or may not, include shared parking facilities, access, utilities or walls; and 
3.  The application for the proposed development is received within three years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a previously approved development. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. 
a.  All applicants for Level II site plan review in the CBD/DDR are required to schedule a pre-application conference with city staff as provided in subsection 7-5-9(b)(2)a. of this chapter. 
b.  The developer is required to meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed project is located. This meeting is to allow the developer to explain the proposed project, be informed about neighborhood concerns, and explore opportunities to address those concerns in cooperation with the neighborhood. The meeting must be held in the pre-application stage no more than four months prior to the submittal date and no closer than ten days before submittal and must be at a location and time designed to allow interested neighbors to attend. It is recommended, but not required, that the developer retain a neutral third party to facilitate the meeting. The developer shall provide notice of the meeting by first class mail to all property owners within 200 feet at least ten days before the meeting and to physical addresses in the notification area. The property must also be posted with notice of the meeting date, time and location at least ten days before the meeting date. A written report of the meeting must be submitted with the Level II application. 
(3)  Plan submittal. Plan submittal for Level II development projects in the CBD/DDR shall be as set forth in subsection 7-5-9(b)(3) of this chapter. Developments with phased components shall be required to also submit a phased master plan. 
(4)  Action by the technical review committee. Conceptual plans for development requiring Level II project review in the CBD/DDR shall be submitted and reviewed by the technical review committee in accordance with subsections 7-5-9(b)(3)(d), although the technical review committee does not issue final approval. The development plans, recommendations and comments from the technical review committee are forwarded to the downtown commission for consideration and review. 
(5)  Action by the downtown commission. Upon receipt of the conceptual development plan and the approval of the technical review committee, the downtown commission shall schedule a public hearing to receive comments regarding the proposed project. Review and action shall be taken in accordance with subsection 7-5-10(b), major works. The downtown commission shall act on the proposed development application within 120 days of receipt. Following a completed review, the plans shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for a decision. 
(6)  Action by the planning and zoning commission. Upon receipt of the conceptual development plan and the recommendation from the technical review committee and the downtown commission, the planning and zoning commission shall schedule a public hearing to receive comments regarding the proposed project. The public hearing shall be scheduled for the next available meeting of the commission. The commission shall review the conceptual site plan for compliance with applicable standards. 
(7)  Final review by the technical review committee. Following approval of the application and conceptual development plan by the planning and zoning commission, a detailed development plan shall be submitted to the technical review committee for review and approval prior to permit issuance. 
(8)  Public notification. Notice for all public hearings required under this section for Level II site plan review in the CBD/DDR (excluding the required developer's neighborhood meeting) shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter, except that public hearings held by the downtown commission shall be exempt from published notice requirements. 
(9)  Variances. Variances requested in conjunction with a Level II site plan under this section shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission, serving as the board of adjustment and acting in accordance with the provisions of section 7-6-1. The downtown commission shall provide feedback to the applicant on the proposed variance. 
(10)  Appeals. Appeals of Level II site plans under this section shall be made to the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions of section 7-6-2. 
(11)  Approvals. Approvals shall be valid for 24 months from the date of approval by the planning and zoning commission. Failure to obtain a zoning permit or otherwise begin the permitted use within this time shall render the approval void. The planning and urban design director shall grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any time limitations prescribed by statute or by other ordinances of this chapter. 
(13)  Violations. Violations of the approved Level II site plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter and be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(c)  Level I site plan review process. 
(1)  Purpose and application. This Level I approval is required for development projects on parcels zoned Central Business District and located in the Downtown Design Review Overly District (CBD/DDR). This review process is required for the following categories of proposed developments: 
a.  All new construction, changes of use to a higher impact, or additions not meeting the threshold for Level II site plan review. 
b.  Changes that modify the exterior walls and/or roof of an existing building. 
c.  Renovations with a total cost exceeding 75 percent of the appraised value of the building, as determined by the Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser. 
d.  Developments which meet all of the following criteria shall be considered one development and shall be reviewed as a Level I project under this section: 
1.  The proposed development and a previously approved development are located within 500 feet of each other; and 
2.  The proposed development and a previously approved development represent different phases of a larger plan that may, or may not, include shared parking facilities, access, utilities or walls; and 
3.  The application for the proposed development is received within three years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a previously approved development. 
e.  Development projects that require site and/or landscape compliance as referenced in section 7-11-1; section 7-11-3; and section 7-11-10 of this chapter. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. 
a.  A predevelopment conference with the planning staff prior to the preparation of development plans is recommended. 
b.  It is highly recommended that the developer meet with representatives of the area in which the proposed project is located. This meeting should be held prior to project submittal. The developer is responsible for providing notification to property owners of such a meeting. It is recommended that this notification be done in accordance with subsection 7-5-9.1(b)(2)(b) above. 
(3)  Plan submittal. Plan submittal for Level I plan review in the CBD/DDR shall be as set forth in subsection 7-5-9(c)(3). 
(4)  Staff review. Plans for development requiring Level I review in the CBD/DDR shall be reviewed in accordance with subsection 7-5-9(c)(4) of this chapter except that prior to obtaining any permits, the plans must be reviewed by designated staff for compliance with downtown design standards. 
(5)  Public notification. Public notice shall not be required for Level I review in the CBD/DDR. 
(6)  Downtown commission review. Applications for Level I review are not subject to review by the downtown commission. 
(7)  Variances. Variances requested in conjunction with a Level I site plan under this section shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission, serving as the board of adjustment and acting in accordance with the provisions of section 7-6-1. The downtown commission shall provide feedback to the applicant on the proposed variance. 
(8)  Appeals. . Appeals of Level I site plans shall be made to the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions of section 7-6-2.. 
(9)  Approvals. Approvals for Level I site plan review in the CBD/DDR shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. Failure to obtain a zoning permit or perform substantial work within this time shall render the site plan approval void. The planning and urban design director may grant a single extension of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any time limitations prescribed by statute or by other ordinances in this chapter. 
(10)  Violations. Violations of the approved development plan for developments requiring Level I site plan review in the CBD/DDR shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3930, § 1b, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 4560, § 1c, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1f, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-5-10. - Downtown design review. 
(a)  Minor works. 
(1)  Purpose. Downtown design (DTDR) minor works review is required for those projects in which the visual character of the structure or grounds is not substantially changed and for those projects related to locally designated historic landmarks as they undergo a separate design review process. The downtown design review procedure seeks to encourage renovation and rehabilitation in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance the historical integrity and develop creative design solutions. While the design guidelines will not dictate architectural styles, they will suggest a variety of design options for achieving compatibility within the designated commercial core, gateways, and periphery boundaries. Procedures for cleaning and painting of structures along with minor exterior rehabilitation and repair shall be considered minor works. Except when included with a major work, exterior illumination, landscaping, signage, site design and roofing shall also be considered minor works. All work related to locally designated historic landmark buildings and properties shall be considered minor works projects, regardless of the scope of work. In addition, except when defined as a major work, all other construction work requiring a building, sign, zoning, demolition for buildings less than 5,000 square feet or variance permit must be reviewed as a minor work. 
Minor works review will apply to projects that are aligned with designated thresholds for Level I. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is recommended prior to submitting an application to conduct work within the downtown design review (DTDR) boundaries. Applicants should call or visit DTDR staff prior to making application to discuss proposed design changes and to determine what level of information is required for submittals. 
(3)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application along with the adopted design guidelines for minor works review will be made available or supplied by designated city staff. A completed application, required drawings, and specifications shall be filed with the development service department to begin the review process. Applicants are strongly encouraged to make application for minor works review at the design phase of the project. 
b.  Fees. No fees are charged for the DTDR review and permitting process. 
c.  Information required. Each application for DTDR minor works review shall include the information described in the check list(s) provided by designated city staff for Level I projects. 
(4)  Staff review. The downtown design review staff shall review the application within ten working days of receipt of the application. Immediately following the review of the application, the minor works review application will be processed. 
(5)  Public notification. No public notification is required for the DTDR minor works review. 
(6)  Formal review. No formal review before the downtown commission of DTDR minor works is required under the mandatory review and voluntary compliance program. 
(b)  Major works. 
(1)  Purpose. The review procedure for a major work seeks to encourage rehabilitation and new construction in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance the historical integrity, and develop creative design solutions. While the design guidelines will not dictate architectural styles, they will suggest a variety of design options for achieving compatibility within the designated commercial core, gateways, and periphery boundaries. Major works shall be reviewed by the downtown commission with a recommendation from the DTDR staff as part of a mandatory review, voluntary compliance program. 
(2)  Review required. A downtown design major works review (DTDR) is required for those projects which involve a substantial change in the appearance of a building, structure, or site, including the demolition or relocation of buildings or structures. A downtown design major works review shall be required for any of the following: 
a.  All projects meeting the designated thresholds for Level II site plan review and Level III developments. 
b.  Any structure where the street facing façade(s) is not left structurally intact. 
c.  Demolition of structures greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(3)  Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is required prior to conducting work within the downtown design review boundaries. Applicants should call or visit the DTDR staff prior to making application to discuss proposed design changes and to determine what level of information is required for submittals. 
(4)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application for major works review and adopted design guidelines are available online or may be supplied by designated city staff. When completed, the application, required drawings, and specifications shall be submitted at the development services department to begin the review process and scheduling for formal review by the downtown commission. 
Applicants are strongly encouraged to make application for major works review at the design phase of the project. 
b.  Fees. Fees are charged for the DTDR review and permitting process in accordance with the Fees and Charges Manual. 
c.  Information required. Each application for DTDR major works review shall include the information on the standard check lists for Level II and Level III projects, building elevations, building sections and context analysis. Applicants may wish to submit a project model including nearby affected properties. 
(5)  Review. The designated staff shall review the application within ten working days of receipt. Immediately following the review of the application, staff will schedule a formal review of the application for the next available regular meeting of the downtown commission. 
In addition to staff review, applicants are strongly encouraged to request a review by the design subcommittee of the downtown commission for pre-review and feedback prior to review by the full downtown commission. 
(6)  Public notification. The downtown commission shall notify property owners adjacent to the development site in accordance with the requirements outlined in section 7-5-20, except that published notice shall not be required. 
(7)  Formal review. The downtown commission will meet monthly to review and vote on major works proposed within the designated downtown design boundaries. Applicants are encouraged to prepare a presentation to be given at this review. No city permits can be processed or variances heard until this formal review with the commission is completed. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2624, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 3351, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 4560, § 1d, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-5-11. - Certificate of appropriateness approval. 
(a)  Minor works. 
(1)  Purpose. A minor works certificate of appropriateness is required for those projects in which the visual character of the structure or grounds is not substantially changed. Structures and grounds located within local historic districts require certificates of appropriateness, which certify that the proposed improvements are not incongruous with the historic character of the local historic district. This section describes the procedure for applying for and receiving a certificate of appropriateness for a minor work. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required prior to applying for a certificate of appropriateness for a minor work. Applicants are encouraged to call or visit the planning and development department prior to requesting a certificate of appropriateness to determine what information is required for the application and to obtain the appropriate guidelines. 
(3)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application, along with the adopted design guidelines, for minor works review will be made available or supplied by designated city staff. A completed application and required information shall be filed with the development services department to begin the review process. 
b.  Fees. For all minor work certificates of appropriateness, fees as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
c.  Information required. Each application for a minor works certificate of appropriateness shall include the information for the application type as listed on the application checklist. 
(4)  Staff review. The director of historic resources or his or her designee shall review the application for compliance with the principles and guidelines applicable to the historic district and/or local historic landmark within ten working days. The review may include a meeting with the applicant at the site of the proposed work. If the proposed minor work is consistent with the applicable design review guidelines, the director or his or her designee shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for the work. 
(5)  Public notification. No public notification is required for a minor works certificate of appropriateness application. 
(6)  Formal review. No formal review of a request for a minor works certificate of appropriateness is required unless an appeal of the decision of the director is taken to the Historic Resources Commission ("HRC"). 
(7)  Variances. No variances from the principles and guidelines applicable to a review for a minor works certificate of appropriateness shall be granted. 
(8)  Appeals. An appeal of the decision of the director of historic resources regarding approval or disapproval of an application for a minor works certificate of appropriateness shall be heard by the HRC. The appeal must be made in writing within 30 days of receipt by the applicant of the written decision of the director of the HRC. 
(9)  Certificate of appropriateness validity. A minor works certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for one year following approval. If work on the project has not begun prior to expiration of the certificate of appropriateness, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the project to development services for review by the director of historic resources or his or her designee. 
(10)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section 7-5-11 shall include, but not be limited to, failure to obtain a minor works certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the requirements set forth above and/or failure to comply with the terms of a minor works certificate of appropriateness once it has been issued. Discontinuance of work in accordance with the minor works certificate of appropriateness or lack of progress toward completion of the work for a period of 90 days shall constitute a violation of this section 7-5-11. Determination of discontinuance of work or lack of progress on such work shall be decided in the sole discretion of the planning and development director and/or director of historic resources. Violations shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(b)  Major works. 
(1)  Purpose. A major works certificate of appropriateness is required for those projects which involve new construction; a change in the appearance of a building, structure, or landscape; demolition of a building or structure; relocation of a building or structure; or any other work which is more substantial in nature than work for which a minor works certificate of appropriateness is required. Buildings, structures and grounds located within local historic districts require certificates of appropriateness, which certify that the proposed changes are not incongruous with the historic character of the local historic district. The procedures for applying for and receiving a certificate of appropriateness for a major work are set forth in this section. 
(2)  Pre-application procedure. A pre-application conference is required prior to applying for a certificate of appropriateness for a major work. Applicants should call or visit department staff to discuss proposed design changes and to schedule a pre-application conference to review the major work application. 
(3)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application, along with the adopted design guidelines, for major works review will be made available or supplied by designated city staff. A completed application and required information shall be filed with the development services department at least 14 days prior to the HRC meeting at which the request is to be heard. 
b.  Fees. For all major work certificates of appropriateness, fees as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
c.  Information required. Each application for a major works certificate of appropriateness shall include the information for the application type as listed on the application checklist. The HRC may refuse to consider or table an application if it determines that insufficient information has been provided by the applicant. 
(4)  Staff review. Upon receipt of an application for a major work certificate of appropriateness, the director of the department or his or her designee shall review the application to ensure that it is complete. Following the review, the application shall be scheduled for review by the HRC. 
(5)  Public notification. Notice of public hearings or public meetings required under this section for major works certificates of appropriateness approval shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for the HRC. Posting of sites as set forth in section 7-5-20 is not required for major works certificates of appropriateness applications. 
(6)  Formal review. All applications for major work certificates of appropriateness shall be considered by the HRC. The request shall be scheduled for review at the next available regular meeting of the HRC. The HRC shall use the applicable principles and guidelines in its review of all applications for certificates of appropriateness. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rules of procedure established by the commission and according to the requirements of the North Carolina General Statutes. The HRC then shall take action to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. The HRC shall cause to be entered into the minutes of its meeting the reasons for its action. In cases where the historic resources commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. The HRC may, at its discretion, view the premises and obtain additional facts concerning any application, and may seek the advice of the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources or other expert advice as it may deem necessary. The HRC must issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness within 95 days after filing of the application, except when the time limit has been extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and the HRC. If the application is approved, the secretary of the HRC shall transmit, in writing, a certificate of appropriateness, clearly describing the nature of the work which has been approved. The secretary shall attach a copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the approval was granted and a placard form of a certificate of appropriateness, which shall be displayed on the project site. If an application is denied, a letter stating the reason for the denial shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(7)  Variances. No variances from the principles and guidelines applicable to a review for a certificate of appropriateness shall be granted. 
(8)  Appeals. An appeal of the decision of the HRC regarding approval of an application for a major works certificate of appropriateness shall be heard by the board of adjustment (BOA) in the nature of certiorari. The appeal must be made in writing and filed with the BOA within 30 days of receipt by the applicant of the letter stating the action taken by the HRC. 
(9)  Certificate of appropriateness validity. A major work certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for one year following approval. If work on the project has not begun prior to expiration of the certificate of appropriateness, the applicant shall be required to resubmit the project to development services for review by the director of historic resources or his or her designee. 
(10)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section 7-5-11 shall include, but not be limited to, failure to obtain a major works certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the procedures set forth above and/or failure to comply with the terms of a major works certificate of appropriateness once it has been issued. Discontinuance of work in accordance with the major works certificate of appropriateness or lack of progress toward completion of the work for a period of 90 days shall constitute a violation of this section 7-5-11. Determination of discontinuance of work or lack of progress on such work shall be decided in the sole discretion of the planning and development director and/or director of historic resources. Violations shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2976, §§ 1b., c., 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(l), (w), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 4736, §§ 1d, e, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 7-5-12. - Floodplain development. 
(a)  Purpose. No approval shall be granted for construction in an area designated as a special flood hazard area as shown on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS) for the City of Asheville, as provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and also adjoining lands, which, because of their characteristics, the city determines as being susceptible to flooding or determines as being susceptible to flooding or damage by flooding until the requirements of subsection 7-12-1 of this chapter are met. Procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements are set forth below. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. Developers are encouraged to meet with the floodplain administrator prior to submitting an application for development in the special flood hazard area. This will provide developers with the opportunity to obtain information regarding details of the application process. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Application required. Applications for permits shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to performing grading or construction on lands in the special flood hazard area. Applications shall be made on forms furnished by floodplain administrator (repealed in 2007). 
(2)  Preparation by professional. Plats, designs, calculations, working drawings, and specifications for work shall be prepared by an authorized registered professional properly registered and licensed in North Carolina for the work in which they are engaged. 
(3)  Fees. Fees, as established by City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(4)  Submittal of plans. Seven copies, unless otherwise required, of the application and supporting data shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. Applications shall include a detailed site plan showing conditions both before and after the proposed work. Information which must appear on the site plan is set forth in subsection 7-12-1(d)(1). 
(d)  Staff review. 
(1)  Engineering staff review. Following submittal of the application and accompanying data, the information shall be reviewed by engineering staff for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Provided that the application is complete, applications shall be reviewed and acted upon by the city engineering staff and notice given the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application. Provided that the application is complete, failure of the city engineering staff to act within this time shall result in the refund of application fees. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the 30 days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
(2)  Submittal of applications to board of adjustment. Applications for projects requiring variances as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(f) shall initially be heard by the specifications review committee, as established under this chapter for review and recommendation. The matter shall then be submitted to the board of adjustment and scheduled for review by the board at their next available meeting. 
(e)  Public notification. Notice of public hearings or public meetings required under this section for review of a request for a variance from the requirements of section 7-12-1 of this chapter shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. 
(f)  Formal review—projects requiring variances only. 
(1)  Review by board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall consider requests for variances as provided for by subsection 7-12-1(f). 
(2)  Timing. Provided the application is complete, the board of adjustment shall arrive at a decision on a request for a variance within 30 days after its hearing on the request. In granting variances the board of adjustment may attach appropriate conditions and safeguards which promote the objectives of this chapter. 
(g)  Variances. Variances from the requirements of section 7-12-1 (Flood Protection) shall be heard by the board of adjustment as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(f). 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the floodplain administrator shall be heard by the board of adjustment as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(j)(1). An appeal shall be filed, in writing, within 30 days of the date action is taken by the floodplain administrator. Decisions of the board of adjustment may be appealed to the Superior Court of Buncombe County as provided by subsection 7-6-1(i). 
(i)  Permit validity. Permits for construction activity in designated special flood hazard areas shall be valid for one year. Failure to initiate construction, or otherwise begin the permitted use, within this time shall render the permit void. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the requirements for construction activity in designated special flood hazard areas shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in section 7-12-1. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1(e)—1(g), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(m), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3811, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 7-5-13. - Erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(a)  Purpose. To assure that land-disturbing activity undertaken in the city does not result in accelerated erosion and sedimentation, no such land-disturbing activity shall take place until plans for controlling erosion associated with the activity have been reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures set forth below. 
(b)  Pre-application conference. Prior to applying for a grading permit and submitting erosion control plans, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the erosion and sedimentation control staff of the city to discuss the proposed project. At this meeting, questions regarding information required in the application, schedules for review and construction, and special requirements can be addressed. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for a grading permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center at least 30 days prior to beginning the proposed land-disturbing activity. Application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the development and permitting center. 
(2)  Fees. A permit fee as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(3)  Plan required. All applications for a grading permit shall be accompanied by either a formal erosion control plan or a sketch erosion control plan. A formal plan shall be required when an area of more than 10,000 square feet is to be uncovered. When less than 10,000 square feet are to be uncovered, a sketch plan shall be required. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection 7-12-2(c). 
(d)  Staff review. 
(1)  Receipt of plans. Upon receipt of the grading permit application and erosion control plan, the erosion and sedimentation control staff shall conduct an initial review of the application and plan to insure that it meets the requirements of section 7-12-2 of this chapter. 
(2)  Distribution of plans. Upon completion of the initial review, one copy of formal erosion control plans shall be forwarded to the Buncombe County Soil and Water Conservation District for review as required. 
(3)  Review period. Provided the application is complete, the erosion and sedimentation control staff shall have ten working days following receipt of a sketch erosion plan to review it and notify the applicant of its status. Provided the application is complete, failure to approve, deny or request additional information on the plans within this time shall result in the refund of application fees. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
Following receipt of a formal erosion control plan, the erosion and sedimentation control staff shall have 30 days to review it and notify the applicant that it has been approved, approved with modifications, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. Revised plans must be approved or denied within 15 days. 
Provided the application is complete, failure to act on the plans within these time periods shall result in the refund of application fees. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for grading permit requests and erosion control plan review. 
(f)  Formal review. Formal review of grading permit requests and erosion control plans before a board or commission is not required. 
(g)  Variances. No variances shall be granted from the requirements that a grading permit be obtained and an erosion control plan be approved prior to initiating any land-disturbing activity subject to the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations set forth in section 7-12-2 of this chapter. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the erosion and sedimentation control staff regarding approval of erosion control plans shall be heard by the city's erosion control plan review committee pursuant to that procedure set forth in subsection 7-12-2(s) of this chapter. The applicant must submit a written demand for a hearing within 15 days following receipt of the written notice of the erosion and sedimentation control staff's decision. 
(i)  Permit validity. When work under a grading permit is not completed within 12 months following the date of issuance of the grading permit, the grading permit shall be deemed expired. Renewal of the grading permit will require the same application procedure as the initial permit. No further grading work is to be performed until the new permit is issued. This provision, however, shall not apply to construction projects which are to be completed in phases provided that the initial application for the erosion control plan for the construction-site indicates a proposed schedule and an erosion control plan for all the phases. In the event that the project is done in separate phases, an erosion control plan for each separate phase shall be submitted and approved by the city with the 12-month period applying to each separate phase. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-5-14. - Stormwater discharge permits. 
(a)  Purpose. To insure that development undertaken in the city does not result in increased stormwater runoff which adversely impacts adjacent property, no development to which this chapter applies, pursuant to the standards set forth in section 7-12-5, shall be commenced without the issuance of a stormwater discharge permit by the city engineer. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. Although a pre-application conference is not required, applicants are encouraged to contact the city's engineering department prior to submitting their application to discuss the project. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Application required. An application for a stormwater discharge permit shall be made by, or on behalf of, the owner(s) or developer(s) of the site for which a permit is sought. The application shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form supplied by the development and permitting center, and signed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent files the application, the agent shall provide documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. The application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Submittal of plan. Three copies of a complete and detailed stormwater management plan, including detailed design plans and construction specifications, for stormwater management facilities; the exact location of any stormwater management facility; and the proposed location of any access easement(s) shall be submitted to the development and permitting center. 
The plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect registered, licensed, or certified pursuant to the North Carolina General Statutes and authorized by law to prepare the analysis, plans, and specifications, and provide the certifications required by the various provisions of this subsection. 
(3)  Fees. The appropriate stormwater discharge permit application fee, as set forth in the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual, shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(d)  Staff review. 
(1)  Engineering department review. Upon receipt of the stormwater discharge permit application and stormwater management plan, the engineering department staff shall conduct a review of the application and plan to insure that they meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Review period. The engineering department staff shall have 30 days after receipt of a stormwater discharge permit application and stormwater management plan to review the application and plan and notify the applicant of the status of the review. Failure to approve, approve with modifications, approve with performance reservations, deny, or request additional information on the application and plan within this time shall result in the refund of application fees. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
(3)  Issuance of stormwater permit. Stormwater discharge permits shall be issued in the name of the applicant(s) and no permit shall be transferred or assigned without the written consent of the city. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for stormwater discharge permit requests and stormwater management plan review. 
(f)  Formal review. Formal review of stormwater discharge permit requests and stormwater management plans before a board or commission is not required. 
(g)  Variances. No variances shall be granted from the requirements that a stormwater discharge permit be obtained and a stormwater management plan be approved prior to initiating any development activity subject to the stormwater management regulations set forth in subsection 7-12-5 of this chapter. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the engineering department regarding stormwater discharge permits including, but not limited to, denial, suspension, assessment of civil penalties, revocation and interpretation, shall be made to the Asheville City Council. The city council shall conduct a hearing to review the information regarding an appeal in order to make a determination as to whether the requirements set forth in this chapter and the city's stormwater standard specifications manual have been met. The applicant must submit a written demand for a hearing to the city clerk within 30 days following receipt by the applicant of the denial, suspension, revocation, interpretation or other decision of the engineering department from which the appeal is taken. The city council shall schedule the hearing for appeal as soon as the council deems reasonably practicable. At the hearing, the applicant may be represented by an attorney. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse any decision of the engineering department. appeals from the decisions of the city council shall be to the Superior Court of Buncombe County, shall be in nature of certiorari, and shall be filed with the court within 30 days of the applicant's receipt of the decision of the city council. 
(i)  Permit validity. When a stormwater discharge permit is issued in association with a project requiring a building permit, the stormwater discharge permit shall expire upon the expiration or revocation of the building permit. When a stormwater discharge permit is issued for a project which does not require a building permit, the stormwater discharge permit shall expire if work is not initiated within 12 months of the date of issuance of the permit or if work stops for a 12-month period. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the stormwater management regulations shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-5-15. - Zoning vested rights approval. 
(a)  Purpose. The zoning vested right is a right which is established pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific development plan. Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section 7-5-15 is outstanding. Obtaining site plan approval or preliminary plat subdivision approval through the vested rights procedure gives the applicant the right to start construction of the development as approved within two years of approval. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. The applicant shall meet with the planning and development director to inquire about specific zoning requirements and obtain the proper application forms. The applicant and the planning and development director shall discuss the site plan or subdivision review process and applicable meetings and deadlines. In addition, the planning and development director shall advise the applicant of the specific requirements the project needs to address and discuss other aspects of the vested rights procedure. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. In order to apply for site plan review under the vested rights procedure, the applicant must indicate his/her intent to obtain vested rights in the form of a letter to the Planning and Development Director. The letter shall include the property address, Buncombe County Tax Office parcel identification number, name of the property owner, and any other pertinent information. 
(2)  Site plan required. Site plans, prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards), shall be submitted when applying for vested rights. The number of site plans to be submitted depends upon the particular review process and is specified in the procedure section for the particular review process. 
(3)  Fees. An application fee as established by City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual shall be submitted with the application. 
(d)  Staff review. The planning and development director shall review the application and accompanying site plan for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations. After the review and approval through the appropriate review process, the request for vested rights will be scheduled for a public hearing before the Asheville City Council. The public hearing will be scheduled as provided by city council's rules of procedure. 
(e)  Public notification. Notice of public hearings or public meetings required under this section for zoning vested rights approval shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. 
(f)  Formal review. Requests for vested rights for site plans and subdivisions shall be scheduled for review at the next regular meeting of the Asheville City Council. At this time, the city council shall hold a public hearing to review the site plan and evaluate its conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable requirements of the City of Asheville. The city council shall then take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Approve the vested rights request. The planning and development director is then directed to issue a vested rights zoning permit. 
(2)  Approve the vested rights request subject to conditions which are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The planning and development director is then directed to issue the vested rights zoning permit subject to the changes in the site plan to be made by the developer. 
(3)  Table the vested rights request pending the submittal of additional information. 
(g)  Variances. Variances from the procedures and requirements for obtaining vested rights as set forth in section 7-11-4 of this chapter shall not be permitted. Requests for variances from the development standards established by this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-1 of this chapter. 
(h)  Appeals. Aggrieved parties may seek appropriate relief as allowed by law. 
(i)  Permit validity. A zoning right that has been vested as provided in section 7-11-4 shall remain vested for a period of two years. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site specific development plan unless expressly provided by the approving authority at the time the amendment or modification is approved. A zoning permit, conditional use permit, or subdivision approval shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding. A vested right shall terminate under the termination conditions as specified in subsection 7-11-4(f) of this chapter. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the conditions of the vested rights approval shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2843, § 1(d), 8-28-01; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(n), 7-11-06)  
Sec. 7-5-16. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to regulate the provision of sign standards and sign restrictions within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville, it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign or sign structure without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. There is no pre-application procedure for sign permits. 
(c)  Application submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. 
a.  An application for a sign permit may be filed by the owner of the property or sign or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. The application for a sign permit shall be filed with the City of Asheville Planning and Development Department, Code Enforcement Division, on a form provided by the Division. 
b.  Sign contractor's license. No person shall engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued a sign contractor's license which has not expired at the time said work is done. This requirement shall be interpreted to exclude those persons who construct and erect a principal use identification sign when that sign is used at that person's place of business, provided all construction and installation is properly permitted and inspected for compliance with the applicable building codes of the City of Asheville and other sections of this article. 
c.  Outdoor advertising license. No person shall erect or maintain off-premises advertising structures in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued an outdoor advertising license which has not expired at the time said work is done. In order to obtain an outdoor advertising license, the licensee must be a licensed sign contractor, as described in subsection a. above, and must submit annually upon renewal of this license a listing of all sign structures leased, owned, or maintained by this licensee. Such list shall give the specific location of each sign by reference to ward, sheet, and tax lot number as indicated on the Buncombe County tax maps and by reference to the name of the property owner. 
(2)  Fees. A permit fee as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual is requested and shall be submitted with the application. Work performed without a permit shall be subject to a late fee. When any permit has been revoked under the terms of this chapter, the permit fees shall not be refunded. If a sign permit is denied, however, the permit fee will be refunded. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by complete information as required by Appendix B (Checklists for Applications) and shall include, without being limited to, a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, a drawing of the building façade indicating the proposed location of the sign, height, dimensions and square footage of the proposed sign and any other data as the sign administrator may determine to be necessary for review of the application. 
(d)  Staff review. Provided the application is complete, the sign administrator shall review the application and determine whether it is complete within ten working days of its submittal. Provided the application is complete, failure by the sign administrator to act within this time shall result in the refund of application fees. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. If the application is incomplete, the sign administrator shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies. No further steps shall be taken to process the application until the applicant corrects the deficiencies. The sign administrator shall issue a permit only upon finding that the proposed sign or sign structure satisfies the requirements of section 7-13. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for sign permit requests. 
(f)  Formal review. No formal review of sign permit requests is required. 
(g)  Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements for signs set forth in this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-1. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the sign administrator shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-2. 
(i)  Permit validity. Upon issuance of a sign permit, the applicant will have one year to commence work on the approved signage, after which the permit shall automatically become null and void. The sign administrator may grant a single 30-day extension of time within which operations must be started or resumed. All requests for such extensions and approval thereof shall be in writing. 
(j)  Violations. Violations of the conditions of a sign permit shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3043, § 1(h), 7-22-03; Ord. No. 3642, § 1b, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 7-5-17. - Driveway access permits. 
(a)  Purpose. A driveway access permit shall be required prior to the construction of a driveway or other connection within the right-of-way of a state roadway system or highway or City of Asheville roadway system. The procedure set forth below shall be followed to obtain a permit for the construction of a driveway or other connection within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required prior to applying for a driveway access permit. Applicants are encouraged to call or visit the city's traffic engineering division prior to requesting a driveway access permit to determine what information is required for the application and to determine if any special conditions exist which may affect the construction or modification of a driveway at the site. 
(c)  Plan submittal. 
(1)  Filing of application. An application for a driveway access permit may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent authorized by the owner to file such application. The application for a driveway access permit shall be filed with the development and permitting center on a form provided by the center. 
(2)  Fees. An application fee, as established by the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
Where a driveway is connected to a state maintained roadway, fees as established by the N.D. Department of Transportation shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. 
(3)  Information required. Each application for a driveway access permit shall contain the information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications), including a site plan, prepared in accordance with the standards established by Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards), showing the location of the proposed driveway access point and construction specifications. Other information necessary to show that the proposed driveway complies with the standards set forth in this chapter and in the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual shall also be provided. 
(d)  Staff review. The city's traffic engineer shall review the application for compliance with the standards established by the City of Asheville for driveway access. The application for a driveway entrance permit shall be reviewed and comments provided by the city traffic engineer within ten working days of its submittal. Failure of the city traffic engineer to take action within this time period shall result in the refund of application fees. The refund of the application fee due to the expiration of the ten working days shall not cause the review of the application to cease. Staff shall continue with the review of the application. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for driveway access permit applications. 
(f)  Formal review. No formal review of driveway access permit applications is required. 
(g)  Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements for driveway entrances set forth in this chapter shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-1 of this chapter. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the city traffic engineer shall be heard by the board of adjustment under the procedures established by section 7-6-2 of this chapter. 
(i)  Permit validity. The driveway access permit shall be valid for one year only. The public works director may grant a single extension of this time period up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. Any change in the approved plan shall render the driveway access permit invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-5-18. - River district design review. 
(a)  Minor works. 
(1)  Purpose. River district design review/ minor works review for compliance with the River District Design Review Guidelines is required for projects located within the River District Design Review Area for which the visual character of the structure or grounds is not substantially changed. Renovation, rehabilitation, and construction that promotes visual harmony, enhances the historical integrity of the riverfront area, and recognizes the environmental constraints of developing along the river is encouraged by the review procedure. 
Landscaping, signage, site design, small additions to existing buildings, minor exterior rehabilitation and repair shall be considered minor works. In addition, all construction work requiring a building sign, zoning, or demolition permit and all variance requests must be reviewed for compliance with the River District Design Review Guidelines. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is required prior to conducting work within the river district design review area. Applicants should call or visit the development services center staff prior to making application to discuss proposed design changes and to determine what information is required for the application. 
(3)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application and guidelines for minor works review may be obtained from the development services center staff, who will also provide the applicant with the name and contact of the staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review. 
When completed, the application, required drawings, and specifications shall be submitted to the development services center staff. 
Applicants are encouraged to apply for river district design review/minor works review at the design phase of the project. 
b.  Fees. No fees are charged for the river district design review/minor works review and permitting process. 
c.  Information required. Each application for river district design review/ minor works review shall include the information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications) of the River District Design Review Guidelines. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards) of the River District Design Review Guidelines shall be required for all projects involving additions, expansions, and/or landscaping. 
(4)  Staff review. The staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review shall review the application and meet with the applicant, preferably at the site of the proposed work, within ten working days of receipt of the application. Immediately following the review of the application, the river district design review/minor works review application will be processed by the development services center staff. 
(5)  Public notification. No public notification is required for the river district design review/minor works review. 
(6)  Formal review. No formal review of river district design review/minor works review is required by an administrative board or commission of the City of Asheville. 
(7)  Variances. No variance from other city regulations shall be heard by the board of adjustment until the proposed project has completed river district design review/minor works review. 
(8)  Appeals . The river district design review/minor works review process has been designated by the Asheville City Council as a mandatory review and voluntary compliance program. Applicants are strongly encouraged to implement their plans for activities within the river district design review area in accordance with the adopted guidelines. 
(b)  Major works. 
(1)  Purpose. River district design review/major works review for compliance with the River District Design Review Guidelines is required for those projects within the River District Design Review Area which involve a substantial change in the appearance of a building or structure or landscape. Major works also include: the demolition of a building or structure; relocation of a building or structure; new construction over 1,500 square feet in size (excluding accessory structures and additions to a building primarily occupied by mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment); rehabilitation where the exterior of the structure has been substantially altered; and substantial changes to signage, landscaping, site design, and exterior illumination of said new construction and rehabilitation. 
The review procedure seeks to encourage rehabilitation and new construction in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance and historical integrity of the river district, and recognize the environmental constraints of developing along the river. 
Major works review requests shall be reviewed by the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission. A recommendation regarding the major works review request shall be provided by the staff member in charge of coordinating the river district design review. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is required prior to conducting work within the river district design review area. Applicants should call or visit the development services center staff prior to making application to discuss the project proposal and to determine what level of information is required for submittals. 
(3)  Application submittal. 
a.  Filing of application. An application for river district design review/major works review shall be obtained from development service center staff, who will also provide the applicant with the name and contact of the staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review. When completed, the application, required drawings, and specifications shall be filed with the development service center staff to begin the review process and scheduling for formal review by the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission. 
Applicants are strongly encouraged to apply for river district design review/major works review at the design phase of the project. 
b.  Fees. No fees are charged for the river district design review/major works review and permitting process. 
c.  Information required. Each application for river district design review/major works review shall include the information described in Appendix B (Checklists for Applications) of the River District Design Review Guidelines. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Appendix A (Map and Plan Standards) of the River District Design Review Guidelines, shall be required for all river district design review/major works review. 
(4)  Staff review. The staff member in charge of coordinating river district design review shall review the application and shall meet with the applicant at the site of the proposed work, within ten working days of receipt of the application. Immediately following the review of the application, staff will schedule a formal review of the application by the Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission within 30 days of receipt of the application. 
(5)  Public notification. No public notification is required for river district design review/major works review. 
(6)  Formal review. The Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission will meet as needed to review major works proposed within the designated river district design review area. Applicants are encouraged to prepare a presentation to be given at this review. No city permits can be processed or variances heard until this formal review with the committee is completed. 
(7)  Variances. No variance from other city regulations shall be heard by the board of adjustment until the proposed project has completed river district design review/major works review. 
(8)  Appeals. The river district design review/major works review process has been designated by the Asheville City Council as a mandatory review and voluntary compliance program. Applicants are strongly encouraged to implement their plans for such activities within the river district design review area in accordance with the adopted guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2437, §§ 3, 4, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 4068, § 1a, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 4263, § 2, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 7-5-19. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Purpose. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the occupancy or use of any new construction and re-occupancy or re-use of any renovation/rehabilitation in the City of Asheville. Certificates of occupancy insure that a completed development project has complied with all of the applicable requirements of this chapter, with the applicable standards of the North Carolina State Building Code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued only when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Remaining or outstanding work other than that required by the North Carolina State Building Code has been bonded (or an irrevocable letter of credit provided) in the amount of one-and-one-half times the estimated cost of completing the work; 
(2)  Limitations on occupancy by building area, use, and occupancy type (for example, occupancy by employees but not the public) imposed by the fire department or building safety department are agreed to by the applicant; and 
(3)  Outstanding work involving life safety features or components is approved for such temporary certificate of occupancy by the fire chief. 
(b)  Pre-application procedure. Although a pre-application conference is not required, applicants are encouraged to contact the building safety department prior to requesting a certificate of occupancy to discuss the procedure. 
(c)  Plan submittal—filing of application. A request for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the owner of the property or by an agent authorized by the owner to make the request. The request for a certificate of compliance shall be made at the development and permitting center. 
(d)  Staff review. Upon receipt of the request for a certificate of occupancy, the planning and development director, the director of public works, the fire chief, the city engineer, and the director of building safety and/or their designee(s) shall inspect the project building(s) and site for compliance with the approved site plan or subdivision plat and the applicable standards of this chapter, with the applicable standards of the North Carolina State Building Code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations. The building(s) and site shall be inspected within ten working days of the receipt of the request for a certificate of occupancy. The applicant shall be notified of any deficiencies in the building(s) or site which prevent the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. No further action shall be taken to issue the certificate of occupancy until all deficiencies are corrected and a reinspection is performed. 
The certificate of occupancy shall be issued only upon finding that the building(s) and site comply with all applicable requirements, including any conditions placed on a project under the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Public notification. No public notification is required for requests for certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Formal review. No formal review of requests for certificate of occupancy is required. 
(g)  Variances. There are no provisions for a variance from the requirement that a certificate of occupancy be issued for all new construction and renovation/rehabilitation to insure compliance with the requirements of the City of Asheville and with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
If a developer provides satisfactory evidence that a bond or surety as required by this paragraph has been requested and that the developer and project otherwise qualify for said bond or surety, and that said request has been turned down by two or more financial institutions for reasons unrelated to the qualifications of the developer or project, the planning director may enter into an agreement with the developer for the delayed completion of the required work; provided, that said agreement may not apply to improvements or features that are required for safety purposes, or are prescribed by statute or state codes or regulations. By way of illustration and not limitation, said agreement (1) shall establish a schedule for the completion of improvements, (2) shall contain provisions relating to enforcement of its terms, and (3) shall specify penalties for breach, (4) shall be subject to approval of the city attorney, and (5) may be recorded in the office of the register of deeds wherein the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 8, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 3708, § 1, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 7-5-20. - Notices and public hearings. 
(a)  General notice requirements. 
(1)  All notices which this chapter requires for public or quasi-judicial hearings shall identify the date, time and place of the hearing and the nature and character of the proposed action. Where the action being taken concerns a particular property or properties, the notice shall also identify the location of the subject property. 
(2)  Where specific notice requirements are set forth in the North Carolina General Statutes for a particular type of public or quasi-judicial hearing, the requirements set forth in the North Carolina General Statutes shall be followed. Where these requirements conflict with procedures as stipulated in this subsection or elsewhere in this chapter, the requirements contained in the North Carolina General Statutes will control. 
(b)  Notice procedure. The following guidelines detail the notification procedure to be followed for public hearings required by this chapter unless otherwise set forth in this chapter. Failure to follow procedures set forth in this section, other than those required by the North Carolina General Statutes, shall not affect the validity of any action taken at a public or quasi-judicial hearing or public meeting. 
(1)  Published notice. Notice for hearings required by this chapter shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation no later than ten days prior to the date on which the application is to be considered. Hearings held by the downtown commission shall be exempt from this notice requirement. 
(2)  Mailed notice. First class mailed notice for public and quasi-judicial hearings required by this chapter shall be provided to the person or entity whose application or request is the subject of the hearing, to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing and owners of all properties located within 200 feet of the subject property as said owners are shown on the county tax listings. Such notice shall be mailed no later than ten days before the scheduled date of the hearing. This notice shall also be mailed to the contact person(s) for the neighborhood(s) in which the development is proposed, if the contact person(s) is (are) known to the planning and urban design department. 
(3)  Posted notice. A sign (or signs) providing information concerning a public or quasi-judicial hearing required by this chapter will be posted on property which is the subject of said hearing no later than ten days before the date on which the hearing is to occur. The sign(s) shall be prominently placed on the subject parcel or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way. When multiple parcels are involved, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the city shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. 
(c)  Special notice requirements for telecommunications towers/structures. For any public hearing for conditional use applications for telecommunication towers and concealed telecommunication support structures, as required by section 7-16-2 hereinafter, additional notice and public hearing requirements shall be provided as set forth in section 7-16-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2535, § 4, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2625, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2976, § 1a, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(o), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 4274, § 1d, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 4560, § 1e, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-5-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4560, § 1f, adopted February 14, 2017, repealed § 7-5-21, which pertained to neighborhood/developer meetings and derived from Ord. No. 3072, adopted November 25, 2003.  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES, ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL AND REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4403, § 1a, adopted Apr. 14, 2015, changed the title of Art. VI from "Variances and Administrative Appeals" to read as set out. 
 
Sec. 7-6-1. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The variance process administered by the board of adjustment is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this chapter in those cases where strict application of a particular requirement will create an unnecessary hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed under this chapter. It is not intended that variances be granted merely to remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this chapter may impose on property owners in general or to increase the profitability of a proposed development. Rather, it is intended to provide relief where the requirements of this chapter render the land difficult to use because of some unique physical attribute of the property itself or some other factor unique to the property for which the variance is requested. 
(b)  Provisions which may not be varied by the board of adjustment: 
(1)  Other than those exceptions explicitly noted, in no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to any special requirement set out in article XVI for a use by right subject to special requirements, or grant a variance with respect to any conditional use permit or conditional zoning district ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance which would modify, alter, change, or suspend the special requirements set forth in article XVI of this chapter, for a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use. 
(3)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to the flood protection provisions within the designated floodway district which would result in any increase in the flood levels during the regulatory flood discharge. 
(4)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance which would permit the creation of a non-conforming lot except that the board may grant a variance permitting a reduction in lot area and dimensional standards, for an individual lot located in residential districts, provided that the variance does not permit a reduction of greater than ten percent in the required lot area and dimensional standards. Provided further, applications for such variance for additional lot(s) under common ownership or located within the same development shall not be submitted within three years of submittal of the previous application, regardless of the decision of the board on the previous application. 
(5)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance from the design guidelines established for local historic districts and historic landmarks. 
(6)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance which would conflict with the North Carolina State Building Code, the Asheville Fire Prevention Code, or any other state code unless otherwise authorized by laws and regulations. 
(7)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance which would permit the creation of a nonconforming lot. 
(8)  In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance from the landscape and buffering standards set forth in section 7-11-1 of this chapter. 
(c)  Applications. 
(1)  An application for a variance may be filed only by the owner of the land affected by the variance or an agent specifically authorized in writing by the owner to file such application. 
(2)  Before filing the application, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the planning and development director or the engineering director if proceeding under sections 7-5-12, 7-12-1 or 7-12-2 of this chapter to discuss the proposed variance and to become more familiar with the applicable requirements and approval procedures of the city. 
(3)  An application for a variance shall be filed with the city clerk who will then forward to the planning and development director or the engineering director, if proceeding under section 7-5-12, 7-12-1, or 7-12-2, on a form prescribed by the director, and containing such information and plans as required on the application form. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. 
(4)  The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(5)  Once an application is accepted as complete by the clerk, the planning and development director or the engineering director, if proceeding under the section 7-5-12, 7-12-1 or 7-12-2, the application will be scheduled for consideration at a public hearing by the board of adjustment; provided however, all appeals and requests for variances under section 7-5-12 and 7-12-1 of this chapter shall initially be heard by the specifications review committee. 
(d)  Action by the board of adjustment. 
(1)  Upon receiving the application materials, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on a proposed variance. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure of the board of adjustment and in accordance with the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(2)  In considering the application, the board of adjustment shall review the application materials, the staff recommendation, the general purpose and standards set forth in this article for the granting of variances, and all testimony and evidence received by the board of adjustment at the public hearing. 
(3)  After conducting the public hearing, the board of adjustment may: 
a.  Deny the application; 
b.  Conduct an additional public hearing on the application; or 
c.  Grant the application. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance. 
Any approval or denial of the request shall be accompanied by written findings that the variance meets or does not meet each of the standards set forth in subsection 7-6-1(e) below: except the standards for flood protection regulation variances are set forth in subsection 7-6-1(f). The written decision shall be signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the secretary to the board. 
(4)  Appropriate conditions, which must be reasonably related to the condition or circumstance that gives rise to the need for a variance, may be imposed on any approval issued by the board of adjustment. 
(e)  Standard of review. When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, the board of adjustment shall grant a variance upon a showing of all the following: 
(1)  Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(2)  The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. 
(3)  The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship. 
(4)  The variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the ordinance such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved. 
No change in permitted uses may be authorized by the variance. Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. 
(f)  Standard of review—flood regulations variances. A variance from the standards set forth in section 7-12-1 of this chapter for flood protection may be granted permitting the erection of a structure with a lowest floor elevation, including basement, lower than the regulatory flood datum if all of the following are met: 
(1)  The property on which the structure is to be erected is an isolated lot of one-half acre or less, contiguous to and surrounded by existing structures constructed below such required first floor elevation; 
(2)  Good and sufficient cause exists for the granting of the variance; 
(3)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
(4)  The issuance of the variance would not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; 
(5)  The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and 
(6)  The variance would not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(g)  Standard of review—sign variances. See section 7-13-9 of this chapter. 
(h)  Effect of approval or denial. 
(1)  After the board of adjustment approves a variance, the applicant shall follow all appropriate procedures set forth in article V of this chapter for the receipt of permits, certificates, and other approvals necessary in order to proceed with development. 
(2)  An application for a rehearing may be made in accordance with the board of adjustment's rules of procedure. 
(i)  Appeals. Any appeal from the decision of the board of adjustment may be made by an aggrieved party and shall be made to the Superior Court of Buncombe County in the nature of certiorari. Any such petition to the Superior Court shall be filed no later than 30 days, as provided in N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-388(e2), after a written copy of the decision of the board of adjustment is received by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2453, § 1, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2637, § 1(b), 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1(h)—1(j), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2912, § 1(d), 4-9-02; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(b), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3369, § 1(c), 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(p), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3757, § 1c, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3793, § 1g, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3943, § 1a, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 4274, § 1b, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 7-6-2. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(a)  Purpose. Appeals to the board of adjustment from the decisions of the administrative staff of the city are permitted as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Decisions which may be appealed. Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer or other boards or commissions charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the board of adjustment as set forth herein. 
(c)  Persons who may file and appeal. Any person who has standing under N.C.G.S. 160A-393(d) or the city may appeal a decision to the board of adjustment. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for appeal. 
(d)  Filing of an appeal. 
(1)  An application for an appeal shall be filed with the city clerk who will then forward to the planning and development director on a form prescribed by the director and contain such information as required on the application form. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(3)  Any appeal of an administrative decision must be filed no later than 30 days from receipt of written notice of the decision. For purposes of this section, "filed" means received by the city clerk. Additionally, though posting of notice of a decision is not required by this ordinance, N.C.G.S. 160A-388(b1)(4) provides that constructive notice to all persons with standing to appeal "shall be conclusively presumed" upon compliance with the provisions of that statute. 
(4)  Once an application is accepted as complete by the planning and development director, the application will be scheduled for consideration at a public hearing by the board of adjustment. 
(5)  The filing of an appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the contested action unless the planning and development director, chief building inspector, or the official who made the decision, certifies to the board of adjustment that, in his/her opinion, by reason of facts stated in the certification, such a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property, or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order which may be granted by the Superior Court of Buncombe County on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken, with due cause shown. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the board of adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such property. In these situations the appellant may request and the board may grant a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed. 
(e)  Action by the board of adjustment. 
(1)  Upon receiving the application materials, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure of the board of adjustment and in accordance with the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(2)  Either at the public hearing or a subsequent meeting, the board of adjustment shall adopt an order reversing, affirming, or modifying the contested action. 
(3)  The board of adjustment shall not reverse or modify the contested action unless it finds that the administrative officer erred in the application or interpretation of the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  The board of adjustment shall not reverse or modify the contested action unless there is a concurring majority vote of the board members. 
(5)  Nothing herein shall prevent the planning and development director or his/her designee from pursuing an informal resolution of the matter appealed from. In such cases, the planning and development director or his/her designee shall report such resolution to the board of adjustment. 
(f)  Effect of reversal or modification. In the event that the board of adjustment reverses or modifies the contested action, all subsequent actions taken by administrative officers with regard to the subject matter shall be in accordance with the reversal or modification granted by the board of adjustment unless an appeal is taken on the board's decision. 
(g)  Appeal from board of adjustment. Any such petition to the superior court shall be filed no later than 30 days, as provided in N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-388(e2), after a written copy of the decision of the board of adjustment is received by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(c), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(q), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3757, §§ 1d, e, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 4274, § 1c, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 4560, § 1g, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-6-3. - Reasonable accommodations. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Asheville to provide individuals with disabilities or handicaps a reasonable accommodation in its rules, polices, practices and procedures, to ensure the equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities or handicaps in compliance with federal law. This section provides a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodations in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures for the City of Asheville to comply fully with the intent and purpose of federal laws. 
Nothing in this section requires persons with disabilities or handicaps, or operators of family care homes or group homes for persons with disabilities or handicaps acting or operating in accordance with applicable zoning, licensing or land use laws or practices, to seek reasonable accommodation under this section. 
(b)  Eligible applicants. 
(1)  This section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled or handicapped under federal law. A person recovering from substance abuse is considered a person with a disability or handicap; however, a person who is currently engaging in the illegal use of controlled substances is not. 
(2)  A request for a reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability or handicap, his or her legal representative, or a provider of housing for persons with disabilities or handicaps in the city's land use and zoning regulations, policies, or practices when the application of such may act as a barrier to affording such person[s] equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling in accordance with the law. 
(c)  Eligible requests. 
(1)  A request for a reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and/or practices for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities in this Unified Development Ordinance, that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability or handicap an equal opportunity to a dwelling of his or her choice. 
(d)  Applications. 
(1)  The City of Asheville's Department of Development Services shall provide applicants for a reasonable accommodation with an application form, eliciting the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and the current address for which the request is being made; 
c.  The current actual use of the property; 
d.  The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered disabled or handicapped under federal law; 
e.  The UDO provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested. 
f.  Explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific property available for the individual. 
(2)  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(3)  A reasonable accommodation shall not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(4)  Any information which relates to the applicant's disability or handicap and is identified by the applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(5)  An application for a reasonable accommodation under this section shall be submitted to the city clerk who will forward copies of the request to the director of development services. No filing fee shall be required for such application. 
(e)  Application review. 
(1)  Review authority. A request for a reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed, and a determination shall be made, by the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Action and procedures of the board of adjustment. 
a.  Upon receiving a complete application, the board of adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing on the proposed reasonable accommodation within 60 days, unless this requirement is waived by the applicant. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure of the board of adjustment and in accordance with the North Carolina General Statutes. 
b.  In considering the application, the board of adjustment shall review the application materials, the standards set forth in this section, and all testimony and evidence received by the board of adjustment at the quasi-judicial hearing. 
c.  After conducting the hearing, the board of adjustment may: 
i.  Grant the application. The concurring vote of a majority of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to grant a reasonable accommodation; or 
ii.  Deny the application. 
Any approval or denial of the request shall be accompanied by written findings of fact and conclusions of law determining that the request for reasonable accommodation meets or does not meet each of the standards set forth in subsection (e)(3) below. The written decision shall be signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the board. The decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the secretary to the board. 
(3)  Standard of review. The board of adjustment shall grant an exception or modification to any provision of this section as a reasonable accommodation under federal law if the board finds, based on the competent, material and substantial evidence, that the proposed accommodation: 
a.  Will be used by an individual or individuals with a disability or handicap protected under federal law; 
b.  Is "reasonable." An accommodation will be determined to be reasonable if it would not undermine the legitimate purposes and effects of existing zoning regulations, and if it will not impose significant financial and administrative burdens upon the city and/or constitute a substantial or fundamental alteration of the city's ordinance provisions; and 
c.  Is "necessary." An accommodation will be determined to be necessary if it would provide direct or meaningful therapeutic amelioration of the affects of the particular disability or handicap, and would afford handicapped or disabled persons equal opportunity to enjoy and use housing in residential districts in the city. 
(4)  Decision. The board of adjustment shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within 60 days of the date of the quasi-judicial hearing. 
(5)  Appeals. Any appeal from the decision of the board of adjustment may be made by an aggrieved party and shall be made to the Superior Court of Buncombe County in the nature of certiorari in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in N.C.G.S. §§ 160A-388 and 160A-393. 
(Ord. No. 4403, § 1c, 4-14-15)  
ARTICLE VII. - TEXT AMENDMENTS AND MAP AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-7-1. - General. 
The Asheville City Council may amend, supplement, modify, or repeal the regulations set forth in this chapter or amend the zoning maps. Such amendments shall be evaluated for compliance with the city's comprehensive plan and other applicable adopted plans, and may require a comprehensive plan amendment pursuant to section 7-4-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(d), 11-22-05)  
Sec. 7-7-2. - Initiation of amendments. 
Proposed changes or amendments to the text of this chapter may be initiated by the Asheville City Council, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the board of adjustment, the planning and development director, any owner of a legal or equitable interest in land located in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or any resident of the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Proposed zoning map amendments may be initiated by the Asheville City Council, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the board of adjustment, the planning and development director, or any owner of a legal or equitable interest in the property for which the map amendment is requested. A zoning study of a defined area may be requested upon submittal to the planning and development department of a petition signed by 51 percent of the property owners in the defined area for which the zoning study is requested who own at least 51 percent of the property (acreage) in the defined area for which the zoning study is requested. The area for which the zoning study is requested must be defined by the petitioners requesting the zoning study and may be of any size and include any number of individual contiguous parcels, including a public street. The area defined by the petitioners will be used by city staff to determine if the required 51 percent of property owners owning at least 51 percent of the property have signed the petition requesting the zoning study. Upon confirmation that the petition for a zoning study is valid, it shall be forwarded to the Asheville City Council for a determination of whether the zoning study should be initiated for the defined area and any portion thereof. The city council may initiate the zoning study, elect not to initiate the zoning study, or reduce the size of the area to be included in the zoning study and initiate a zoning study of the reduced area. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-7-3. - Petition requirements. 
(a)  Pre-filing meeting. Before filing a petition for an amendment or a request for a zoning study, an applicant shall meet with the planning and development director to discuss the proposed amendment or request and to become more familiar with the applicable requirements and approval procedures of the city. 
(b)  Filing. 
(1)  A petition requesting an amendment or a zoning study shall be filed with the planning and development department on a form provided by the director. 
(2)  Applicable fees shall be payable as set forth in the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(3)  Petitions must be submitted by 12:00 noon on the last Friday of a month in order for the petition to be heard at the meeting of the planning and zoning commission scheduled at least 30 days later. 
(c)  Content of applications. 
(1)  Each application shall contain or be accompanied by all information required on the application form provided by the planning and development director. 
(2)  Every amendment proposing to change the district boundary lines shall be accompanied by a metes and bounds description, a survey of the area involved, or reference to existing lots, sufficient in the estimation of the planning and development director to plot or otherwise identify the amendment on the official zoning maps of the City of Asheville. 
(3)  Any person designated by the owner(s) of the property included in the petition to serve as agent for the owner shall submit such authorization in writing with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3296, § 1, 10-25-05)  
Sec. 7-7-4. - Review by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Review—general. The Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider proposed amendments. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure of the commission. The commission will make recommendations to the Asheville City Council regarding whether to approve or deny each proposed amendment. When considering an amendment, the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall base its decision on considerations as set forth in subsection 7-7-5(b). 
(b)  Affirmative recommendation by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. Following an affirmative recommendation by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission on the proposed amendments, the action shall be reported to the Asheville City Council for a public hearing and final action according to the process set forth is subsection 7-7-5 of this chapter. The public hearing will be scheduled as provided by city council's rules of procedure. 
(c)  Negative recommendation by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. If the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission has made a negative recommendation on an amendment, the petitioner may, within 30 days after written notification from the city clerk, request that a public hearing be held by the Asheville City Council. This request shall be in writing and submitted, within the 30-day period, to the city clerk. If the petitioner fails to request a public hearing before the Asheville City Council within the allotted 30-day time frame, then the denial shall be considered affirmed by the Asheville City Council and the normal administrative remedies provided by this chapter satisfied. Furthermore, the waiting period for subsequent applications as set forth in subsection 7-7-7 of this chapter shall apply to all property included in a petition denied in this manner. 
Amendments initiated by the Asheville City Council or the Planning and Development Director which receive a negative recommendation from the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be required to follow the appeals process set forth above. The recommendation of the planning and zoning commission on the amendments initiated by the Asheville City Council or the planning and development director shall be forwarded to the city council for review and action. 
(d)  No action by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission. If the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission has made neither a positive nor a negative recommendation on a proposed amendment within 90 days of first considering it, the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Asheville City Council for consideration. The proposed amendment shall be accompanied by a record of the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission's comments regarding the amendment and the reasons, if any, for their lack of action. 
(e)  Content of recommendations. Any recommendation made by the planning and zoning commission to the city council pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall include a statement describing whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and any other applicable plan, and shall address any other matter deemed appropriate by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 9, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2843, § 1(e), 8-28-01; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(e), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(r), 7-11-06)  
Sec. 7-7-5. - Action by the Asheville City Council. 
(a)  Review—general. Following receipt of a recommendation on a proposed amendment, or in the case of a negative recommendation, the receipt of the petitioner's request for a public hearing or in the case of no action by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission as described in subsection 7-7-4(d) above, the Asheville City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The public hearing will be scheduled and conducted as provided by city council's rules of procedure. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(b)  Action. 
(1)  Before acting on any proposed amendment, the Asheville City Council shall consider any recommendation made by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the recommendation submitted by the Planning and Development Department to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, the comments made at the public hearing, and any other relevant additional information. 
(2)  When considering a proposed amendment, the Asheville City Council will not evaluate the petition based on any specific proposal for the use or development of the property. The petitioner shall not use any graphic materials or descriptions of the proposed development except for those which would apply to all uses permitted by the requested classification. 
(3)  Upon reviewing all pertinent information, the Asheville City Council may: 
a.  Adopt the proposed amendment; 
b.  Reject the proposed amendment; 
c.  Refer the proposed amendment back to the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration or hearing; or 
d.  Modify the proposed amendment. 
(4)  Considerations during decisions. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the city council shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with the comprehensive plan and any other applicable plan, and shall state why the action taken is considered to be reasonable and in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2843, § 1(f), 8-28-01; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(f), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(s), 7-11-06)  
Sec. 7-7-6. - Protests. 
(a)  Protest petitions. In case of a qualified protest against a zoning map amendment, that amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the city council. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the council and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered 'members of the council' for calculation of the requisite supermajority. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Signatories required. To qualify as a protest, under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of either (i) 20 percent or more of the area included in the proposed change or (ii) five percent of a 100-foot-wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100-foot buffer area as long as that street right-of-way is 100 feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax listing to determine the 'owners' of potentially qualifying areas. 
(2)  Qualified signatures. Where the owner of property submitting a protest petition is something other than an individual, married couple holding the property as an entirety, or fewer than five joint owners (tenancy in common, joint tenants, etc.), the petition shall be accompanied by copies of appropriate documentation that the petition has been signed by all of the record owners of the protesting property, and in the case of an owner that is not a real person, documentation showing that the petition has been executed in the proper form for that entity. Where the property is titled in the name of someone who is deceased, divorced, or otherwise no longer an owner of the property, the petition shall so state. An opinion from a licensed North Carolina attorney as to the legal sufficiency of the form of execution of a protest petition will suffice for this requirement. 
(c)  Exceptions. The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not be applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise, or to an amendment to an adopted (i) special use district, (ii) conditional use district, or (iii) conditional district if the amendment does not change the types of uses that are permitted within the district or increase the approved density for residential development, or increase the total approved size of nonresidential development, or reduce the size of any buffers or screening approved for the special use district, conditional use district, or conditional district. 
(d)  Form and time for filing. No protest against any change in or amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be valid or effective unless it be in the form of a written petition actually bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the signers to protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless it shall have been received by the city clerk in sufficient time to allow the city at least two normal work days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The city council may by ordinance require that all protest petitions be on a form prescribed and furnished by the city, and such form may prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the city to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The City of Asheville provides protest petition forms at the office of the city clerk. A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning amendment. Only those protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set forth in N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3306, § 1(g), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(h), 1-8-08)  
Sec. 7-7-7. - Waiting period for subsequent applications. 
(a)  Waiting period - general. When an application for a zoning amendment has been approved or denied by the Asheville City Council, no rezoning application covering the same property shall be accepted or considered within 12 months after the date of the approval or denial. This restriction shall apply regardless of whether or not the new application is for a zoning classification different from the original application. 
(b)  Waiting period - waiver. The waiting period required by this section may be waived by a three-fourths vote of Asheville City Council if it determines that there have been substantial changes in conditions or circumstances which may relate to the request. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-7-8. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  Purpose. Conditional zoning is established to provide for flexibility in the development of property while ensuring that the development is compatible with neighboring uses. Conditional zoning affords a degree of certainty in land use decisions not possible when rezoning to a general use district. Additional conditions, standards and regulations are attached to a proposed development to ensure that the activities and operations are compatible with the surrounding uses and with applicable adopted plans in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Conditional zoning districts. Conditional zoning is available to any of the general zoning classifications enumerated in this chapter, except for those that require a master plan as part of the application (e.g. Urban Village). Expansion zoning districts are only allowed as conditional zoning districts for Level III projects and as otherwise indicated in the Table of Permitted Uses and this UDO. Applicants for Level III projects shall select the most applicable expansion district based on the proposed use(s). The conditional zoning designation shall be indicated on all zoning maps and other official documents with the suffix, "CZ" (e.g. RM-8 CZ; IND CZ; COM EXP CZ). 
(c)  General requirements. The following provision shall apply in the administration of conditional zoning. 
(1)  A conditional zoning application shall be considered only upon submittal of a complete application by the owner of the affected property or a duly authorized representative of the property owner. 
(2)  Development plans shall be prepared by a licensed design professional and shall be prepared in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
(3)  All standards and requirements of the corresponding general use zoning district or expansion district shall be met, except to the extent that the conditions imposed by the conditional zoning may be more or less restrictive than the development standards if such conditions comply with the comprehensive plan or other adopted plans, and/or except where the requirements are modified in accordance with subsection 7-7-8(c)(6). A conditional zoning involving an expansion district must meet all standards and requirements of the expansion district. 
(4)  No uses shall be permitted except those enumerated in the ordinance adopting the conditional zoning. 
(5)  The conditions agreed upon pursuant to the conditional zoning approval shall be stated in the adopting ordinance and may limit the uses which are permitted on the property. By way of illustration and not limitation, conditions may specify location on the property of the proposed structure(s), the number of dwelling units, the location and extent of supporting facilities such as parking lots, driveways, access streets, and sidewalks, the location and extent of landscaping, buffer areas and open space, the timing of development, the height of structures, the design and orientation of structures, the location and extent of rights-of-way and other areas to be dedicated for public purposes, and other such matters as may be identified as appropriate for the proposed development. 
(6)  Minor modifications to the approved site plan may be reviewed and approved administratively provided that they do not involve a change in permitted uses, changes in overall density or substantial changes to the configuration of the development that affect the operation or impacts of the development. Any other modification of the conditions and standards in a conditional zoning district shall be approved by the city council following this review process as an amendment to the conditional zoning ordinance and may be referred to the technical review committee as appropriate. The planning and urban design director shall in every case have the discretion to decline to exercise the power to approve minor modifications as provided for herein, and may require the applicant to seek an amendment to the conditional zoning ordinance. 
(7)  When adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the city council shall also approve a statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and any other officially adopted plans that are applicable, and briefly explain why the council considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. That statement is not subject to judicial review. 
(8)  Any violation of a provision of a conditional zoning ordinance shall be treated the same as any other violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the same remedies and penalties as any other such violation. 
(9)  If no action has been taken to obtain a zoning permit or otherwise begin development of the property in accordance with the conditional zoning ordinance within 24 months of its approval by city council, the planning and urban design director may initiate appropriate action to rezone the affected property to any other classification. The conditional zoning ordinance may provide a specific duration of the approval. Appropriate approval conditions may be added to guarantee site maintenance and security. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any time limitations prescribed by statute or by other ordinances in this chapter. 
(10)  If the use(s) commenced pursuant to a conditional zoning ordinance is abandoned or discontinued as described in article 17 the planning and urban design director may initiate appropriate action to rezone the affected property to any other classification or the applicant may seek an amendment to the conditional zoning approval by following the process outlined in this chapter. 
(11)  No variances or conditional use permits may be issued for developments on property that is subject to a conditional zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Pre-application procedure. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. All applicants for conditional zoning are required to schedule and attend a pre-application conference with city staff prior to submittal of the complete application. These conferences allows the applicant and staff an opportunity to discuss the rezoning request, the requirements for completing the review schedule, contact persons for services and permits, and information regarding site plans, landscaping, and development requirements. 
The staff can also determine if any special reviews will be required, such as reviews by the historic resources commission, the tree commission, Asheville Area Riverfront Redevelopment Commission, or downtown commission. 
(2)  Neighborhood meeting. The developer is required to meet with representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed project is located. This meeting is to allow the developer to explain the proposed project, be informed about neighborhood concerns, and explore opportunities to address those concerns in cooperation with the neighborhood. The meeting must be held at the pre-application stage no more than four months prior to and no less than ten days before the submittal date and must be at a location and time designed to allow interested neighbors to attend. It is recommended, but not required, that the developer retain a neutral third party to facilitate the meeting. The developer shall provide notice of the meeting by first class mail to all property owners within 200 feet at least ten days before the meeting and must post the site with notice of the meeting date, time and location. A written report of the meeting must be submitted with the conditional zoning application. 
(e)  Plan submittal. When applying for conditional zoning, the owner shall specify the nature of the proposed development and shall propose conditions to ensure compatibility with the surrounding uses and consistency with adopted plans. Applications for conditional zoning shall be processed, considered, and voted upon using the same procedures and subject to the same requirements as those established in this article for zoning map and zoning text amendments, except as provided below: 
(1)  Conditional zoning application requirements. 
a.  A development plan(s) for a proposed project shall be prepared by a licensed design professional and shall be prepared in accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the City of Asheville Standard Details and Specifications Manual, other applicable city ordinances, city policies and state law. 
b.  A complete application packet containing all information as required by the designated staff shall be submitted according to the published schedule of the technical review committee. 
c.  The application must also include a notation of the deed number of the subject property(s) with book and page reference as listed with the Buncombe County Register of Deeds. 
(2)  Review by the technical review committee. The development plan(s) shall be submitted and reviewed by the members of the technical review committee. The development plan(s), recommendations and comments shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission unless review by another body is required. 
(3)  Review by others. If other review bodies are required to consider the application, the project will be forwarded to that body and reviewed according to procedures established for that body before advancing to the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Review by the planning and zoning commission. Following review by the technical review committee and other bodies, as required, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for conditional zoning. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. After holding the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of the application, including recommending conditions for the zoning; recommend denial of the application; or continue the consideration of the application in order to receive further information. If recommending approval or denial of the application, the planning and zoning commission must provide a written recommendation addressing the consistency of the proposal with the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans. 
(5)  Review by city council. Upon receipt of the recommendations from the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application for conditional zoning. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
The city council's consideration of an application for conditional zoning is legislative in nature, and the council may consider any relevant information in its deliberations. Consideration shall be given to adopted land use plans for the area, small area plans, corridor plans, and other land use policy documents, and to surrounding land uses. The council may adopt or not adopt a conditional zoning ordinance, or may continue its consideration of the application as necessary or appropriate. 
(6)  Conditions. During the adoption of a conditional zoning ordinance, specific conditions may be proposed by the petitioner, city council, planning and zoning commission or city staff, but only those conditions mutually approved by city council and the petitioner may be incorporated into the zoning regulations and permit requirements. Conditions and site-specific standards imposed in a conditional zoning district shall be limited to those that address the conformance of the development and use of the site to city ordinances, an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those that address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or use of the site. 
(7)  Final review by the technical review committee. Prior to the issuance of any permits, the applicant must submit detailed plans incorporating all conditions to the technical review committee for final review. 
(8)  Map amendment. Upon adoption of a conditional zoning ordinance, the official zoning map of the City of Asheville shall be amended to add the conditional zoning district. The city clerk shall maintain a book or other official record for conditional zoning ordinances, and each conditional zoning ordinance shall be filed therein. Failure to comply with this provision shall not render the ordinance invalid. 
If approved by the city council, no permits may be issued on the subject property until the property owner has recorded the approved plan and conditions pertinent to the specific property at the Buncombe County Register of Deeds, including a notation of the pertinent deed number with book and page reference. 
(10)  Perpetually binding. The conditional zoning ordinance adopted as provided herein shall be perpetually binding upon the affected property unless subsequently changed or amended as provided for in this chapter. 
(11)  Legislative review. Conditional zoning ordinances are legislative in nature, and judicial review of conditional zoning ordinances shall be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3237, § 1(b), 5-24-05; Ord. No. 3306, §§ 1(h—j), 11-22-05; Ord. No. 3374, §§ 1(t), (u), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3700, §§ 1a, b, b, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3709, § 1d, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 4377, § 1, 1-13-15; Ord. No. 4560, § 1h, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1g, 1-9-18)  
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL USE AND EXPANSION DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4560, § 1i, adopted February 14, 2017 changed the title of art. VIII from "General Use Districts" to General Use and Expansion Districts." 
 
Sec. 7-8-1. - Enumeration and description of districts; designation of districts on official zoning maps. 
(a)  Criteria for zoning districts. For the purposes set forth in article I, the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are divided into zoning districts taking into account the design, size, and/or location of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Transportation facilities, including streets, sidewalks, and bridges; 
(2)  Schools, parks, greenways, and other public facilities and requirements; 
(3)  Police protection; 
(4)  Fire protection; 
(5)  Sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage structures; 
(6)  Water supplies for purposes of fire protection and consumption; 
(7)  Access and location to other utility services; 
(8)  Potential hazards from fire, flooding, and diseases; 
(9)  Access to light and air from buildings; 
(10)  Access for fire and police protection and refuse collection; 
(11)  Protection for occupants of dwellings from noise, dust, and gases caused by traffic and other uses; 
(12)  Topography and other natural features; and/or 
(13)  Current uses of land and buildings for residences, businesses, industries, places of worship, schools, and for other uses and heights of buildings, the size and location of yards, and the density of population in each of the zoning districts hereinafter mentioned. 
(b)  Enumeration and descriptions of zoning districts. There are three types of zoning districts: 
(1)  General use districts are those in which a variety of uses are permitted. The general use districts established in this article are classified from "highest" to "lowest" in the following order: 
"Highest" 
RS-2 Residential Single-Family Low-Density District 
RS-4 Residential Single-Family Medium Density District 
RS-8 Residential Single-Family High Density District 
RM-6 Residential Multi-Family Low Density District 
RM-8 Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District 
RM-16 Residential Multi-Family High Density District 
Neighborhood Business District 
Office District 
Office II District 
Office/Business District 
Community Business I District 
Community Business II District 
Urban Residential District 
Neighborhood Corridor District 
Haywood Road Form District 
River Arts Form District 
Urban Village District 
Urban Place District 
Resort District 
Institutional District 
Highway Business District 
Regional Business District 
Central Business District 
River District 
Commercial Industrial District 
Light Industrial District 
Industrial District 
"Lowest" 
For any district where an overlay district is found, the overlay district shall have the same order as the general use district for the purpose of determining its hierarchy under the table. 
(2)  Overlay districts are zoning districts which overlap one or more general use districts. Overlay districts (article IX) involve additional regulations on some or all property within underlying general use districts. The following overlay districts are established: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Historic preservation overlay district(s). Asheville's historic areas are important assets to the city. The protecting and conserving of the historic areas is encouraged through the establishment of historic preservation overlay districts. Designation of an area as an historic district and the development of design guidelines for the area help preserve the architectural integrity of the area and stabilize and enhance property values. Historic districts, protected by designation as preservation overlays, serve as valuable educational tools and as tourist attractions. 
c.  Downtown design review overlay district. Urban design review assists in protecting the downtown local architectural heritage and in the preservation of the considerable economic investments that have occurred over the years. The downtown design review process seeks to encourage renovation and new development in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance the historical integrity, and develop creative design solutions. While the design guidelines will not dictate architectural styles, they will suggest a variety of design options for achieving compatibility within the designated boundaries. 
d.  Manufactured housing and manufactured housing community overlay districts. The manufactured housing and manufactured housing community overlay districts are established to provide a procedure for identifying areas in which manufactured housing may be located and to establish standards for individual manufactured homes and for the development of communities. These overlay districts are intended to expand the range of housing opportunities available to residents of Asheville while assuring that manufactured housing is compatible with existing development. 
e.  Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District. Realizing the importance of the Blue Ridge Parkway to the economy of Asheville and western North Carolina, the Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District is created to protect and preserve the unique features of this asset to the city. The standards established in this district will protect the scenic quality of the parkway and reduce encroachment on its rural setting. 
f.  Transition overlay district. Several areas in the City of Asheville are experiencing development pressures which are pushing the areas toward change. The location of most of these area on the edge of residential neighborhoods means that changes in these areas could have a significant impact on the adjacent neighborhoods. Transition overlay districts are established to allow these areas to change while assuring that the change is compatible with adjacent areas. Standards are developed individually for each area and designed to meet each area's unique needs. Involvement of area property owners and residents in the preparation of development standards is encouraged. 
(3)  Conditional districts are zoning districts which provide for flexibility in the development of property while ensuring that the development is compatible with neighboring uses. Conditional zoning districts are available for any of the general use zoning classifications enumerated in this ordinance; moreover, there are certain conditional districts that are not associated with an existing general use district and may only be considered with Level III developments. These districts include: 
Central Business Expansion District 
Institutional Expansion District 
Commercial Expansion District 
Residential Expansion District 
Industrial Expansion District 
Lodging Expansion District 
Mixed Use Expansion District 
(c)  Designation of districts on official zoning maps. Each district shall be shown on the official zoning maps of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, a copy of which is located in the city planning and development department. Said set of maps, and all district designations, boundaries, figures, letters, and symbols shown on such maps are hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(d)  Table of Permitted Uses. The table is a summary listing of uses that are fully defined in section 7-2-5. 
Zones 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RSRT 	INST 	RIV 	URD 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Residential Uses 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 																	
Accessory dwelling unit 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 																	
Accessory dwelling commercial caretaker 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 									P 		
Dwellings, Duplex 				P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 			
Dwelling, Townhouse 			P 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	S 		P 			P 			P 
Dwellings, Multi-family 				P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 			P 		P 	P 
Dwelling, Single family detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 					P 	P 		S 	P 	S 				P 				
Cottage Development 			S 	S 	S 	S 																								S 			
Sustainable Development Projects 				S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 					S 	S 											
Public and Institutional Uses 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Institutional Uses 																																	
Armories 														P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 											
Assisted living facilities 						S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	P 			P 					P 
Civic, social service & fraternal organizations 						S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				S 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Convention, Conference, and/or Exhibit Centers 												P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 					P 	P 				P 	P 
Colleges and Universities 														P 	P 	P 	P 		S 		P 	P 		P 	P 		P 	P 					P 
Day Care Center, Adult 						S 		S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	P 								
Day Care Center, Child 						S 		S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	P 								
Day Care Home, Adult 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	S 									
Day Care Home, Child 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 										
Detention, jails & correctional facilities 														C 	C 	C 					EXP 												
Dormitories 														P 	P 	P 	P 		S 		P 	P 											
Family Care Homes 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 										
Fire/Police stations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Government buildings and uses 								S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 				S 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 		P 
Group homes 			C 	C 	C 	S 			P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	S 	S 									
Hospitals/medical centers 														P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 						P 					P 
Libraries 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 
Museums 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 	P 					P 
Orphanages 						P 				P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		S 									
Performance centers 												P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		P 	P 		P 					P 	P 
Places of Worship 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 		P 	P 					P 
Post offices without distribution facility 							P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Post office distribution facilities 														P 	P 	P 			P 			P 											
Public Utilities & related facilities 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 							
Schools 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	S 	S 	P 					P 			P 
Shelters 									P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		S 				P 	P 					P 
Stadiums & arenas 															P 	P 	P 		P 		S 	P 					P 	P 					P 
Transportation terminals 														P 	P 	P 	P 		P 			P 											
Vocational or Technical School 												P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 		P 	P 		S 	P 								
Recreational Uses 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Arboretums 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Community Centers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 			
Golf Courses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 				P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 											
Parks, Passive and greenways 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreational uses, governmental such as, but not limited to, parks for active use 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Recreational uses, restricted to membership, non-profit 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 						P 				
Recreational uses accessory to residential uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Commercial/Business Uses 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Food, Beverage, Entertainment Uses 																																	
Adult establishments 																C 	C 	C 	EXP 					EXP 									
Eating/drinking establishments (drive-through facility permitted separately) 							S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 			P 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 		P 		P 		P 
Nightclubs 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			S 		P 		P 				P 	P 				P 
Microbrewery 								S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 			S 	S 	P 		P 	P 			S 	P 		P 		P 
Mobile food vending 								S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 		S 	S 			S 					
Movie theaters 											S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 				S 	P 		P 	P 			P 	P 				
Recreational uses, commercial indoor 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 		P 		P 	P 			P 	P 				P 
Recreational uses, commercial outdoor 												P 		P 	P 	P 				P 		P 											P 
Lodging 																																	
Bed & breakfast inns 				S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 						S 	S 	S 		S 	S 				P 		P 	
Boardinghouses 						S 					S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 				S 	S 		S 	S 			S 		P 		P 	
Campground 															P 	P 				P 		P 										P 	
Homestays 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 		S 			S 
Hotel, extended stay 																				P 							P 	P 	P 			P 	P 
Hotel, large 																				P 							P 	P 	P 			P 	P 
Hotel, small 																				P 							P 	P 	P 			P 	P 
Short-term vacation rental 																				S 							P 	P 				P 	P 
Office Uses 																																	
Business incubator 														P 		P 		P 	P 			P 											
Call Center 																P 		P 	S 			P 											
Home Occupations 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 			P 		S 			
Instructional services 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		P 	P 		P 						P 
Offices 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 
Radio/Television studios 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 		P 	P 		P 						
Research & technology production uses 									P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 		P 		P 
Retail/Service Uses 																																	
Barber shops & beauty salons 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 						
Car washes 											P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 		P 				P 		S 		P 							
Cat café 																	P 										P 						
Clinics 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	S 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 				P 
Clinics, veterinary 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		P 	P 		P 		P 				P 
Commercial use accessory to residential use 					S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	S 	P 	S 	S 	S 		P 						
Equipment rental business 											S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 				S 		P 			P 								
Farm Products Market 							P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 	P 	P 	P 		P 						
Financial institutions (drive-through permitted separately) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 		P 	P 		P 		P 				P 
Flea markets 																P 			P 			P 							P 				
Funeral establishments 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 		S 			P 		P 				
Gasoline sales 											P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 		P 			P 	EXP 	S 		P 	S 						
Grocery stores (outdoor storage and gasoline sales uses permitted separately) 							P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 		P 	P 		P 						
Hardware/garden supply stores (outdoor storage permitted separately) 							P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 		P 	P 		P 						
Health & fitness facilities 							P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			S 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 						p 
Heavy equipment & specialized vehicle sales, rental & service 														P 	P 	P 			P 			P 				P 							
Industrial equipment sales 														P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 			P 					P 				P 		
Kennels 														P 	P 	P 						P 											
Laundry/dry cleaning establishments (drivethrough facility permitted separately) 							P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 	P 	P 	P 		P 						P 
Manufactured home sales and servicing 														P 	P 	P 						P 											
Recreational vehicle sales, service & repair 														P 	P 	P 						P 				P 							
Motor vehicle and boat sales new & used 														P 	P 	P 	C 					P 											
Motor vehicle and boat service & repair business (outdoor storage permitted separately) 											S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 		S 			S 		S 		P 	S 						
Motor vehicle and utility trailer rental 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 					P 						
Motor vehicle service facility (outdoor storage and gasoline sales permitted separately) 											P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 			P 		S 		P 	P 						
Pharmacies (drive-through facility permitted separately) 							P 	S 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 						
Plant sales, nurseries and greenhouses 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 						P 											
Printing & publishing 												P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 		P 	P 		P 						
Retail sales (outdoor storage, gasoline sales, drive-through facility uses permitted separately) 							S 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	P 						P 
Self-service storage facilities 														P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 							P 				
Single tenant retail structures, multi-tenant retail structures with GFA of more than 100,000 sq. ft. 														C 	C 	C 						C 				C 							
Small Engine service and repair 							P 			P 	S 	S 	P 	S 	S 	P 	S 		P 			P 				P 	S 						
Studios, galleries & workshops for artists, artisans, and craftspeople - low impact 								P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 				P 
Studios, galleries & workshops for artists, artisans and craftspeople - high impact 														P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 			P 					S 		P 		P 		P 
Tailors/dressmaker shops 							P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 						
Taxi stands 														P 	P 	P 	P 					P 			P 	P 	P 		P 				P 
Tattoo Parlors 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					P 					P 						
Industrial Uses 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Concrete plant 																		P 	P 			P 									P 		
Crematories - animal 														S 	S 	S 		S 	S 		S 	S 											
Crematories - human 								S 	S 		S 	S 		S 	S 	S 			S 		S 	S 											
Industrial uses 																P 			P 			P 									P 		
Industrial uses, light 											S 	S 			S 	P 		P 				P 			P 				P 		P 		P 
Recycling operation 																S 		S 	S 			S 											
Recycling plant 																			S 			EXP 									P 		
Lumber yards 															P 	P 			P 			P 							P 		P 		
Motor freight terminals 																P 			P 			P 							P 		P 		
Wholesale sales 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 			P 				P 		P 		
Warehousing and storage 															S 	P 		P 	P 			P 				P 			P 		P 		
Aeronautical—Airport Uses 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Aerospace and aviation-related training facilities 																										P 							
Air cargo/freight terminals, operations and activities 																										P 							
Aircraft hangars, servicing and repair facilities 																										P 							
Aircraft sales and leasing facilities and services 																										P 							
Aircraft servicing, manufacturing and retrofitting facilities 																										P 							
Airport administration and maintenance facilities 																										P 							
Airport facilities to include runways, aprons, taxiways, weather monitoring facilities, control tower, navigational/communication facilities, airfield lighting, signs & associated structures 																										P 							
Airport passenger terminal with associated ticket sales, restaurant/lounge/food services, retail sales & services, car rental services, other incidental services and associated short and long-term parking lots 																										P 							
Airport services 																										P 							
General aviation services and facilities, including aircraft tie-down & parking areas, support & maintenance shops, concessions, aviation fuel storage & dispensing facilities 																										P 							
Offices and other facilities that specifically support airport, aviation and aeronautical activities 																										P 							
Other Use Types 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Accessory structures 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 		P 								
Agriculture 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	P 	P 							
Ancillary non-residential uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 																	C 										
Antenna 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 							
Commercial satellite dishes & related equipment 														P 	P 				P 			P 											
Cemeteries, animal 											S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 											
Cemetaries/Columbariums 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 											
Drive-through facilities or uses 							EXP 	S 	S 	S 	EXP 		C 	P 	P 	P 	S 		P 		S 	S 	EXP 	S 					P 				P 
Interim uses on vacant lots 								S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 								
Level III Development 																											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Live-work units 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Outdoor storage 							EXP 				S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	EXP 	S 	S 	S 		S 							P 		P 		
Parking Decks, Garages, Structures 														P 	P 	P 	P 				S 	P 		S 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Parking Lots 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recycling collection centers 											S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		P 	P 	S 	S 	S 		S 									
Stables 																	S 			S 		P 											
Telecommunication towers 										C 		C 		C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				C 							
Telecommunication tower/support structure concealed 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 							
Telecommunication tower/support structure—Replacement tower 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 		S 		S 
Wireless telecommunication facilities, co-location 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 		S 		S 
Wireless telecommunication facilities (concealed) 				S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 		S 		S 
Uses Expressly Prohibited 	RS2 	RS4 	RS8 	RM6 	RM8 	RM16 	NB 	OFF I 	OFF II 	OB 	CBI 	CBII 	NCD 	HB 	RB 	CI 	CBD 	LI 	IND 	RES 	INST 	RIV 	UR 	UV 	UP 	ARPT 	CBD EXP 	INST EXP 	COM EXP 	RES EXP 	IND EXP 	LODG EXP 	MXD EXP 
Adult establishments 																	EXP 					EXP 											
Asphalt plants 																						EXP 				EXP 							
Chemical storage facilities 																						EXP 											
Detention, jails & correctional facilities 																						EXP 											
Drive-through facilities or uses 							EXP 				EXP 												EXP 										
Gas manufacturing 																						EXP 											
Gasoline sales 																							EXP 										
Gated communities 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 			EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 	EXP 								
Hazardous waste management facilities 																						EXP 											
Hazardous materials (H1) manufacturing or storage 																						EXP 											
Manufacture or storage of ammunition, dynamite, or other high explosives 																						EXP 											
Mining 																						EXP 											
Outdoor storage 							EXP 										EXP 																
Paper Mills 																						EXP 											
Skywalks/pedestrian bridges over key pedestrian streets 																	EXP 																
Slaughter house 																						EXP 											
Solid waste disposal facilities 																						EXP 											
Solid waste landfills 																						EXP 											
Uses prohibited by Asheville Flood Protection Standards 																						EXP 											
Uses with outdoor speaker systems 							EXP 																										
NOTES 
Permitted = P 
A use permitted by right that must still meet all regulatory standards for the applicable district in Sec. 7-8. 
USSR = S 
A use permitted by right subject to special standards in Sec. 7-16-1, as well as all regulatory standards for the applicable district in Sec. 7-8. 
Conditional = C 
A use permitted only through approval of the City Council subject to special standards in Sec. 7-16-2, that must also meet all regulatory standards for the applicable district in Sec. 7-8. 
Expressly Prohibited = EXP 
Use is expressly prohibited in any indicated districts. 
	
Tan - adding or changing category 
Accessory Use Only = AP 
RES = Residential Zones 
MU = Mixed Use Zones 
IND = Industrial Zones 
S = Special Zones 
FN #1 - Living Quarters uses prohibited 
FN #2 - Excluding protection service 
FN #3 - Allowed as accessory use only 
FN #4 - Allowed if no gasoline sales 
FN #5 (XP) - Expressly Prohibited 
FN #6 - Allowed if indoors only 
 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(2), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(i), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1c, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3959, § 1b, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4007, § 1b, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4233, § 1c, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 4342, § 1c, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 4417, § 1, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 4431, §§ 1b, c, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 4448, § 1b, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 4470, § 1b, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4560, §§ 1j, k, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(b—d), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4646, § 1(c), 11-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1h, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-8-2. - RS-2 Residential Single-Family Low Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RS-2 Residential Single-Family Low Density District to establish a low density for single-family dwellings and other compatible uses in recognition of environmental constraints such as, but not limited to, steep slopes, impervious soils, high water tables, and flooding. It is also the intent of this district to preserve the general welfare by protecting important resources such as, but not limited to, watersheds and view sheds. In addition to recognizing environmental constraints and preserving important resources, this district is also intended to stabilize and protect the district's residential character while promoting a suitable environment for single-family living. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the RS-2 Residential Single-Family Low Density District shall be prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. Density in the RS-2 District shall be determined by the minimum lot size standards. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RS-2 District shall be 16,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RS-2 District shall have a minimum width of 80 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RS-2 District. 
Front: 35 ft. 
Side: 10 ft. 
Rear: 25 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RS-2 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted within any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided for new developments and expansions of existing developments as required by section 7-11-3. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(a), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(a), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(b), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(a), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(b), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(a), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(c), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3083, § 1(a), 1-13-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(b), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1, 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3908, § 1e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(e), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(a), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-3. - RS-4 Residential Single-Family Medium Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RS-4 Residential Single-Family Medium Density District to establish a medium density for single-family dwellings and to stabilize and protect the residential character of the district while promoting a suitable environment for single-family living. Non-single-family development normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area is also permitted. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the RS-4 Residential Single-Family Medium Density District shall be prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. Density in the RS-4 shall be determined by the minimum lot size standards. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RS-4 District shall be 8,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RS-4 District shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
(5)  Yard standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RS-4 District. 
Front: 25 ft. 
Side: 10 ft. 
Rear: 25 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RS-4 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted within any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided for new developments and expansion of existing developments as required by section 7-11-4. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(b), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(b), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(c), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(b), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(c); 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(b), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(c), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3083, § 1(a), 1-13-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(b), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3908, § 1e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(f), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(b), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-4. - RS-8 Residential Single-Family High Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RS-8 Residential Single-Family High Density District to establish a high density per acre for single-family dwellings where public infrastructure is sufficient to support such development and to stabilize and protect the district's residential character in areas of existing high density single-family development while promoting a suitable environment for single-family living. Non-single-family development normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area is also permitted. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the RS-8 Residential Single-Family High Density District shall be prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. Density in the RS-8 District shall be determined by the minimum lot size standards. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RS-8 District shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RS-8 District shall have a minimum width of 40 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RS-8 District. 
Front: 15 ft. 
Side: 6 ft. 
Rear: 15 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RS-8 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted within any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided for new developments and expansions of existing developments as required by section 7-11-4. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(c), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(c), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(d), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(e), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(d), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(c), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3052, § 1(a), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(c), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3083, § 1(a), 1-13-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(b), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3489, § 1(b), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3908, § 1e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(g), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(c), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-5. - RM-6 Residential Multi-Family Low Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RM-6 Residential Multi-Family Low Density District to permit a limited range of low density multi-family housing types along with single-family detached and attached dwellings. This district is intended to provide a transitional area between single lower- and multi-family higher-density areas, and to provide a compatible mixture of these various housing types. Non-residential development normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area is also permitted. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the RM-6 Residential Multi-Family Low Density District shall be prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density in the RM-6 district shall be two dwelling units for the first 6,000 square feet of lot area and an additional dwelling unit may be provided for each 1,000 square feet of lot area in excess of the minimum lot standard. 
(2)  Structure Size. New multifamily structures shall have a building footprint of not more than 4,000 square feet and a gross floor area of not more than 12,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RM-6 District shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RM-6 District shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RM-6 District. 
Front: 15 ft. 
Side: 6 ft. 
Rear: 15 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RM-6 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. Multifamily development in RM-6 shall comply with design standards as required in section 7-10-8. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(d), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(d), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(e), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2772, § 1(1), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(d), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(e), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(d), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3052, § 1(a), (b), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(d), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3205, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(b), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3489, § 1(b), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3908, §§ 1b, e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(h), (i), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(d), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-6. - RM-8 Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RM-8 Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District to permit a full range of medium density multi-family housing types along with single-family detached and attached residences. This district is intended to provide a transitional area between high density single-family and multi-family areas, and to permit medium density multi-family development in areas where existing conditions make higher density development inappropriate. Non-residential development normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area is also permitted. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the RM-8 Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District shall be prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density in the RM-8 District shall be two dwelling units for the first 4,000 square feet of lot area and an additional dwelling unit may be provided for each 1,000 square feet of lot area in excess of the minimum lot standard. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New multifamily structures shall have a building footprint of not more than 4,000 square feet and a gross floor area of not more than 12,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RM-8 District shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RM-8 District shall have a minimum width of 40 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RM-8 District. 
Front: 15 ft. 
Side: 6 ft. 
Rear: 15 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RM-8 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. Multifamily development in RM-8 shall comply with design standards as required in section 7-10-8. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(e), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(e), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(f), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2772, § 1(b), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(e), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(f), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(e), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3052, § 1(a), (b), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(d), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3205, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3412, § 1(b), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3489, § 1(b), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3908, §§ 1b, e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(j), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(e), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-7. - RM-16 Residential Multi-Family High Density District. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the RM-16 Residential Multi-Family High Density District to permit a full range of high density multi-family housing types along with limited institutional, public and commercial uses appropriate within high density residential areas. It is intended that this district be located near employment centers, shopping facilities, roads and other urban infrastructure capable of handling the demand generated by high density residential development. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the RM-16 Residential Multi-Family High Density District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density in the RM-16 District shall be two dwelling units for the first 2,500 square feet of lot area and an additional dwelling unit may be provided for each 1,000 square feet of lot area in excess of the minimum lot standard. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New multifamily structures shall have a building footprint of not more than 4,000 square feet and a gross floor area of not more than 12,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the RM-16 District shall be 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the RM-16 District shall have a minimum width of 40 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the RM-16 District. 
Front: 15 ft. 
Side: 6 ft. 
Rear: 15 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the RM-16 District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback other than that which would occur on an approved driveway. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. Multifamily development in RM-16 shall comply with design standards as required by section 7-10-8. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2584, § 1(f), 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(f), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2735, § 1d., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2772, § 1(c), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2871, § 1(f), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2901, § 1(g), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(f), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3064, § 1(d), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3489, § 1(b), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(i), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3874, §§ 1a, b, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3908, §§ 1b, e, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(k), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4621, § 1(f), 10-24-17)  
Sec. 7-8-8. - Neighborhood Business District. 
(a)  General description. The Neighborhood Business District is established to reserve areas for low-intensity business centers which are accessible to pedestrians from the surrounding residential neighborhood. The intent of the district is to provide for the daily convenience and personal service needs of the surrounding residential neighborhood while minimizing conflicts with surrounding residential uses. This district is designed to be located within or adjacent to residential neighborhoods where large commercial operations are inappropriate, but where small neighborhood oriented businesses are useful and desirable. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
Outdoor storage 
Uses with drive-through facilities 
Uses with outdoor loud speaker systems 
Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Neighborhood Business District is prohibited. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Neighborhood Business District shall be 12 dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Neighborhood Business District shall not exceed a total of 3,000 square feet in gross floor area for one story structures. Multiple story structures may have a gross floor area of up to 6,000 square feet if residential uses are provided on the upper floor(s). 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None required. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Neighborhood Business District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: None required. 
Corner lot, street side: 15 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Neighborhood Business District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. Parking must be provided at the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the building. Uses in the Neighborhood Business District are permitted a 30 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All activities associated with non-residential uses, including deliveries and refuse collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(15)  Drive-through facilities. Uses with drive-through facilities are prohibited in the district. 
(16)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage is prohibited in the district. 
(17)  Outdoor loudspeaker systems. Outdoor loudspeaker systems are prohibited in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(h), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(h), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(b), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3279, § 1, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1b, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1c—e, n, p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-9. - Office District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Office District is established to reserve areas for the development of small scale office uses adjacent to residential uses. A mixture of office and residential uses is permitted in the Office District. This district may serve as a transition as residential areas convert to other uses or between residential and commercial areas. Due to the location of the Office District near residential areas, uses in this district shall conduct most of their activities during daylight hours. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Office District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Office District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 40 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Office District shall not exceed a total of 4,000 square feet in gross floor area for one story buildings and 8,000 square feet for multiple story buildings. Existing structures shall not be expanded to exceed these limits. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Office District shall be 5,445 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Office District shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Office District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 10 feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setbacks; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V - Fire Prevention. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Office District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Office District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All activities associated with non-residential uses, including deliveries and refuse collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The arrival and departure of guests at bed and breakfast homestays and inns shall be exempt from this standard. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2490, § 1, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(i), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(i), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1b, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(3), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3874, § 1c, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1a, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-10. - Office II District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Office II District is established to reserve areas for the development of small to medium scale office uses where this scale is compatible with the scale of adjacent uses and/or where the infrastructure is inadequate to serve larger scale uses. The Office II District may also serve to provide for a mixture of uses along thoroughfares where the predominant use is commercial. The Office II District may also serve as a transition between residential areas and commercial areas. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in Office II District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Office II District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 40 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Office II District shall not exceed a total of 8,000 square feet in gross floor area for one story buildings and 16,000 square feet for multiple story buildings; provided, however, restaurants shall not exceed 4,000 square feet in size. Existing structures shall not be expanded to exceed these limits. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Office II District shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Office II District shall have a minimum width of 80 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Office II District: 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 10 feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setbacks; if so, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V—Fire Protection. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Office II District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Office II District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All activities associated with nonresidential uses, including deliveries and refuse collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The arrival and departure of guests at bed and breakfast homestays and inns shall be exempt from this standard. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(j), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(j), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1b, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1b, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-11. - Office/Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Office/Business District is established to reserve an area for the development of office uses and related support uses. This district will reserve areas for medium scale offices and a limited range of business uses and may serve as a transition area between commercial and residential areas. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Office/Business District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Office Business District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 40 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Office/Business District shall not exceed a total of 30,000 square feet in gross floor area. Existing structures shall not be expanded to exceed 30,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Office/Business District shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Office/Business District shall have a minimum width of 80 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Office/Business District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 10 feet. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setbacks; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Office/Business District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Office/Business District shall be four stories, but not to exceed 60 feet, except in the transition area described in subsection (13) below. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None required. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All activities associated with non-residential uses, including deliveries and refuse collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
Transition area: Within 50 feet of a residentially zoned area, restrictions shall be placed on the height of buildings and structures. Height of buildings and structures located in this area shall be subject to the height restrictions established in the adjacent residential area. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(k), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(k), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1b, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3874, § 1d, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1c, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-12. - Community Business I District. 
(a)  General description. The Community Business I District is established to provide areas for medium-density business and service uses serving several residential neighborhoods. This community business center may serve as a workplace for many residents in the surrounding neighborhoods and should be sensitive to a significant pedestrian population, but also provide for adequate and safe vehicular access. The Community Business I District is designed to be located primarily along streets which serve multiple residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Community Business I District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
Uses with drive-through facilities 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Community Business I District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 40 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Community Business I District shall have a building footprint of not more than 6,000 square feet. The gross floor area of new structures shall not exceed 12,000 square feet. Existing structures shall not be expanded to exceed a footprint or gross floor area of 12,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Community Business I District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: None required. 
Corner lot, street side: 15 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Community Business I District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Community Business I District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. Parking shall be provided at the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the structure. Uses in the Community Business I District are permitted a 25 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(15)  Drive-through facilities. Uses with drive-through facilities are prohibited in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(l), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(l), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1b, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1b, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3700, §§ 1d, e, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1f, n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1d, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-13. - Community Business II District. 
(a)  General description. The Community Business District II is established to provide areas for medium-to-high-density business and service uses serving several residential neighborhoods. This community business center may serve as a workplace for many residents in the surrounding neighborhoods and should be sensitive to a significant pedestrian population, but also provide for adequate and safe vehicular access. The Community Business II District is designed to be located primarily along minor and major thoroughfare streets which serve multiple residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Community Business II District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Community Business II District shall be 25 dwelling units; or 50 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New structures in the Community Business II District shall not exceed a total of 45,000 square feet in gross floor area. Existing structures shall not be expanded to exceed 45,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Community Business II District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: None required. 
Corner lot, street side: 15 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Community Business II District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Community Business II District shall be 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. Parking shall be provided at the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the structure. Uses in the Community Business II District are permitted a 20 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(m), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(m), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(b), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1b, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1e, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-14. - Resort District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Resort District is established to provide an area for the development of resort oriented uses and conference/retreat facilities. This district will provide areas for the development and expansion of facilities which serve primarily tourists and vacationers. Development standards are established to protect adjacent land uses from the adverse impacts of resort development. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Resort District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Resort District shall be 16 dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Resort District shall be five acres. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Resort District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Resort District. 
Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 15 feet. 
Rear: 25 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Resort District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Resort District shall be 80 feet except in the transition area described below in subsection (13). The permitted height of buildings and structures in the Resort District may be increased by one foot for each two feet of additional front, side, and rear setbacks up to a maximum height of 100 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All exterior lighting shall be shielded such that light is not directed toward adjacent residential property. 
Outdoor loud systems shall be directed away from residential areas and shall not operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Transition area: Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area, restrictions shall be placed on the height and location of uses other than those permitted in the adjacent residential zone. Height of buildings and structures located in this area shall be subject to the height limitations established in the least restrictive adjacent residential zone. Primary entrances of buildings and structures located in the transition area shall be directed away from residential uses. Restaurants, bars and nightclubs, facilities for animals (stables), mechanical equipment, and maintenance facilities shall not be located in the transition area. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(n), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(n), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(c), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-15. - Institutional District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Institutional District is established to reserve land for the development of major educational facilities, major medical facilities and other complementary and supporting uses such as health related developments, office developments, and public services. Development standards for uses in this district are established to minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Institutional District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Institutional District shall be 30 dwelling units; or 60 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. This density standard shall not apply to dormitories constructed on the campus of an educational institution. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. Except for single-family residential development, the minimum lot size in the Institutional District shall be 20,000 square feet. For single-family residential development in the Institutional District, the minimum lot size shall be 2,500 square feet for attached single-family development and 3,500 square feet for detached single-family development. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Except for single-family residential development, lots in the Institutional District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. For single-family residential development in the Institutional District, the minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Institutional District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 10 ft. 
Rear: 10 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Educational/Campus Institutional District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. None required, except in the transition area described below in subsection (13). 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. Primary access to colleges, universities, junior colleges, vocational schools, hospitals, and medical complexes shall not be from local residential streets. If located on a local residential street, primary access to other non-residential uses in the Institutional District shall be no more than 500 feet from the local street's intersection with a street with a minimum classification of collector. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
Transition area: Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area, the height of buildings and other structures shall be subject to the height limitations established in the least restrictive adjacent residential zone. The primary entrance of nonresidential buildings and structures located in the transition area shall be directed away from residential uses. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2589, § 1(d), 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(o), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(o), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(b), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, c, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1f, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-16. - Highway Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Highway Business District is established to address the needs of commercial development along major thoroughfares. Automobile oriented development is prevalent within this district and a wide range of commercial uses is permitted. Due to the dominance of the automobile, a major objective within this district is to preserve the traffic capacity of the thoroughfare. This is attempted through minimizing the number of access points onto the thoroughfare, encouraging zero-lot line development, and promoting shared parking and access between adjacent businesses. Development which enhances the function of the thoroughfare and is sensitive to the appearance of the corridor is essential within this district. These major corridors are the gateways to Asheville and often define the first image of the city. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Highway Business District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Highway Business District shall be 35 dwelling units; or 70 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. New developments in the highway business district shall not exceed a total of 200,000 square feet in gross floor area for multiple tenant developments and 100,000 square feet in gross floor area for single tenant development; existing developments shall not be expanded to exceed these limits. In multi-tenant developments, no single retailer may exceed those limits set forth in subsection 7-16-2(c)(10) and shall not constitute more than 75 percent of the total gross floor area of the development in order to receive a multi-tenant square footage allowance. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. There shall be no minimum lot width standards, however, the minimum lot frontage shall be 100 lineal feet or meet access requirements for non-residential lots as set forth in subsection 7-11-2(k). For through and corner lots, the minimum street frontage shall be required along the property line abutting the larger thoroughfare. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Highway Business District. 
Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required 
Rear: 10 feet. 
Corner lot, street side: 25 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Highway Business District shall be 60 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. Points of access to the street shall be determined by the city traffic engineer following review of the site plan and other relevant information. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None required. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2462, §§ 1(a), 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2649, § 1(a), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(p), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(p), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(c), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3582, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, c, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3711, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1g, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-17. - Regional Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Regional Business District is established to provide areas for large scale commercial operations. This district is intended to encourage innovative development that is integrated with adjacent uses. It is not the intent of the district to encourage strip commercial areas, but rather a concentration of commercial activities with an overall design scheme. This district is designed to be located around the intersections of high traffic volume thoroughfares such as interstate highways and arterial roads. This district permits a wide range of commercial uses and is easily accessible by the automobile. The Regional Business District is characterized by high traffic generation, large structures which may contain multiple businesses, and shared parking and access between adjacent businesses. Although the automobile and bus are the primary modes of transportation to this district, pedestrian connections between the businesses within the district enhance the functionality of the district. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Regional Business District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Regional Business District shall be 35 dwelling units; or 70 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. There shall be no minimum lot width standard, however, the minimum lot frontage shall be 100 lineal feet. For through and corner lots, the minimum street frontage shall be required along the property line abutting the larger thoroughfare. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Regional Business District. 
Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: 10 feet. 
Corner lot, street side: 25 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Regional Business District shall be 80 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. Points of access to the street shall be determined by the city traffic engineer following review of the site plan and other relevant information. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2462, §§ 1(a), 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2649, § 1(b), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(q), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2792, § 1(a), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2872, § 1(a), 11-27-01, Ord. No. 2904, § 1L(q), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(c), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(j), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3582, § 1(c), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, c, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3874, § 1e, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1h, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-18. - Central Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. It shall be the purpose of the Central Business District to reinforce the downtown as the urban center of Asheville and Western North Carolina, encouraging private and public investment which will preserve the Central Business District as the primary retail, office, hotel, institutional, cultural and entertainment center of our community. It is further the purpose of this district to encourage a strong supportive retail center along with high density residential development which will complement other downtown uses and surrounding neighborhoods. A high priority is placed on design, integrating new uses into and with existing architecture in a respectful and cohesive manner. Design review guidelines in place for the downtown area remain as a companion document for urban design decisions. Development within this district should facilitate the circulation patterns and needs of individuals and business alike. A well-balanced transportation system for this district must recognize the importance of all forms of movements, be it pedestrian, bicycling, transit, automobile, or truck in nature. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. 
Outdoor storage or outdoor warehousing (excluding automobile or cycle sales and leasing) 
Adult establishment 
Skywalks/pedestrian bridges over key pedestrian streets 
Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Central Business District is prohibited 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards—Downtown. The following development standards apply to all parcels zoned Central Business District for new construction and/or changes that modify the exterior walls and/or roof of an existing building that are located within the boundaries of the Downtown Design Review Overlay District, as described in section 7-9-3 of this chapter. Routine maintenance, repairs or replacement of same or similar materials on existing buildings are exempt from these requirements. 
(1)  Density standards. None. 
(2)  Structure size standards. Structure size shall not be limited except that height and design and operational standards shall apply. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Central Business District. 
Front: 
Minimum setback: Zero feet from the right-of-way line. For corner lots buildings are to be placed at the corner. 
Maximum setback: Zero feet from the right-of-way line. The following exceptions to the maximum setback may be permitted. The agency or official responsible for project review may consider allowing greater setbacks under one or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  A setback of up to 50 feet from the edge of the curb may be approved for places of worship, civic and governmental buildings, and residential projects that will provide a public space, such as a courtyard or plaza space. 
b.  A setback of up to 20 feet for uses in the district providing courtyard or plaza spaces in the setback area. 
Courtyard and plaza areas should meet definitions located in 7-2-5 of this chapter which describe form and purpose. The main façade of the building must face this setback area. 
c.  An adopted plan or other official document of the city recommends a greater setback. 
d.  A greater setback is determined as part of a design review process or is the result of an addition (that is otherwise compliant with this article) to an existing building. 
Side: None required, except that a 15-foot setback will be required when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
Rear: None required, except that a 15-foot setback will be required when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. For the definition of height see building height in section 7-2-5 of this chapter. The minimum height for new structures in the Central Business District will be two stories (a minimum of 24 feet). Maximum building height will be determined according to the context transition edge map, the height zone map, the height zone edge setback and shadow impacts described below and with maps following this section. 
a.  The two-story requirement for new construction will mean that: 
1.  A second floor is provided as a full occupiable floor and a mezzanine level will not be sufficient to meet this requirement; and 
2.  Civic uses such as places of worship, arenas, auditoriums, and performance centers will not be required to meet the two-story requirement described in subsection 1. above. 
b.  Context transition edge: The first step in determining the height permitted for a structure is to review the context transition edge map found at the end of this section to determine if it is applicable to the specific property. This map shows areas where a gradual scale transition is required for new downtown construction from nearby established residential neighborhoods. The map reflects a specific height overlay for properties located near the context transition edge (a 100-foot-wide area measured from the transition line). Buildings located within this transition edge will have their actual height determined by using the formula for height: H = D/1.5; (where H is the height of the building and D is the distance from the transition edge). The one exception is that a two-story structure with a 15-foot setback when adjacent to residentially zoned property is exempt from the formula requirements. 
 
c.  Height zones: Measurement of height: The second step in determining the height permitted for a structure is to review the building height zone map located at the end of this section. 
(1)  The intermediate height zone is 145 feet and the tallest height zone is 265 feet. 
(2)  Actual building heights may exceed this height by an additional overall amount of 50 feet to accommodate such uses as the final occupied floor, mechanical penthouses and roof cap features. 
d.  Height zone edge setback from the right-of-way: To protect certain views in downtown, as illustrated on the height zone map by a dashed line (specific to portions of four streets listed below), a height zone edge setback is established. The height zones for the intermediate height zone and the tallest height zone follow property lines except for the following streets where a height transition between these two zones 40 feet wide measured from the right-of-way line edge will be observed: 
(1.)  College Street between the tunnel and Town Mountain Road. 
(2.)  Haywood Street between Battery Park Avenue and N. French Broad Avenue (south side). 
(3.)  Patton Avenue from Pearl Street to Otis Street (both sides of street) and continuing from Otis Street to the point of Pritchard Park (south side). 
(4.)  Hilliard Avenue between Clingman Avenue and Pearl Street (north side). 
e.  Shadow impact limits: Shadows from new construction on large or small public parks or public plazas are limited by the following standard: 
(1.)  Shadows impacts on any one point are limited to no more than two hours between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on the spring or fall equinox at ground level; March 21 or September 21 respectively. 
(2.)  Where no right-of-way exists between the proposed project and the public park or plaza, a 50-foot buffer free of any shadow limitations will be observed. 
This shadow impact standard will not apply to smaller public spaces such as pocket parks or private plazas, parks and courtyards. See the definition for parks specific to the Central Business District in section 7-2-5 of this chapter for further clarification. 
f.  One story additions to existing buildings are approved under the following circumstances: 
1.  Additions are permitted when they are: 
a.  1,000 square feet or less, or 
b.  The addition does not expand the footprint of the existing building by more than 20 percent; and 
c.  The addition is located no closer than five feet of the primary façade of an existing contributing structure in the Downtown National Register District, or is located at the rear of the existing building so there is no affect on the primary façade, or for non-contributing structures is placed to make the existing building either equal to or more compliant with setback requirements; and 
d.  As measured from the primary street façade, the width of the addition shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of the existing building, and 
e.  Other fenestration and design requirements if any, apply. 
2.  One-story accessory structures, that are in support of a primary use on a site are allowed when: 
a.  Placement of the accessory structure is behind or to the side of the primary building or in the case of outside dining spaces for restaurants, may be placed at the front of the lot to enhance activity at the sidewalk level, and 
b.  Fenestration and design requirements if any, apply. 
Other additions that fall outside of these provisions may be considered by the planning and zoning commission following the usual process for variances, which includes a recommendation from the downtown commission. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. If provided, loading facilities shall be placed along alleys or streets not identified on the Key Pedestrian Streets map (found at the end of this section) as a first choice but may be located there if no other alternative is available. There shall be no requirements for off-street parking in the Central Business District. No parking is allowed between the building and any abutting street. 
Parking garages placed on a key pedestrian street shall provide a full habitable story and use along the street-side façade(s) with a minimum depth of 20 feet or shall comply with the design and operation standards for openings and design organization requirements for new construction. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. In general, sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten feet wide or the city engineer may approve an alternative width based on context of street and block. Narrower sidewalks may be approved in cases where there is insufficient space for a larger sidewalk. 
(11)  Access standards. Vehicular entries shall be a maximum of 24 feet in width. In addition driveway curb cuts are limited to a single standard driveway per 200 feet along a block face per development. Automobile access and services from a rear alley is encouraged. The city engineer shall make the final determination regarding access standards for situations where strict compliance is difficult while assuring the goals for a strong pedestrian environment in the CBD are met. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. None. 
(13)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  The following requirements apply to all buildings in the CBD: 
Street wall and step-back requirements: In order to enhance the traditional scale of downtown and ensure adequate air and light at the sidewalk level and neighboring properties, a visual demarcation will be established across the façade of the building at a height that is defined as the street wall. Corresponding to this elevation on the façade a step-back across the front or side(s) will be provided and in limited circumstances described below, other alternatives may apply to ensure variety in new construction. 
(1.)  Street wall height: The street wall height and specific alternatives are established in the following ways: 
a.  If the property is located within the Traditional Downtown Core area as illustrated on the map following this section, the street wall will be set at between two and four stories with a recommendation to reflect the height of neighboring buildings; 
b.  If the property is located outside the Traditional Downtown Core the street wall will be established by a one-to-one relationship to the width of the right-of-way (ROW). For example, a ROW of 50 feet would result in a maximum street wall height of 50 feet. Depending on the site the following scenarios may apply: 
1.  If a parcel fronts on more than one street, the street wall shall be established by: 
a.  The ROW width of the key pedestrian street if applicable; or 
b.  Measuring the ROW from the side of the building with the primary pedestrian entrance. 
2.  The street wall may wrap around to the side(s) at the same height or be re-established based on the ROW of the side street. For the purposes of this section frontage on a service alley will be treated the same as an internal property line and therefore would not require a street wall step-back, or; 
c.  Throughout the CBD, a building that provides a setback along the frontage line to create a plaza or courtyard area (minimum depth ten feet), will not be required to establish a street wall. This setback area must exceed two-thirds of the building width along the frontage line; or 
d.  For areas outside the Traditional Downtown Core where the ROW area is greater than 75 feet, a building is not required to provide a street wall step-back or side step-back. Buildings in these situations will be required to meet other design and operational standards as applicable; or 
e.  Throughout the CBD, a variance may be sought as set forth in section 7-5-9.1 from the step-back requirements by meeting design guidelines that specify a clear visual demarcation provided between the base of the building and upper floors corresponding to the height of the street wall. The requested variance shall not result in conflict with building code requirements; or 
f.  Throughout the CBD, buildings determined to be signature buildings or proposed for landmark locations may seek a variance as set forth in section 7-5-9.1 from street wall and step-back requirements when they meet design guidelines specific to landmarks. See the Public View Corridors map for recommended landmark locations. 
g.  When an existing one-story building that is a contributing structure in the downtown national register district will be incorporated into a development proposal that may include a single or multi-story addition, it will be deemed to satisfy the requirement or that portion of the requirement for the streetwall. 
 
(2.)  Step-back requirement: In order to enhance the traditional scale of downtown and ensure adequate air and light at the sidewalk level and neighboring properties a step-back at the street wall height is required according to the following standards. In no case shall the required step-back(s) decrease the buildable area by more than ten percent: 
a.  At the street wall height a minimum ten-foot-wide step-back is observed along at least two-thirds of the length of the street-side façade (the remaining one-third may be provided at up to two hundred percent (2 x) of the street wall height); or 
b.  A side step-back may be provided as an alternative according to the following requirements as applicable. 
1.  At the street wall height, a 40-foot-wide step-back is provided along the side of the proposed structure. This 40-foot-wide step-back may be split between two sides (such as 20 feet each side); 
2.  Buildings taller than 75 feet shall provide a side step-back that equals one-half of the width of the façade above 75 feet*. 
* The step-back amount may be split between two sides. 
* See street wall height description to determine the height of the corresponding street wall. 
 
(3.)  Design organization: Buildings shall demonstrate a building design organization on each façade such as but not limited to a base-middle-cap organization, vertical articulation or other organizing principle. 
Building caps: Downtown Asheville has a wealth of buildings with distinctive caps that use special forms and materials. The unique diversity of building caps has become a defining feature of the downtown skyline. In order to frame views and provide attractive landmarks that enhance the skyline of the downtown area, building caps are required. See the design guidelines regarding building caps for recommendations in addition to the following requirements: 
a.  Provide a cap to enhance a base-middle-cap oriented design; or 
b.  Provide a cornice or other decorative band for flat roofs to serve as a cap. 
(4.)  Pedestrian entrances: All buildings shall have their primary pedestrian entrance on a frontage line. If the site is located on a key pedestrian street then the primary pedestrian entrance shall be located along that street. See the Asheville Downtown Design Guidelines for additional recommendations. 
(5.)  Windows, doors and other openings. Building fenestration is required because it enhances the character of downtown Asheville by providing features of visual interest at the sidewalk for the benefit of pedestrians, by defining the scale of buildings between the ground floor and upper floors and by improving the skyline vista of Asheville. The following requirements apply: 
a.  For buildings along streets designated as key pedestrian streets (see map at the end of this section), at least 70 percent of the street-level façade is composed of windows, doors and other openings. 
b.  For buildings along streets that are not designated as key pedestrian streets, at least 50 percent of the street-level façade is composed of windows, doors and other openings. 
c.  Residential buildings shall provide at least 30 percent (40 percent for live/work units) windows, doors or other openings along the street-level façade unless located along a key pedestrian street where it will be required to meet the 70 percent standard noted above. 
d.  All buildings are required to provide a minimum of 20 percent of the upper story areas as windows, doors or other openings with each face calculated independently. This requirement applies to exposed building sides unless otherwise restricted by the NC State Building Code. 
e.  At street-level, areas of opaque wall may extend no more than 20 feet horizontally before beginning a window, door or other opening. 
f.  Glass may be tinted but shall not be reflective. 
g.  When the façade of a building follows the natural grade of a sloping site, windows and other openings which may start out at pedestrian-level quickly go overhead and no longer relate to the sidewalk; in these situations where the surface level of the floor reaches six feet or more above the sidewalk, that floor will be deemed to no longer be at the pedestrian level. Requirements for windows, doors or other openings will be reassessed for the remaining ground level façade length. 
b.  The following requirements apply to buildings taller than 75 feet for additional floors extending above this point: 
 
(1.)  Floor plate limited: 
a.  For parcels 20,000 square feet and larger, the gross floor plate area is limited to 40 percent of the lot area; 
b.  For parcels smaller than 20,000 square feet, gross floor plate area may not exceed 8,000 square feet. 
c.  For parcels greater than 16,000 square feet, the agency or official responsible for project review may consider floor plates up to 50 percent if it is surrounded by substantial permanent public or private open space that allows for views and access to direct sunlight. 
(2.)  Maximum dimension defined: The maximum horizontal wall dimension in any direction is limited to 145 feet for additional floors above the 75 feet. 
(3.)  External vista points: Photomontages modeling the proposed building are required from each of the established external vista points as a tool to evaluate development proposals: 
Merrimon Avenue at Gracelyn Street 
College Street at the west side of the tunnel 
Stephens-Lee Recreation Center 
Biltmore Avenue at Short Coxe Avenue 
I-240 at the Smokey Park Bridge 
Town Mountain Road at the bridge over I-240 
(4.)  Public view corridors: If a project lies within a public view corridor based on the map following this section a photomontage from the internal vista point is required and where possible, building mass should be oriented to preserve views and roof forms should help to frame views. 
c.  Additional site related standards for all projects: 
Street furnishings: Street furnishings placed in the public right-of-way shall be approved by the department of public works and will include but not be limited to benches, tree grates, lighting fixtures and waste receptacles. 
Mechanical equipment and appurtenances necessary for the function of the building shall be enclosed and screened or otherwise designed to be integral with the overall building design, including but not limited to elevators, stairs, cooling towers and vent stacks. 
The design of the base of a building, as well as the quality and durability of its materials, shall be emphasized at the first floor of structures. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are prohibited as a base material. 
Private dumpsters and freestanding service equipment shall be screened by solid partitions or other screening. 
Development on key pedestrian streets shall meet the following requirements: 
For new construction along key pedestrian streets, buildings are required to be constructed along a minimum of 80 percent of the frontage line of the lot. This standard is not intended to restrict site access especially for smaller lots. Access is covered under access standards above. On corner lots the 80 percent frontage requirement applies to the primary street. 
(14)  Downtown design review guidelines. All construction work requiring building, sign, demolition, and zoning permits and projects requesting a variance, within the downtown boundaries designated by the Asheville City Council, shall be submitted for mandatory review, voluntary compliance with the adopted Downtown Asheville Design Review Guidelines, with the exception of locally designated historic landmarks which shall be reviewed by the Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County in accordance with the applicable review procedures of the historic resources commission. 
(15)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16)  Balconies. A balcony encroachment which extends into the public right-of-way beyond three feet must be approved by the city council. 
(17)  Skywalks and pedestrian bridges. 
a.  Skywalks and pedestrian bridges over key pedestrian streets are not permitted in the district. 
b.  Skywalks and pedestrian bridges when crossing over alleys or private property are permitted with the approval of the director. 
c.  Skywalks and pedestrian bridges when crossing over streets not included on the key pedestrian streets map are permitted with the approval of the director. 
(18)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage or outdoor warehousing, excluding automobile or cycle sales and leasing, is prohibited in this district. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2589, § 1(b), 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(r), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2792, § 1(b), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2872, § 1(b), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(r), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(4), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3350, § 1, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b) 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(k), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1b, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1a, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3874, § 1f, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3929, §§ 1a, b, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1g—i, n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4168, § 1b—g, 2-26-13; Amend. of July 2014; Ord. No. 4342, § 1d, 9-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-19. - River District. 
(a)  Purpose. River District is hereby created to celebrate, conserve, promote, and manage those areas on both sides of the French Broad and Swannanoa Rivers within the corporate limits and those areas of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Asheville, North Carolina. These zoning standards will ensure that new development is compatible with and enhances the unique river resources as called for in Asheville's Comprehensive Plan and addenda. It is the intent of these standards to promote economic revitalization throughout the river valleys while providing for an opportunity for enjoyment of the river by a maximum number of citizens, neighbors, and guests. The Riverfront Plan, the Riverfront Open Space Guidelines, and the River District Design Review Guidelines are companion documents to these regulations. 
The goals of the River District are to: 
(1)  Promote the protection and improvement of the French Broad and Swannanoa Rivers as water resources; 
(2)  Allow a mixture of river oriented land uses (residential, recreational, office/institutional, commercial, manufacturing, industrial, open space, and agricultural) to develop and prosper together through the establishment of specific development standards; 
(3)  Promote responsible development that will result minimal stormwater runoff, soil erosion, river bank destabilization, grading, and flood damage; 
(4)  Promote the preservation of a vegetative river resource corridor between the top of the river bank and new development to protect property from flooding and to enhance water quality; 
(5)  Encourage the planting of specific riparian landscaping that will aid in controlling erosion, improving water quality, reducing stormwater runoff, enhancing fish and wildlife habitats, and protecting visual quality; 
(6)  Promote the protection of existing natural areas, wetlands, and habitats, especially bluffs along the rivers; 
(7)  Encourage the establishment of vegetative buffer yards between incompatible land uses to lessen negative impacts; 
(8)  Encourage the conservation, protection, and promotion of the district's natural, cultural, and historic resources to enhance its value as a significant amenity to Asheville's citizens, neighbors, and tourists; 
(9)  Encourage the creation of identifiable neighborhoods within the district through preferred land uses and the enhancement of their historical significance through coordinated physical amenities; 
(10)  Promote improvements to existing infrastructure and the coordination of all new utility improvements; 
(11)  Promote the rivers as a gateway to the city by encouraging the improvement of physical connections to Downtown, West Asheville, Biltmore Village, U.N.C.-A., A. B. Technical Community College, Warren Wilson College, Blue Ridge Parkway, and the N.C. Arboretum and encourage the provision of controlled public access directly to the water; and 
(12)  Encourage the development of different uses on different floors of multiple story buildings. 
The development of a pedestrian trail/greenway along the rivers is encouraged within the River District. Land owners are encouraged to dedicate/grant a dry land right-of-way or easement within the river resource yard. The public pedestrian trail/greenway along the rivers would be a part of the proposed greenway system for the City of Asheville as designated in the Greenway Master Plan. 
Land owners are additionally encouraged to dedicate or grant a dry-land right-of-way or easement for use and maintenance by the Asheville Fire Department as a river emergency/rescue point. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the River District: 
Adult establishments 
Asphalt plants 
Businesses manufacturing or storing materials listed as H1 hazardous materials as identified in the current version of the North Carolina State Building Code 
Chemical storage facilities 
Detention centers, jails, and related correctional facilities 
Gas manufacturing 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
Hazardous waste management facilities 
Manufacture or storage of ammunition, dynamite, or other high explosives 
Mining 
Paper mills 
Slaughter houses 
Solid waste disposal facilities 
Solid waste landfills 
Uses prohibited by the Asheville Flood Protection Standards 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the River District shall be 30 dwelling units; or 60 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. However, in multi-tenant developments, no single retailer shall constitute more than 75 percent of the total gross floor area. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the River District. 
Front, street side: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Lots abutting the river: 10-foot side setback 
Rear: None required unless lot abuts the river. 
Lots abutting the river: Setback from the top of the river bank a distance equal to 20 percent of the lot depth, with a maximum setback of 50 feet and a minimum setback of 20 feet (See River Resource Yard; Development Standard # 12). This distance shall be measured at the time of site plan review. 
Non-residential uses shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from residential uses. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the River District shall be 80 percent. Vegetative drainage swales are required for stormwater control in the River District. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the River District shall be 60 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. Species suitable for a river environment shall be specified for required landscaping and buffering in the River District. (See Appendix C, Recommended Species List.) In areas experiencing natural stream bank erosion, planting of riparian vegetation shall be the required stabilization measure. If this technique is shown to be ineffective, then riprap shall be utilized, using natural rocks and installed in a manner providing space for vegetative growth. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. Uses in the River District shall be permitted a 20 percent reduction in required parking. Shared parking arrangements and common parking areas are encouraged. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in subsection 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(12)  Design and operation standards. The speculative grading of land within the River District is prohibited. Natural slopes in excess of 45 degrees shall not be graded and the existing vegetation shall not be removed. 
River Resource Yard - A river resource yard equal to 20 percent of the lot depth, with a maximum depth of 50 feet and a minimum depth of 20 feet shall be required of those properties abutting the French Broad River and Swannanoa River banks for all new development on these lots. This river resource yard is to be measured from the top of the banks of the rivers at the time of site plan approval. Existing continuous tree stands should be preserved to stabilize the river banks. Selective pruning or removal of diseased trees and shrubs in the river resource yard is permissible, provided that a live room system stays intact to provide for bank stabilization, erosion control, and improved water quality. Dead and diseased vegetation may be removed. Walkways, trails, river access areas, and similar activities may occur within the River Resource Yard. 
Uses located within the River District shall be subject to the noise standards set forth in the city's noise ordinance (article IV of Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, sections 10-81 through 10-83). New outdoor loud speaker systems shall operate only during daylight hours. 
All new or expanded operations located within the River District producing glare or heat shall be screened from adjacent residential districts. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so no direct beam of light crosses lot lines. The top of light fixtures shall not exceed 30 feet in height in parking lots and 14 feet at all other locations on the development site. 
Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited in the required front setback and within 50 feet of a residential district. 
River District Design Guidelines: All construction work requiring building, sign, demolition, and zoning permits and projects requesting a variance within the River District shall be subject to a mandatory review/voluntary compliance procedure as set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(13)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(14)  Storage tanks and containers. Storage tanks and containers used for storage of chemicals, oil or fuels incidental to a use that is allowed in the district but shall be prohibited when located within the regulated floodway and, if out of the floodway, shall be elevated and secured to comply with the City of Asheville Environmental Protection Standards found in article 12. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2437, §§ 5, 6, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 2462, § 1(b), 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2589, § 1(d), 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2649, § 1(c), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(s), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2792, § 1(d), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(s), 3-12-02); Ord. No. 3010, § 1b, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3579, §§ 1(a), (b), 1-22-08; Ord. No. 3582, § 1(d), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, c, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1j, n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1i, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-20. - Commercial Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Commercial Industrial District is established to provide areas for a wide range of commercial and industrial uses including: light manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing, services, retail sales, offices, and residential uses. The district is established where environmental conditions and urban infrastructure are adequate to support commercial and industrial development. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements in the Commercial Industrial District is prohibited. In addition, asphalt plants are expressly prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Commercial Industrial District shall be eight dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Commercial Industrial District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Commercial Industrial District. 
Front: Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: 10 ft. 
Corner lot, street side: 25 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Commercial Industrial District shall 80 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in the required front setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. Points of access to the street shall be determined by the city traffic engineer following review of the site plan and other relevant information. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. Open storage shall not be permitted within any required setback. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2462, §§ 1(a), 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2649, § 1(d), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(g), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(t), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2792, § 1(c), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(t), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(c), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1b, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3337, §§ 1(b), (c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3390, § 1(b), 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, d, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1b, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3874, § 1g, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3908, § 1b, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1j, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-21. - Light Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose. Realizing the importance of light industrial uses to the economy of the City of Asheville, it shall be the purpose of the Light Industrial District to reserve land for existing and future light industrial, office-warehouse, and related activities and for land uses that support these activities. Development standards are established to ensure that land uses located outside the Light Industrial District are not adversely affected by the negative impacts of the more intense development types permitted in this zoning district. Light Industrial Districts shall be located to capitalize on existing infrastructure where possible, such as transportation facilities and utilities. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Light Industrial District is prohibited. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Light Industrial District shall be two dwelling units per acre and shall apply only to accessory dwellings as residential uses are generally prohibited in the Light Industrial District. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Light Industrial District shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Light Industrial District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Light Industrial District. 
Front: 20 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then setback shall be 30 feet. 
Rear: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then setback shall be 30 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. 85 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. 80 feet. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback. Loading docks designed to accommodate vehicles larger than panel trucks shall be limited to one per each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Open space standards: Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
a.  Transition area: Within 200 feet of a residentially zoned area, primary entrances of buildings and structures shall be directed away from residential uses. 
b.  Uses located in the Light Industrial District shall be subject to the noise standards set forth in the city's noise ordinance (article IV of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, sections 10-81 through 10-83). 
c.  Exposed sources of light shall be equipped with a 90 degree shut-off fixtures. The top of light fixtures shall not exceed 30 feet in height in parking lots and 14 feet at all other locations on the development site. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1d, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3794, §§ 1a, b, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3874, § 1h, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-22. - Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose. Realizing the importance of industrial uses to the economy of the City of Asheville, it shall be the purpose of the Industrial District to reserve land for existing and future industrial activities and for land uses that support industrial activities. Development standards are established to ensure that land uses located outside the Industrial District are not adversely affected by the negative impacts of industrial uses. Industrial Districts shall be located to capitalize on existing infrastructure where possible, such as transportation facilities and utilities. Supporting land uses are characterized as providing supplies, raw materials, transportation, or storage services to industries or providing services to industrial employees. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, or a use by right, subject to special requirements or a conditional use in the Industrial District is prohibited. In addition, asphalt plants are expressly prohibited. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Industrial District shall be two dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Industrial District shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Industrial District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Industrial District. 
Front: 20 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then setback shall be 50 ft. 
Rear: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then setback shall be 50 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. None. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-1 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback. Employee parking only shall be permitted in any required side and rear setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. 
(11)  Access standards. None. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. None. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
Transition area - Within 200 feet of a residentially zoned area, restrictions shall be placed on the height and orientation of uses other than those uses permitted in the adjacent residential zone. Height of buildings and structures located in this area shall be subject to the height limitations established in the least restrictive adjacent residential zone. Primary entrances of buildings and structures located in the transition area shall be directed away from residential uses. 
Uses located in the Industrial District shall be subject to the noise standards set forth in the city's noise ordinance (article IV of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, sections 10-81 through 10-83). 
Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so no direct beam of light crosses lot lines. The top of light fixtures shall not exceed 30 feet in height in parking lots and 14 feet at all other locations on the development site. 
All operations using or storing radioactive materials, whether or not licensed by the atomic energy commission, shall comply with the applicable regulations adopted, or as such regulations may hereafter be amended, by the North Carolina State Board of Health, pursuant to the power granted such board by Chapter 481, Session Laws of 1959 (G.S. 104C), entitled North Carolina Atomic Energy, Radio Activity, and Ionizing Radiation Laws, as amended. 
Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited in the required front setback and within 50 feet of a residential district. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2649, § 1(e), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(u), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2740, §§ 1(a)(b), 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(u), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3002, § 1b, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3010, § 1(d), 3-25-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(5), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3327, § 1(b), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(c), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3368, § 1, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3685, §§ 1b, d, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3794, §§ 1c, d, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3874, §§ 1i, j, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-23. - Urban Village District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Urban Village District is established to create mixed use development that is economically vital, pedestrian-oriented and contributes to the place-making character of the built environment. The Urban Village District offers the unique opportunity to provide quality and long lasting retail, office and residential uses in an organized layout that encourages the full range of access by patrons and users, and offers innovative high quality design of structures, public amenities and pedestrian facilities. The development and design standards set forth in this district intend to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  Provide safe and convenient access to shopping and other essential services to: 
Pedestrians, 
Bicyclists, 
Transit riders, and 
Persons with disabilities. 
(2)  Effective traffic flow through: 
Access management, and 
Improved internal and external connectivity. 
(3)  Create a built environment that serves to: 
Enhance gateway corridors, 
Preserve historic heritage, 
Promote economic development and an improved tax base for the city, and 
Celebrate Asheville's distinction from other cities. 
(4)  Promote sustainable use of limited land and investment resources by: 
Encouraging higher building densities, 
Allowing efficient shared parking areas, making cost effective use of existing infra-structure, 
Showcasing innovative high quality development, 
Providing adaptive re-use of under-performing retail properties, 
Ensuring multi-modal transportation access, 
Insuring internal and external connectedness, 
Developing a durable framework of infrastructure and built structures that can accommodate future renovations, 
Upgrades and rehabilitation, and 
Reestablishing the public realm, civic pride, and sense of community ownership in new developments. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, a use by right subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Urban Village District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Master plan required. 
a.  Unless initiated by the city pursuant to its zoning authority, Urban Village District projects are required to submit a master plan with the zoning application for the entire parcel that indicates the general street network, the land use configuration within that network, the ultimate proposed development intensity (including the number of residential units and gross square footage of all nonresidential uses), and the proposed structure heights for the Urban Village. For initiation of this zoning classification, properties may fall under more than one ownership so long as there exist covenants or other legally binding agreements that address cross-access, cross-parking and other similar issues affecting joint operation of the projects. 
b.  After the establishment of the Urban Village District zoning, regardless of scale, Urban Village District development projects shall be approved under the Level II site plan review process. Multi-phase projects must submit drawings and elevations along with the approved master plan at the time of Level II review. A traffic impact analysis will be required for all Urban Village projects and shall be submitted with the Level II application. Projects for the Urban Village District shall be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in the ordinance. 
c.  Revisions to approved Urban Village District master plans may be approved by the city council or by the planning and development director depending on the type of revisions being requested. City council shall review any revisions to a master plan that increases the overall development intensity, changes the proposed mix of uses by increasing or reducing any use category by 25 percent or more, or increases the maximum building height from that shown on the approved master plan. Additionally, city council shall review any revision to a master plan that results in a decrease in the amount of perimeter open space or perimeter parking lot buffering, or in a 25 percent or greater reduction in the number of proposed blocks from that shown on the approved master plan. For the purpose of determining overall development intensity, one residential unit shall be regarded as the equivalent of 500 square feet of office floor area; one residential unit shall be regarded as the equivalent of 200 square feet of commercial floor area; and 1,000 square feet of office space shall be regarded as the equivalent of 350 square feet of commercial floor area. For other uses, the planning and development director shall determine the equivalency factor using quantifiable information such as automobile trip generation data. In reviewing master plan revisions, the city council shall follow the same public hearing process used to approve the initial master plan; at its discretion, the city council may refer the proposed revisions to the planning and zoning commission for their recommendation. The planning and development director is authorized to review and approve all other revisions to master plans. In approving revisions to a master plan, the planning and development director shall analyze the revisions in terms of compliance with the specific requirements of the Urban Village Zoning District, the general development pattern approved by city council, and the overall development concept, including the mix of uses, of the initial approved master plan. In the event the planning and development director denies the proposed revisions, the property owner may request that the city council review the revisions following the same public hearing process as provided above. 
(2)  Density standards. Maximum residential density shall not be limited, except by other standards such as building height, parking, landscaping and buffering, open space, and traffic impact analysis. 
(3)  Structure size standards. The structure size shall not be limited except by other standards such as building height, parking, landscaping and buffering, open space, and traffic impact analysis. 
(4)  Area standards. The minimum area required to establish an Urban Village District shall be five acres. 
(5)  Lot size standards. There is no minimum lot size in an Urban Village District. 
(6)  Street design standards. Internal streets in the Urban Village District shall be designed using the Asheville Standards And Specifications Manual (or as approved by the city engineer) but shall contain: pedestrian zone area, travel lane area, center medians if any, on-street parking. The sight visibility triangle requirement noted in article XI may be modified at the review of the city engineer. 
(7)  Lot width standards. None 
(8)  Setbacks. 
Minimum setback: Zero feet from the right-of-way. 
Maximum setback: 15 feet from the street as measured from back of curb, except as follows: 
a.  Arcades and awnings may encroach into the setback area. 
b.  Mixed use office/retail structures may be setback from the back of curb up to 25 feet if at least ten feet in front of the structure includes an arcade, forecourt, dooryard, or courtyard offering public amenities. 
c.  Institutional and public uses may be setback a maximum of 75 feet as measured from back of curb for projects that incorporate a courtyard or green. Courtyard and green areas may include landscape portions but shall also include hardscape paving elements for public meeting or gathering. The main façade of institutional and public use structures must face this setback area. 
d.  Single-family residential structures may be setback up to 25 feet from back of curb and may include a dooryard, courtyard, porch and fence. 
e.  Multifamily residential structure setback areas may include a courtyard up to 25 feet deep. The courtyard may not be wider than one-third of the building length unless approved by the director of planning and development. 
f.  Variations in setback requirements may be granted by the city council or planning and development director to address issues of context, including but not limited to alignment of buildings in the same blockface, street classification on the thoroughfare plan, and proposed or existing public greens, pedestrian zones and courtyards. 
g.  Buildings may be set back up to 40 feet from back of curb for topographic reasons subject to the following requirements: 
• A pedestrian zone and sidewalk is provided at the back of the curb meeting UV standards and may include street trees and other streetscape enhancements; 
• The top of the retaining wall (excluding handrails, etc.) does not exceed five feet above (or below depending on the specific topographic grade) the sidewalk level; 
• The area above (or below depending on the specific topographic grade) the retaining wall and adjacent to the building includes uses to encourage a lively pedestrian space and shall be considered an active pedestrian level; 
• Building frontages facing this active pedestrian level shall meet fenestration requirements as described in the ordinance. 
• No more than 50 percent of the length of the façade of the building is separated from the main sidewalk level with the use of a retaining wall. The remaining 50 percent of the street frontage must: 
1.  Have upper and lower sidewalks join at the same grade as a single sidewalk, or 
2.  Connect the upper and lower sidewalks through no more than five steps or a ramp at no more than a one to 12 slope. The steps described in this scenario are the steps running parallel to the face of the building connecting to the sidewalk area. 
(9)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(10)  Height standards. 
a.  Minimum height: 15 feet. Maximum height: 100 feet. It is the intent of this section that the predominant height of structures in Urban Village Districts be between two and six stories in height. In applying this provision, single story structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross building footprint of structures included in the master plan. Any structure taller than four stories shall be designed with a cornice at the fourth story level, with those portions of the structure taller than four stories being set back at a minimum of ten feet from the cornice level. Any structure taller than six stories shall be located internally to the site unless the surrounding context supports such height. 
b.  As part of its approval of the master plan, increases in maximum height of a structure may be allowed by the city council not to exceed 150 feet, based on such factors as topography, relationship to other structures in the area, and compliance with applicable design guidelines. For structures exceeding 100 feet in height, the minimum cornice level setback shall be 20 feet or a second cornice level with a minimum setback of 10 feet shall be established at a point between floors five through eight. 
(11)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented towards their primary access street. On corner lots, the building must be located at the corner. Single-family residential units located on a corner are exempt from this requirement. Building sides should appear similar to their fronts. 
b.  Entrances. All buildings should include well-defined entrances facing the street at regular intervals. An operable entrance on each primary façade should be provided to encourage access by pedestrians. Buildings on corner lots may place the entrance at the corner eliminating the need for side entrances. 
c.  Windows, doors and other openings. The first floor of all new structures in the Urban Village District shall be designed in a way that a minimum of 45 percent of the length of the first floor street frontage incorporates either windows, doors and other openings to complement pedestrian scale activity. Structures shall have windows evenly distributed across the façade. Upper story windows, doors and other openings shall make up at least 30 percent of the wall surface. Residential-only buildings that are identified on the approved masterplan may reduce the openings along the ground floor street facing façade to 30 percent. All storefront windows shall be transparent or lightly tinted and shall not appear false or applied. Windows are also required along the sides of structures that are visible from roadways or have parking adjacent to them. Exceptions to these standards may be made by the city council in order to achieve compliance with LEED or NC building energy code standards, to accommodate public art or to allow alternative fenestration approaches provided the intent of this section is met by the building exhibiting a primary focus on pedestrian interest. 
d.  Variances. Requests for variances of the design and operational standards set forth in this subsection may be granted by the planning and zoning commission, which is hereby designated to perform the duties of a board adjustment for this purpose. 
(12)  Internal access and connectivity. The site shall be traversed by a network of internal streets built according to the Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual (or as approved by the city engineer). Internal streets should seek to avoid cul-de-sacs and dead end roads and other features that hamper connectivity. However, roads may terminate at a monumental structure or a green. In such cases, a sidewalk or other connection must be provided to ensure the goals of connectivity. In addition, internal streets are also required to have sidewalks and street trees. A bus shelter is required for Urban Village Districts. Larger projects may require more shelters as determined by the Traffic Impact Analysis and or by the transit director. Connectivity is a goal of the internal street system and external connections to areas outside and adjacent to the Urban Village should be created where possible and appropriate. Blocks are required throughout the site to provide access to different village areas and to encourage multi-modal transportation options. Only one driveway per block face shall be allowed for blocks shorter than 350 feet; up to two driveways may be allowed in blocks 350 feet or longer provided measures are taken to maintain pedestrian interest and safety. Single-family (including townhome) and duplex uses are exempt from this driveway restriction. Parking and loading access from service alleys for all uses, however, is encouraged, and such alleys, when approved as part of the street network of the master plan, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(13)  Block length. Block length may vary but shall not exceed 500 feet in length. For blocks on local streets that are 350 feet or longer, a mid-block pedestrian street crossing is required which may also include a parking lot driveway and/or pedestrian passageway between two or more buildings, and shall have curb extensions (bulbouts) for ease and safety of pedestrian street crossing (per the Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual). Collector streets may also require mid-block pedestrian crossings as noted above. Variations in block length and pedestrian crossing requirements may be approved by the city engineer provided the intent of this section is met. 
(14)  Pedestrian zone and sidewalks. The pedestrian zone is the area between the street curb and the building edge or for access roads, the street curb and the ROW area. The pedestrian zone includes sidewalks, street trees and other pedestrian amenities. The pedestrian zone will generally be 15 feet wide along primary streets in the Urban Village District but may be wider depending on the setback pattern. On secondary streets, the city engineer may accept a 12-foot wide pedestrian zone after evaluation of traffic and circulation patterns. Sidewalks in Urban Village Districts shall be required along one side of access streets and both sides of internal streets throughout the development. If appropriate to the design of the Urban Village, greenway paths may be substituted for sidewalks in residential areas to provide connections. The sidewalk shall be a minimum of seven feet wide in the Urban Village District. In solely residential areas containing less than eight units per acre, sidewalks are only required to be five feet wide. With institutional and public uses that have an increased setback, a sidewalk shall connect the building façade entrance with the street. The sidewalk may be as wide as the entire pedestrian area. Arcades, awnings, outdoor dining, shelters, seating areas, fountains, street trees, additional landscaped areas and other pedestrian amenities may be a part of this pedestrian area so long as seven feet of clear walking space is maintained. The pedestrian area may also be used to create an area for waiting, pick up and drop off. At locations such as intersections and other crosswalks, curb extensions (bulb-outs) are required to create safer pedestrian crossings. No fee in lieu of construction of sidewalks will be accepted in urban village districts. 
(15)  Parking/loading standards. Parking facilities shall be provided as per the parking, loading and access standards, article 11 of this code with the exceptions noted below: 
a.  Amount of parking. Parking spaces in the Urban Village District shall be reviewed at the master plan level. The maximum number of spaces allowed in Urban Villages shall be the minimum required in the parking section in article 11 since this district can take advantage of shared parking opportunities. Parking spaces in parking structures shall be exempt from parking space calculations. 
b.  On-street parking. On-street parking is required for all local streets and for collector streets as approved by the city engineer. On-street parking may take the form of parallel or angle parking and shall be built according to the Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual. On-street parking shall be counted when calculating the maximum number of spaces allowed. 
c.  Off-street parking. Uses in the Urban Village District are not required to provide off-street parking. Off street parking lots are encouraged to be provided at the side or rear of buildings or the interior of a block of buildings and not closer to the street than the edge profile of the structures. No more than 20 percent of parking that is provided in the Urban Village District shall be in the form of off-street surface lots not located to the side or rear of buildings. Off-street parking shall not be adjacent to street intersections. No parking is permitted in any setback area. No more than 50 percent of the parking spaces provided may be in the form of off-street surface parking, with other parking to be accommodated in on-street or structured parking. Phased development may exceed the allowable amount of surface parking for time frames determined in master plan approval provided that full development of all phases meets the above requirements. 
d.  Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided as per article 11 except that the five percent calculation of total parking spaces will include on-street and off-street spaces provided in the master plan. Bicycle parking shall be distributed throughout the project use area. 
e.  Loading standards. Urban Village Districts may share on-street and off-street loading facilities and are therefore allowed to provide these facilities at half the rate listed for the applicable uses. On-street loading spaces may be counted toward the project loading requirements. 
(16)  Street trees. Street trees are required in the pedestrian zone and along access roads at an average rate of one tree every 40 feet and shall be selected from the City of Asheville recommended tree species list for durable large maturing trees. Trees may be planted in minimum of five foot by five-foot square pits close to the curb edge of the sidewalk. Tree frames and grates are not required but are recommended especially near store entrances, other sidewalk constraints, points of ingress or egress, or public gathering areas. If tree grates are not used, an organic surfacing material shall be used to level the surface of the tree pit with the sidewalk. This material shall receive regular maintenance. To offer flexibility in the tree planting requirements, trees may be planted in planting strips adjacent to the curb edge of the sidewalk. Planting strips shall be no narrower than five feet wide. Planting strips may include grass, flowers and other plant materials where appropriate. Planting strips may not be appropriate in pedestrian gathering areas. 
(17)  Landscape/buffering standards. Landscaping and buffering shall be in accordance with article 11 [of the UDO] of the code with exceptions as noted below. Surface parking lots shall include interior and perimeter tree plantings made up of deciduous trees at a rate of one tree for every 1,500 square feet of parking and shall be selected from the City of Asheville Recommended Species Tree List for durable large sized trees. No parking space may be farther than 45 feet from a tree. Parking areas adjacent to roadways will require buffering from the street as noted in article 11 [of the UDO] with the exception that the buffer planting area shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. Residential structures within the Urban Village may have up to a 100 percent reduction in buffering requirements from the rest of the Urban Village. Buffering for Urban Village District projects is measured and reviewed from the parcel lot lines used to establish the district and not on an internal lot-by-lot basis. The Urban Village development projects shall be considered a high impact use based on the existing adjacent land use table in article 11 [of the UDO]; however, required buffering of neighboring uses may be reduced by the director of planning and development depending on the compatibility of the design of the project or particular component thereof with adjoining uses. 
(18)  Open space standards. Open space for urban village district shall be a minimum of five percent of the area covered by the master plan. Pedestrian zones and public plaza spaces may be counted toward the open space requirements. Any bufferyards provided according to this section that are constructed with a greenway or other durable walking trail may also be counted toward the open space requirements. Dedicated public park space shall be reviewed with the City of Asheville Parks and Recreation Department for concurrence, agreement and maintenance (if required). 
(19)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2851, § 1(a), 9-25-01; Ord. No. 3115, § 1, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(b), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3335, § 1(a), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3418, §§ 1(a), (b), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3578, § 1, 1-22-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3874, §§ 1k—m, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-24. - Neighborhood Corridor District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Neighborhood Corridor District (NCD) is established to foster medium density, mixed-use development that is economically viable, pedestrian oriented and contributing to the place making character of the built environment. The Neighborhood Corridor District is designed to provide new development and redevelopment opportunities in the form of neighborhood scaled mixed-use structures that relate to the street, enhance the streetscape, offer services for the surrounding neighborhoods, and provide pedestrian facilities along connector corridors throughout the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Enhancing and maintaining the transportation function and capacity of the corridor is also a goal of this district and will be accomplished by encouraging the following: shared parking among parcels and uses, internal connections between parcels, and reducing the number of allowable curb cuts. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, use by right subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Neighborhood Corridor District is prohibited. 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. Maximum residential density shall be 35 dwelling units per acre but may be increased up to a maximum of 70 dwelling units per acre if affordability incentives are met according to the Community Incentive Table. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
 
7-8-23-1 
 
7-8-23-2 
 
Landscape/Hardscape/Openspace: 
These elements can strengthen the project usefulness and livability by building residents, office tenants and the overall community and can be either public or private in nature. Hardscape features and courtyards can count towards open space requirements. Landscaping will be as per article 11 of the UDO. Street trees, awnings, arcades, seating areas and other pedestrian uses may be placed in the setback area or the public right-of-way with an approved encroachment agreement from the city or North Carolina Department of Transportation as applicable. 
(3)  Building size: Building size is limited to a maximum footprint of 12,000 square feet, except for grocery stores which are allowed a maximum building footprint of 24,000 square feet. The maximum total building floor area shall be 24,000 square feet but may be increased to up to 48,000 square feet per the Community Incentive Table. 
(4)  Lot size: There are no lot size or lot width requirements. 
(5)  Setback standards : As noted below, and landscape and buffer standards shall also apply. 
Front and street side: Minimum zero feet and maximum of 15 feet from right-of-way line. 
Side: None. 
Rear: None. 
Note: The Planning and Development Director may adjust the setback line to not more than 25 feet from the right-of-way based upon an assessment of topographic and other site constraints. 
(6)  Height standards: Minimum two stories and maximum three stories. Buildings can be constructed to four stories in height with a maximum height of 45 feet per the Community Incentive Table. The height of automobile related businesses is governed by the requirements of the uses by right subject to special requirements section. 
(7)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Neighborhood Corridor District shall be 90 percent. Where feasible, the pervious surface areas should be located at the lower sections of the site to intercept storm water runoff and provide opportunities for ground water recharge. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter with the exceptions noted below. In the Neighborhood Corridor District, street trees may be provided in the front building setback or the street right-of-way (with an approved encroachment agreement) as a part of a streetscape plan that may be proposed or in place for the corridor. Landscape bufferyards shall be a minimum of a 'B' buffer. Automobile related businesses shall provide a minimum of a 'C' buffer. In determining bufferyard requirements for uses in the NCD, the measure of application shall be that the adjacent property is not zoned NCD and the neighboring use is exclusively residential. The intent of the bufferyard requirement as applied to the Neighborhood Corridor District is to provide an effective screen to buffer residential uses. With this in mind and respecting site topography, plantings should be included at the highest points of original slopes or fill slopes along property lines where the buffer is required. As an alternative to these landscaped buffer requirements, a landscaped buffer ten feet wide is allowed with plantings provided consistent with a Type "A" buffer and the provision of a fence eight feet in height that complies with the standards outlined in subsection 7-11-3(d)(17). Landscaped bufferyards shall be a type 'B' buffer except as indicated below. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter with the following additions: 
a.  Parking shall be provided at the side or rear of the structure and not closer to the street than the face or edge of the structure; On corner lots, the side of the building that fronts on the secondary street is also considered a front or face of the building. 
b.  Parking may be provided in the street right-of-way adjoining the property as on-street parking with the approval of the city traffic engineer or the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
c.  Uses in the Neighborhood Corridor District are permitted a 50 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter provided that a walking amenity and bike racks are provided (walking amenities may include but are not limited to public courtyards, drinking water fountains, benches, shade structures, pocket green spaces and public access restrooms). 
d.  Shared and remote parking is encouraged and may count for up to 100 percent of the required parking so long as the parking is within 500 feet of the property. Parcels that are sharing parking areas or providing remote parking shall bring the parking lots into compliance with parking and landscaping requirements found in article 11 [of the UDO], at a minimum, the area that is provided as a part of the shared use. Rules requiring that shared and remote parking areas must be found in the same zoning classification are waived in the Neighborhood Corridor District. Residentially zoned areas may not be used to provide shared or remote parking space for this district except that non-residential uses in residential districts may be used. Parcels will require a recorded agreement for the shared or remote parking arrangement. 
e.  Parking structures may be provided as a secondary use in meeting a project's parking requirements. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter. In addition, sidewalk connections may be required to ensure and provide a safe passageway for pedestrians and patrons to maneuver through the parking area to the entrance of the businesses. If internal cross-access is provided between businesses and parcels, then sidewalks shall be also provided along accessways as needed to insure pedestrian connectivity. 
(11)  Open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by the requirements found in section 7-11-4 of this chapter with the addition that all uses (projects) exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor for commercial projects or eight residential units are required to comply. Sidewalk spaces featuring public-pedestrian amenities, outside dining facilities and vest pocket parks are supported and shall count towards open space requirements. 
(12)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  Orientation. The front of the building shall be orientated towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should appear similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner respecting setback standards unless prohibitive terrain issues are present. 
b.  Entrances. All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 45 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. Secondary entrances may face second tier streets, driveways or parking areas. Buildings on corner lots may place the entrance at the corner, eliminating the need for dual entrances. 
c.  Windows. Windows shall be evenly distributed at pedestrian level across the length of the façade on the first floor of the building. Windows will create a more effective pedestrian environment if they are un-tinted and non-reflective. Windows shall make up at least 45 percent of the first floor façade facing the primary streetfront. If located on a corner property, windows shall make up at least 40 percent of the first floor façade facing a side street. 
d.  Façades. When new building façades will be wider than 45 feet, the façade surface shall be subdivided into portions not exceeding this distance by varying setbacks, roof forms, or adding design details such as pilasters or other architectural treatments. 
e.  Variances. Requests for variances of the design and operational standards set forth in this subsection 12 may be granted by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, which is hereby designated to perform the duties of a board of adjustment for this purpose. Requests for variances shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their next available regularly scheduled meeting. 
(13)  Access and connectivity standards. As determined by the director of planning and development, sites that are of sufficient size, location and are topographically workable, require a network of internal streets and driveways. Shared access and cross-access with adjoining properties instead of access from the corridor is required where practical to improve and sustain the capacity of the corridor, reduce the number of curb cuts, ensure driver and pedestrian safety, improve the unity of the streetscape, and encourage trip chaining and pedestrian mobility. Stub out connections to neighboring parcels may be constructed if cross access is not available at time of permit approval. 
(14)  Community Incentive Table 
Incentives 	Mixed Use 	Residential 	Existing 
Historic 
Structures 
Density greater than 35 units per acre 	Buildings more than 80 feet wide fronting on corridor must incorporate retail or office uses into the street-level façade. 	In combination with: 20 percent of units provided are designated affordable 	Compatible adaptive reuse and/or additions to historic structures 
Building square footage greater than 24,000 square feet 	Minimum of 50 percent of street level gross square footage is used for retail and building setbacks adjacent to residentially zoned properties are a minimum of 40 feet 	In combination with: a minimum of 25 percent of the building square feet is residential uses and a minimum of 25 percent of the units are less than or equal to 700 square feet each 	Compatible adaptive reuse and/or additions to historic structures 
Height greater than 3 stories to a maximum of four stories (45') 	Minimum of 50 percent of street level gross square footage is used for retail and building setbacks adjacent to residentially zoned properties is expanded to a minimum of 40 feet 	In combination with; a minimum of 25 percent of the building square feet are residential units and building setbacks adjacent to residentially zoned properties is expanded to a minimum of 40 feet 	Compatible adaptive reuse and/or additions to historic structures 
 
(15)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2973, § 1a, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3207, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3757, § 1f, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3874, § 1n, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, §§ 1k, l, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-25. - Urban Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose: The Urban Residential District (URD) is established to complement existing residential neighborhoods by providing an improved diversity of housing types, scale, affordability, and character in areas where they can best be served by city services and infrastructure and is intended to be located on significant transit corridors and/or in high growth areas. The Urban Residential District is designed to provide new development and redevelopment opportunities that encourage urban scaled residential structures that relate to the street and character of Asheville's urban areas. While housing types that are economically viable and pedestrian oriented will be emphasized, a mix of other compatible activities, especially those that support residential uses within walking distance, will be permitted. It is also intended that this district enhance and maintain the transportation connectivity through the promotion of multi-use greenway paths, sidewalks, and public transit. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. 
Drive through establishments 
Gasoline sales 
Gated communities. This shall not include those gated communities lawfully established prior to June 12, 2007, or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to June 12, 2007, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community masterplan. 
Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, use by right subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Urban Residential District is prohibited. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. Maximum residential density shall be 35 dwelling units; or 70 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units are designated affordable. Projects including affordable units must provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices will remain affordable for the first ten years after completion, increasing by no more than three percent per year, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price index, whichever is lower. Also, such units must be reserved for qualified households in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
 
 
Landscape/Hardscape/Openspace: 
These elements can strengthen the project usefulness and livability by building residents, office tenants and the overall community and can be either public or private in nature. Hardscape features and courtyards can count towards open space requirements. Landscaping shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. Street trees, awnings, arcades, seating areas and other pedestrian uses may be placed in the setback area or the public right-of-way with an approved encroachment agreement from the city or NC Department of Transportation as applicable. 
(3)  Building size: Building size is limited to a maximum footprint of 10,000 square feet. The maximum total building floor area shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot size: 
Single-family, attached: 	1,800 square feet (min.) 
	2,500 square feet (max.) 
Single-family, detached: 	2,000 square feet (min.) 
	3,500 square feet (max.) 
Multi-family 	3,500 square feet (min.) 
 
Front and street side: Minimum zero feet and maximum 15 feet from right-of-way line, except as follows. Front and street sides adjacent to proposed Wilma Dykeman Riverway (currently, Swannanoa River Road, Thompson Street, Meadow Road, Lyman Street, and Riverside Drive) shall observe a build-to line consistent with the projected road-widening plan and/or limits of floodway designation; this line shall be determined by the planning and development director after consultation with the city engineer and may vary depending on the road segment affected by the widening plan. In appropriate circumstances, the planning and development director may increase the setback line from the right-of-way or build-to line based upon an assessment of topographic, flood hazard, significant existing vegetation, or other significant site constraints or features. 
Side: None 
Rear: None 
(6)  Height standards: For multifamily development: Minimum 2 stories and maximum 4 stories with a maximum height of 54 feet. For single-family development, the maximum height shall be 40 feet. 
(7)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Urban Residential District shall be 90 percent. Where feasible, the pervious surface areas should be located at the lower sections of the site to intercept storm water runoff and provide opportunities for ground water recharge. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter with the exceptions noted below. In the Urban Residential District, street trees may be provided in the front building setback or the street right-of-way (with an approved encroachment agreement) as a part of a streetscape plan that may be proposed or in place for the district. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter with the following additions: 
a.  Parking shall be provided at the side or rear of the structure and not closer to the street than the face or edge of the structure; On corner lots, the side of the building that fronts on the secondary street is also considered a front or face of the building. 
b.  Parking may be provided in the street right-of-way adjoining the property as on-street parking with the approval of the city Traffic Engineer or the NC Department of Transportation. This parking may be applied towards the parking requirement when on-street parking is located within 500' of the main entrance except on streets where the primary uses are single-family residential. 
c.  Uses in the Urban Residential District are permitted a 50 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter provided that a walking amenity and bike racks are provided (walking amenities may include but are not limited to public courtyards, drinking water fountains, benches, shade structures, pocket green spaces and public access restrooms). 
d.  Shared and remote parking is encouraged and may count for up to 100% of the required parking so long as the parking is within 500 feet of the property. Parcels that are sharing parking areas or providing remote parking shall bring the parking lots into compliance with parking and landscaping requirements found in article 11, at a minimum, the area that is provided as a part of the shared use. Rules requiring that shared and remote parking areas must be found in the same zoning classification are waived in the Urban Residential District. Residentially zoned areas may not be used to provide shared or remote parking for this district except that non-residential uses in residential districts may be used. Parcels will require a recorded agreement for the shared or remote parking arrangement. 
e.  Parking structures may be provided as a secondary use in meeting a project's parking requirements. Parking decks are not exempt from the design guidelines. Particular attention shall be placed in the design and programming of the base of parking decks. On primary streets which strive for pedestrian continuity, the first story shall be masked by a habitable liner building and the decks above shall be screened from view by a designed façade consistent with the overall building design. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be required for all projects with street frontage in accordance with City standards. In addition, sidewalk connections may be required to ensure and provide a safe passageway for pedestrians and patrons to maneuver through the parking area to the entrance of the businesses. If internal cross-access is provided between businesses and parcels, then sidewalks shall be also provided along accessways as needed to insure pedestrian connectivity. 
(11)  Open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by the requirements found in section 7-11-4 of this chapter with the addition that all uses (projects) exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor for commercial projects or 8 residential units are required to comply. Sidewalk spaces featuring public-pedestrian amenities, outside dining facilities, courtyards and pocket parks are supported and shall count towards open space requirements. 
(12)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  Orientation. The front of the building shall be orientated towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should appear similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner respecting setback standards unless prohibitive terrain issues are present. 
b.  Entrances. All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 45 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. Secondary entrances may face second tier streets, driveways or parking areas. Buildings on corner lots may place the entrance at the corner, eliminating the need for dual entrances. 
c.  Façades. When new building façades will be wider than 45 feet, the façade surface shall be subdivided into portions not exceeding this distance by varying setbacks, roof forms, or adding design details such as pilasters or other architectural treatments. 
d.  Openings on a façade. The openings on a façade shall remain within a void-to-solid ratio of nor more than 45 percent with each façade measured independently. The void-to-solid ratio of the façade includes windows, balconies, arcades, loggias, and galleries. The void-to-solid calculations shall not be applied to, nor include, non-residential uses located on the first floor. 
1.  Windows. When a non-residential use is located on the first floor, storefront windows shall be evenly distributed at pedestrian level across the length of the façade on the first floor of the building. All storefront windows shall be transparent or lightly tinted and shall not appear false or applied. Windows shall make up at least 60 percent of the area of the street facing first story façade. Upper floors shall have windows evenly distributed across the façade that may differ in size and proportion from the street level windows. Upper story windows shall make up at least 25 percent of the wall surface. Under no circumstances shall the upper floor windows be installed flush with the outer surface of the façade. All windows, except storefronts, shall be operable as hung or casement. Window sills should be provided, and lintels may be shown. Windows are also required along the sides of structures that are visible from roadways or have parking located adjacent to them. 
2.  Balconies. Balconies shall be used in moderation and shall be integrated into the overall composition of the façade. Balconies shall not be implemented in a monotonous or repetitive configuration. This pertains to both indented balconies (loggias) and to cantilevered ones. Cantilevered balconies shall extend no more than three feet from the building façade and shall be visibly supported by brackets. In the case of balconies that are nearly flush with the façade and associated with inwardly swinging doors (French balconies) there may be as many balconies as there are doors. 
3.  Arcades, loggias, and galleries. Arcades, loggias, and galleries shall have columns and piers of a width and depth proportion to the height of the element with a width-to-height ratio of between 1:6 and 1:8 but in no case less than 16 inches wide. Arcades and galleries shall overlap the front sidewalk to within eighteen inches of the curb. The interior passage of the arcades/galleries should be a minimum of 12 feet deep with a min. of 14 feet clear from sidewalk to ceiling. 
e.  Rooftop machinery. The location and masking of rooftop machinery shall be as consciously designed as any other aspect of the building. Adequate parapets shall mask any negative impact from street level, as well as horizontally from adjacent buildings. 
f.  Signage. See article 13 of this chapter for sign allowance in this district. 
g.  Variances. Requests for variances of the design and operational standards set forth in this subsection 12 may be granted by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, which is hereby designated to perform the duties of a board of adjustment for this purpose. Requests for variances shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department and considered by the planning and zoning commission at their next available regularly scheduled meeting. 
(13)  Access and connectivity standards. As determined by the director of planning and development, sites that are of sufficient size, location and are topographically workable, require a network of internal streets and driveways. Shared access and cross-access with adjoining properties instead of access from the corridor is required where practical to improve and sustain the capacity of the corridor, reduce the number of curb cuts, ensure driver and pedestrian safety, improve the unity of the streetscape, and encourage trip chaining and pedestrian mobility. Stub out connections to neighboring parcels may be constructed if cross access is not available at time of permit approval. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(15)  Drive-through facilities. Drive through facilities are prohibited in the district. 
(16)  Gasoline sales. Gasoline sales are prohibited in the district. 
(Ord. No. 3028, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 3052, § 1(b), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(b), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3362, §§ 1(a), (b), 5-23-06; Ord. No. 3394, § 1(a), 9-26-06; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1b, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3874, § 1o, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1k, l, n, p, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4374, § 1m, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 7-8-26. - Urban Place District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Urban Place District is established to foster higher density, mixed-use development that is economically viable, pedestrian oriented, visually attractive and contributing to the place making character of the city. The Urban Place District is designed to provide new development and redevelopment opportunities in the form of mixed-use structures that relate to the street, enhance the streetscape, and offer a wide range of complementary land uses and employment opportunities. The Urban Place District is intended primarily for use in areas currently or potentially affected by blight or neglect, or where the design and appearance of the built environment is important to the vitality of the area. Typical application of this district will be in areas planned for high intensity mixed use development with sufficient infrastructure to support this type of development. There should be general compatibility with either an established plan or plans or with the existing or historic development pattern in applying this district. 
The Urban Place District has special application to properties located in or near the flood plain for the French Broad and Swannanoa Rivers. It is important here to celebrate, conserve, promote and manage the river areas. Balancing economic development in the river corridors with environmental protection is our future. The rivers are our last great treasure enhancing our unique sense of place. The Wilma Dykeman Riverway Master Plan and urban riverfront corridor plans acknowledge that businesses will choose where to locate based on the availability of quality of life amenities, such as our rivers and parks. Low impact sustainable development that offers a variety of land uses and housing types and prices will leverage public open space for flood control and storm water retention. The flood plain is a sensitive resource that must be protected while providing for the opportunity for enjoyment of the river area by the citizens of the community. These regulations are intended to complement the Wilma Dykeman Riverway Master Plan and other river related plans and ordinances including but not limited to local, state and federal floodplain and stormwater ordinances. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Level III, conditional use. All Level III projects as identified in subsection 7-5-9 of this chapter will require a conditional use permit. These projects may include only those uses permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Developm ent standards. 
(1)  Densi ty standards. Maximum residential density shall be 64 units per acre. 
(2)  Building size: Building size is limited to: A maximum footprint of 35,000 square feet, with a maximum gross floor area of 100,000 square feet for buildings three stories or less in height; and a maximum footprint of 50,000 square feet, with a maximum gross floor area of 200,000 square feet for buildings exceeding three stories. 
(3)  Lot size: Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. This requirement may be waived by the technical review committee for smaller lots that are determined to further the purpose of the Urban Place District. 
(4)  Lot width: Minimum lot width: 75 feet. This requirement may be waived by the technical review committee for narrower lots that are determined to further the purpose of the Urban Place District. 
(5)  Setback standards. 
Front and street side: Minimum zero feet and maximum 15 feet from right-of-way line, except as follows: Front and street sides adjacent to proposed Wilma Dykeman Riverway (currently, Swannanoa River Road, Thompson Street, Meadow Road, Lyman Street, and Riverside Drive) shall observe a build-to line consistent with the projected road-widening plan and/or limits of floodway designation; this line shall be determined by the planning and development director after consultation with the city engineer and may vary depending on the road segment affected by the widening plan. In appropriate circumstances, the planning and development director may increase the setback line from the right-of-way or build-to line based upon an assessment of topographic, flood hazard, significant existing vegetation, or other significant site constraints or features. 
Side: None 
Rear: None 
(6)  Height standards. Minimum two stories and maximum six stories or 80 feet, whichever is greater. 
(7)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Urban Place District shall be 95 percent unless the property is located within the designated 100-year special flood hazard areas. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter with the exceptions noted below. In the Urban Place District, street trees may be provided in the front building setback or the street right-of-way (with an approved encroachment agreement) as a part of a streetscape plan that may be proposed or in place for the corridor. The planning and development director may grant alternate compliance as outlined in subsection 7-11-3(b)(3) in order to provide appropriate buffers for the purpose of compatibly integrating the Urban Place District development into the surrounding land use pattern. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter with the following additions: 
a.  Parking shall be provided at the side or rear of the structure and not closer to the street than the face or edge of the structure. On corner lots, the side of the building that fronts on the secondary street is also considered a front or face of the building. 
b.  Parking may be provided in the street right-of-way adjoining the property as on street parking with the approval of the city traffic engineer or the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
c.  Uses in the Urban Place District are permitted up to a 50 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter provided that transit shelters, pedestrian amenities and/or bike racks are provided and such amenities are determined by the planning and development director to offer significant multimodal transportation accessibility to, from, and within the development. Pedestrian amenities may include but are not limited to wide sidewalks, public courtyards, and public park areas. 
d.  Shared and remote parking is encouraged and may count for up to 100 percent of the required parking so long as the parking is within 500 feet of the property. Parcels that are sharing parking areas or providing remote parking shall bring the parking lots into compliance with parking and landscaping requirements found in article 11 [of the UDO], at a minimum, the area that is provided as a part of the shared use. Rules requiring that shared and remote parking areas must be found in the same zoning classification are waived in the Urban Place District. Residentially zoned areas may not be used to provide shared or remote parking space for this district except that nonresidential uses in residential districts may be used. Parcels will require a recorded agreement for the shared or remote parking arrangement. 
e.  Parking structures may be provided as a secondary use in meeting a project's parking requirements; such structures may contain more than the maximum number of spaces required for the associated use(s) if there are shared parking or commercial parking arrangements acceptable to the planning and development director. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-7 of this chapter, except that a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided unless precluded by topographic or dimensional constraints as determined by the city engineer and planning director. In addition, sidewalk connections may be required to ensure and provide a safe passageway for pedestrians and patrons to maneuver through the parking area to the entrance of the businesses. If internal cross-access is provided between businesses and parcels, then sidewalks shall also be provided along accessways as needed to insure pedestrian connectivity. 
(11)  Open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter, except in no case shall the total required open space exceed five percent of the lot area. Public sidewalk spaces two or more feet wider than the minimum requirement and featuring public-pedestrian amenities, outside dining facilities and pocket parks are encouraged and may count toward open space requirements. Donations of land for green space and greenways is also encouraged. 
(12)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  Orientation. The front of the building shall be orientated towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should appear similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner respecting setback standards unless prohibitive terrain issues are present. 
b.  Entrances. All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 60 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. Secondary entrances may face second tier streets, driveways or parking areas. Buildings on corner lots may place the entrance at the corner, eliminating the need for dual entrances. 
c.  Windows. Windows shall be evenly distributed at pedestrian level across the length of the façade on the first floor of the building. Windows will create a more effective pedestrian environment if they are un-tinted and non-reflective. Windows shall make up at least 40 percent of the area of the street-facing first story façade. Upper floors shall have windows evenly distributed across the façade that may differ in size and proportion from the street level windows. Upper story windows shall make up at least 25 percent of the wall surface. All storefront windows shall be transparent or lightly tinted and shall not appear false or applied. Windows are also required along the sides of structures that are visible from roadways or have surface parking lots located adjacent to them. 
d.  Façades. When new building façades will be wider than 60 feet, the façade surface shall be subdivided into portions not exceeding this distance by varying setbacks, roof forms, or adding design details such as pilasters or other architectural treatments. 
e.  Variances. Requests for variances of the design and operational standards set forth in this subsection may be granted by the Asheville Planning and Zoning Commission, which is hereby designated to perform the duties of a board of adjustment for this purpose. Requests for variances shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department and considered by the planning and zoning commission at their next available regularly scheduled meeting. 
(13)  Access and connectivity standards. As determined by the planning and development director, sites that are of sufficient size, location and are topographically workable require a network of internal streets and driveways. Shared access and cross-access with adjoining properties instead of access from the corridor is required where practical to improve and sustain the capacity of the corridor, reduce the number of curb cuts, ensure driver and pedestrian safety, improve the unity of the streetscape, and encourage pedestrian mobility. Stub out connections to neighboring parcels may be constructed if cross access is not available at time of permit approval. Block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet unless precluded by topography or existing block patterns. 
(14)  Special requirements for properties located within the designated 100-year special flood hazard areas along either the French Broad or Swannanoa Rivers and their adjacent tributaries, 
a.  Properties abutting the river shall provide a setback from the top of the river bank of 20 percent of the lot with a maximum depth of 50 feet and a minimum depth of 25 feet. This area is called the river resource yard. 
b.  The river resource yard shall not be graded and all existing native trees shall be preserved in order to maintain the river bank and protect existing trees. Diseased trees and shrubs may be pruned leaving roots alive and intact and dead trees removed. Greenways, passive recreation areas and other river access areas may be constructed within the river resource yard. 
c.  The maximum impervious surface coverage for the flood zone properties shall be 80 percent. Special site and development features such as but not limited to green roofs and other best management practices (BMPs) for storm water collection and treatment may be considered such that their net effect is to provide 80 percent or less impervious surface coverage as reviewed and approved by city engineering department. 
d.  The speculative grading of land within the designated 100-year special flood hazard area is prohibited. 
e.  River district design guidelines: All construction work requiring building, sign, demolition, and zoning permits and projects requesting a variance shall be subject to the mandatory review/voluntary compliance procedure as set forth in article V of this chapter. 
f.  Sustainable design: In order to protect the environmental resources of Asheville's riverfront and to ensure that buildings and structures built or renovated in this area are done in an environmentally sound way, the City of Asheville encourages that all design and construction follow the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED TM ) Commercial Green Building rating system, or other related LEED TM Rating System, approved by the U.S. Green Building Council. 
g.  Elevated buildings: For buildings that are elevated to comply with requirements of the 100-year special flood hazard areas: 
1.  Parking may occur under the building. Screening of the parking area is required between adjacent right-of-way areas and the structured parking unless floodplain requirements will not allow for this to occur. 
2.  Window detailing requirements at the ground level are waived. A connecting feature from the right-of-way area to the main level of the elevated structure is recommended. 
(15)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3216, § 1, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 3262, § 1(c), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3445, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 3483, § 1(b), 6-2-07; Ord. No. 3583, § 1(a), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3643, § 1a, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 3743, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3874, § 1p, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1n—p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-27. - Airport District. 
(a)  Purpose. It shall be the intent of this district to encourage and support the continued operation and vitality of the Asheville Regional Airport by allowing certain airport-related commercial/industrial and recreational uses in accordance with this ordinance, state law, and Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses, special uses, conditional uses and uses expressly prohibited are identified in subsection 7-8-1(d), Table of Permitted Uses. Standards for special uses and conditional uses can be found in article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  Level III, conditional use. All Level III projects as identified in section 7-5-9 of this chapter will require a conditional use permit. These projects may include only those uses permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Review thresholds. Level I, II, and III development review thresholds will remain unchanged for non-aviation projects. Aviation projects will be exempt from the cumulative thresholds set forth in subsections 7-5-9(a)(1)(a)b and c, and 7-5-9(b)(1)b and c. 
(2)  Density standards. Residential uses are not permitted in the Airport District, no density standards apply. 
(3)  Structure size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size in the Airport District shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(5)  Lot width standards. Lots in the Airport District shall have a minimum width of 100 feet. 
(6)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Airport District. 
Front: 35 feet. 
Side: Ten feet unless adjacent to a residential district, then the setback shall be 50 feet. 
Rear: 20 feet unless adjacent to a residential district, then the setback shall be 50 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(7)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(8)  Access standards. Points of access to all publicly accessible streets shall be determined by the city traffic engineer following review of the site plan and other relevant information. 
(9)  Design and operation standards. None. 
(10)  Height standards. The maximum height for all non-aviation related businesses shall be 60 feet. Height limitations for aviation related operations are regulated through the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77 or its successor. 
(11)  Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-10 except for those standards which are found to be in conflict with Federal Aviation Regulations that regulate airport lighting. 
(12)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(13)  Other development standards. 
Airside: No landscaping/buffering, parking/loading, sidewalk, and open space standards will apply. 
Landside: Landscaping/buffering, parking/loading, sidewalk, and open space shall be provided as required by article XI of this chapter except for those areas within 100 feet of an Airside zone, which shall also be exempt. 
(14)  Asphalt plants. Asphalt plans are prohibited in the district. 
(Ord. No. 3906, § 1b, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1m—p, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 7-8-28. - Haywood Road Form District. 
1.0.  General provisions. 
1.1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Haywood Road Form District is to implement the Haywood Road Corridor Charrette Report and the Haywood Road Vision Plan. 
1.2.  Intent. It is the intent of this Haywood Road Form District to: 
1.  Where feasible, preserve and enhance existing buildings and structures along the corridor. 
2.  Ensure a high quality of development for new construction; 
3.  Reduce the bulk and mass of buildings; 
4.  Ensure adequate distribution of height and mass throughout the corridor, with larger buildings located closer to Patton Avenue; 
5.  Allow for a mix of uses at a variety of scales; 
6.  Promote additional housing types and housing opportunities; 
7.  Make the corridor more walkable and pedestrian-friendly; 
8.  Implement the complete streets model by enhancing multi-modal transportation options, including transit, bicycle and pedestrian connections; 
9.  Calm traffic and improve vehicular circulation; 
10.  Support existing businesses; and 
11.  Ensure adequate transitions from the corridor to adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
1.3.  Applicability. 
A.  Territorial application. The Haywood Road Form District applies to all property located within the Haywood Road Corridor, as shown in subsection 2.1. 
B.  Application of chapter 7, Development. 
1.  The following requirements of chapter 7 do not apply in the Haywood Road Form District, unless expressly stated otherwise: 
a.  Section 7-10-2. Required setbacks; allowable encroachments into required setbacks. 
b.  Section 7-11-4. Open space standards. 
c.  Section 7-11-6. Traffic impact analysis. 
d.  Subsection 7-8-1d. Table of Uses. 
e.  Subsection 7-11-2c. Off-street parking requirements. 
f.  Subsections 7-13-4b and c. On-premises signs and single and multi-tenant signs. 
g.  7-17-3c. When pertaining only to establishing a new eating and drinking establishment, microbrewery, or nightclub, the Land use impact table for comparing land uses will not apply and parking will always be required for the new use following the provisions in the Haywood Road Form Based code. 
2.  The use of buildings and land within the Haywood Road Form District is subject to all other regulations as well as the Haywood Road Form District, whether or not such other provisions are specifically referenced in the Haywood Road Form District. References to other regulations or provisions of the Haywood Road Form District are for the convenience of the reader. The lack of a cross-reference does not exempt a land, building, structure or use from other regulations. 
3.  It will be unlikely that a single developer will be able to implement the street cross section details found within each district pertaining to road width, bike lanes and streetscape details for the corridor without more control of the roadway by the City of Asheville. Minimal sidewalk and street tree requirements will be reviewed for compliance as a part of project submittals. 
4.  Overhead power lines along the corridor may not permit a building within close proximity to an easement area associated with the lines; if subject to these imposed restrictions which may overlap the property line, buildings may measure their setback(s) from the line of the easement and not the edge of the right of way. 
C.  Conflicting provisions. 
1.  Interpretation of conflicts between the Haywood Road Form District and any other city ordinance or regulation (including chapter 7) are controlled by the Haywood Road Form District. 
2.  The graphics, illustrations and photographs used to visually explain certain provisions of Haywood Road Form District are for illustrative purposes only. Where there is a conflict between a graphic, illustration or photograph and the text, the text controls. 
1.4.  Transitional provisions. 
A.  New development. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 1.4.C below, upon the effective date of the Haywood Road Form District or any subsequent amendment, any new building, additions or other structure or any use of land must be constructed or developed only in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Haywood Road Form District. 
2.  No excavation or filling of land or construction of any public or private improvements may take place or commence except in conformity with the Haywood Road Form District. 
B.  Existing development. Any existing use, lot, building or other structure legally established prior to the effective date of the Haywood Road Form District that does not comply with any provision of these specific regulations is a legal non-conformity pursuant to article 18. 
C.  Previously issued permits and pending applications. Previously issued permits and pending applications will be processed in accordance with and decided pursuant to the law existing on the date the application was filed. 
2.0.  Districts. 
2.1.  Districts established. 
 
2.2.  Rules applicable to all districts. The following general rules apply to all Haywood Road sub-districts unless expressly stated otherwise. 
A.  Lot. 
1.  Defined. A parcel of land either vacant or occupied intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or for the future, of transfer of ownership, or possession, or for development. 
2.  Lot area. Lot area is the area included within the rear, side and front lot lines. Lot area does not include existing or proposed right-of-way, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use. 
3.  Lot width. Lot width is the distance between the two side lot lines measured at the primary street property line along a straight line or along the chord of the property line on a curvilinear lot. 
 
B.  Building coverage. 
1.  The maximum area of the lot that is permitted to be covered by buildings, including both principal structures, structured parking and roofed accessory structures, including gazebos. 
2.  Building coverage does not include paved areas such as driveways, uncovered porches or patios, decks, swimming pools, porte cochere, or roof overhangs of two feet or less. Surface parking is not considered part of building coverage. 
C.  Outdoor amenity space. 
1.  General. Where required, outdoor amenity space must be provided on the lot and must be available as unenclosed exterior space appropriately improved for pedestrian amenity, rooftop space, or for aesthetic appeal and cannot include areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only. Outdoor amenity space may be public or private. 
2.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor amenity space may be met in one contiguous open area or in multiple open areas on the lot; however, to receive credit, the area must be at least seven feet in width and length, and at least 40 percent of the required amenity space must be located in one contiguous open area. 
 
b.  Outdoor amenity space may be located at or above grade. 
c.  Outdoor amenity space may be roofed but cannot be permanently enclosed. 
d.  Outdoor amenity space cannot be parked or driven upon, except for emergency access and permitted temporary events. 
e.  In calculating the minimum outdoor amenity space requirement, the following listed facilities, and any similar facilities, may be included: 
i.  Ground-level facilities such as a swimming pool, playground, sport court, dog park, garden, community garden, park, green, pavilion, courtyard, seating area, outdoor dining area or plaza; and 
ii.  Upper-level facilities such as a shared or common balcony, rooftop deck or rooftop garden. 
f.  A required property line buffer is not considered outdoor amenity space. 
D.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Generally. There are four types of setbacks - primary street, side street, side interior and rear. Building setbacks apply to both principal and accessory buildings and structures except where explicitly stated otherwise. 
 
2.  Measurement of building setbacks. 
a.  The primary street setback is measured at a right angle from the primary street right-of-way line. 
b.  On corner lots, the side street setback is measured at a right angle from the side street right-of-way line. 
c.  The rear setback is measured at a right angle from the rear property line or the rear right-of-way or easement line where there is an alley. The rear property line is the property line opposite to the primary street property line. 
d.  All lot lines which are not primary street, side street or rear lot lines are considered side interior lot lines for the purpose of measuring setbacks. Side interior setbacks are measured at a right angle from the side property line. 
3.  Primary street designation. 
a.  Where only one street abuts a lot, that street is considered a primary street. 
b.  Where more than one street abuts a lot, Haywood Road or Patton Avenue are considered the primary street. 
E.  Build-to zone (BTZ). 
1.  Defined. 
a.  The build-to zone (BTZ) is the area on the lot where a certain percentage of the front building facade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum setback range from the edge of the right-of-way. In cases where required streetscape elements are installed on private property the building setbacks shall be measured from the back of the streetscape elements. 
b.  The required percentage specifies the amount of the front building facade that must be located in the build-to zone, measured based on the width of the building divided by the width of the lot. In cases where driveway access is needed, the driveway width may be removed from the BTZ calculations. 
 
2.  Corner lots. On a corner lot, a building façade must be placed within the build-to zone for the first 30 feet along the street extending from the block corner, measured from the intersection of the two right-of-way lines. 
 
3.  Uses allowed. With the exception of parking spaces and outdoor storage, all structures and uses (including outdoor dining) allowed on the lot are allowed in the build-to zone. 
F.  Nonconforming build-to zone. 
1.  Additions. Expansion of an existing building which is unable to meet the build-to requirement must comply with the following nonconforming provisions: 
a.  Front: Addition. Any addition to the front that exceed 50 percent of the existing footprint must be placed in the build-to zone; however, the addition does not have to meet the build-to percentage for the lot. A front addition is not allowed on a contributing structure in a National Register District or a structure that is eligible for historic designation (although a variance may be granted where a hardship exists, including but not limited to a conflict with the Building Code or specific purposes for the addition that make a front location the most technically (not financially) feasible option. 
 
b.  Rear: Addition. One-story or multi-story rear additions are allowed because the extension does not increase the degree of the nonconformity. 
 
c.  Side: Addition. One-story or multi-story side additions meeting the following conditions are allowed: 
i.  The side addition is no greater than 500 square feet in area or 20 percent of the existing building footprint, (whichever is greater), and is less than 50 percent of the existing building width measured along the primary street. 
 
ii.  In the case of a contributing structure in a National Register District (or a structure eligible for designation), the side addition can be placed no closer than 5 feet from the street-facing façade of the building. 
2.  New buildings. Where a new building is being constructed on a lot or site with an existing building on it that doesn't meet the build-to requirement, the following nonconforming provisions apply. 
a.  Front: New building. All new buildings must be placed in the build-to zone until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
b.  Rear: New building. New buildings located outside of the build-to zone are not allowed until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
c.  Side: New building. New buildings located outside of the build-to zone are not allowed until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
d.  Accessory structures: New Structure New accessory structures must be placed behind or to the side of the principal building and may not exceed 500 square feet. Outdoor dining may be placed at the front of the lot to enhance the activity at the sidewalk. One-story accessory structures are permitted. 
G.  Setback encroachments. All buildings and structures must be located at or behind the required setbacks except as listed below. Unless specifically stated, no building or structure can extend into a required easement or public right-of-way. 
1.  Building features. 
a.  Porches, stoops, balconies, galleries and awnings/canopies can extend into a required primary street setback as stated in subsection 2.2.R. 
b.  Building eaves, roof overhangs, gutters, downspouts, light shelves, bay windows and oriels less than ten feet wide, cornices, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features may encroach up to three feet into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
c.  Chimneys or flues may encroach up to four feet, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.  Unenclosed patios, decks, balconies, stoops, porches, terraces or fire escapes may encroach into a side interior or rear setback, provided that such extension is at least six feet from the vertical plane of any lot line and bufferyard requirements, if any, are met. 
e.  Handicap ramps may encroach to the extent necessary to perform their proper function. 
f.  Structures below and covered by the ground may encroach into a required setback. 
g.  Outdoor amenities allowed within setbacks that are in the ground plane of the site. 
2.  Low impact stormwater features. 
a.  Low impact stormwater management features may encroach up to two feet into a primary street setback (but not into the required sidewalk), including, but not limited to: 
i.  Rain barrels or cisterns, six feet or less in height; 
ii.  Planter boxes; 
iii.  Bio-retention areas; and 
iv.  Similar features, as determined by the city engineer. 
b.  Low impact stormwater management features listed above may encroach into a side interior or rear setback, provided such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
3.  Mechanical equipment and utility lines. 
a.  For residential buildings only, mechanical equipment such as HVAC units and security lighting, may encroach into a required rear or side interior setback, provided that such extension is at least three feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
b.  Minor structures accessory to utilities (such as hydrants, manholes, and transformers and other cabinet structures) may encroach into a required rear, side interior or side street setback. 
4.  Other setback encroachments. 
a.  Fences and walls under section 7-10-3. 
b.  Property line buffers under subsection 4.2. 
c.  Signs under subsection 4.3. 
H.  Building height. 
1.  Building height is regulated in both number of stories and feet and is measured from the average grade to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel roof or to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof, not including a maximum six-foot high parapet wall encroachment. In no case is a parapet allowed to exceed six feet in height above the roof deck. 
 
2.  Average grade is determined by calculating the average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or improved grade (whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the primary street setback line. 
 
3.  New principal structures must be a minimum height of two stories. Any second story must be finished out for occupancy. 
4.  Where a lot slopes downward from the front property line, one story that is additional to the specified maximum number of stories may be built on the lower, rear portion of the lot. 
 
5.  An attic does not count as a story where 50 percent or more of the attic floor area has a clear height of less than seven and one-half feet; measured from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
 
6.  A basement with 50 percent or more of its perimeter wall area surrounded by natural grade is not considered a story. 
I.  Height encroachments. Any height encroachment not listed below is prohibited. 
1.  The maximum height limits of the district do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water tanks, water towers or other similar structures which, by design or function, must exceed the established height limits. 
2.  The following specified accessory structures, building and site features, and mechanical equipment may exceed the established height limit provided they do not exceed the maximum height by more than six feet: 
a.  Chimney, flue or vent stack; 
b.  Flagpole; 
c.  Vegetation associated with a rooftop garden or landscaping; 
d.  Skylights; 
e.  Parapet wall; and 
f.  Solar panels, wind turbines and rainwater collection systems. 
3.  The following may exceed the established height limits provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than ten feet, are set back at least 15 feet from the edge of the roof on the primary facade and ten feet for other sides: 
a.  Elevator or stairway access to roof; 
b.  Rooftop shade structure; 
c.  Greenhouse; and 
d.  Mechanical equipment. 
4.  Any of the elements listed in paragraphs 2. and 3. above are considered accessory to the principal structure and must not be used for any purpose other than as incidental to the principal structure. 
J.  Ground floor elevation. 
1.  Ground floor elevation is measured from top of the adjacent curb to the top of the finished ground floor. 
2.  Minimum ground floor elevation applies to the first 30 feet of the lot measured from the right-of-way line. 
 
3.  Ground floor elevation must meet the accessibility requirements of the NC Building Code. 
K.  Story height. 
1.  Story height is measured from the top of the finished floor to the ceiling above. 
2.  Minimum ground story height applies to the first 30 feet of the building measured inward from the street-facing façade. At least 50 percent of the ground story must meet the minimum height provisions. 
3.  At least 80 percent of each upper story must meet the minimum upper story height provisions. 
 
L.  Transparency. 
1.  The minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover a ground story facade. The transparency percentage is derived by dividing the transparent area of ground story windows and doors by the total area of the ground story facade along the primary or side street. 
 
2.  The minimum transparency percentage of windows and doors that must cover an upper story facade is measured from top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate. The percentage is derived for each upper story based on the transparent area of upper story windows and doors divided by the total area of the upper story facade. 
3.  Transparency applies to primary and side street-facing facades only. 
4.  Glass is considered transparent where it has a transparency higher than 80 percent and external reflectance of less than 15 percent. 
5.  An opening to a parking garage is not considered transparency. Any clear glass in a garage door for a restaurant or entertainment use (and not for loading purposes) is considered transparent. 
M.  Blank wall area. 
1.  Blank wall area means a portion of the exterior façade of the building that does not include: windows or doors; columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth; or a substantial material change (paint color is not considered a substantial change). The same material used in a different pattern does not constitute a substantial material change. 
 
2.  Blank wall area applies in both a vertical and horizontal direction and to ground and upper story primary and side street-facing façades. 
N.  Pedestrian access. 
1.  An entrance providing both ingress and egress, operable to residents or customers at all times during operating hours, is required to meet the street-facing entrance requirements. Additional entrances off another street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are permitted. 
2.  The entrance spacing requirements must be met for each building, but are not applicable to adjacent buildings. 
 
3.  Doors are not permitted to swing into public rights-of-way. 
4.  An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a building along the street to meet the street-facing entrance requirements. 
O.  Neighborhood compatibility. 
1.  Building stepback. 
a.  A building stepback is required when form district property is abutting an RS or RM district. When abutting an RS or RM district, a building must not extend into a 45-degree angular plane projecting over the subject property measured from a height of 40 feet at the side interior or rear setback line. One foot of additional setback is required for every foot of height above 40 feet. 
 
b.  The building stepback ends at any public street (not including an alley) or 150 feet from the RS or RM district property line, whichever is less. 
2.  Property line buffer. A property line buffer meeting the standards of subsection 4.2 is required where a Haywood Road Form District abuts a RS or RM district. 
P.  Building materials. 
1.  Applicability. The following requirements apply to all street-facing façades of a building. 
2.  Use of materials. 
a.  Traditional materials such as brick, terra-cotta, natural stone, cast stone, metal, glass, concrete are preferred for new construction and renovations. Non-traditional materials such as unpainted rough-sawn wood and materials with a rustic image are used carefully and in ways that relate to their traditional context. The use of modern sustainable or green materials may justify deviations from the use of traditional materials. Synthetic finishing system materials are not permitted at the ground or street level. 
b.  Primary material changes must occur at inside corners or where they wrap around an outside corner a minimum of two feet. 
 
c.  When using more than one primary material in a façade, one is required as the main theme, with the others acting only to complement and accentuate the design. 
d.  Openings in masonry façades should express a structural lintel or arch to show how they are carrying the weight above. 
Q.  Streets, sidewalks and driveways. 
1.  If an appropriate width sidewalk and street trees do not exist or do not meet the sub-district requirements, the developer is responsible for installation sidewalk and street trees as shown in subsection 2.3 through subsection 2.6. Modified dimensions may be approved by the city traffic engineer to account for existing street widths and building locations. 
2.  The required sidewalk may be wholly or partially located on private property, provided the sidewalk is located within an easement permanently dedicated to the city. 
3.  Where vehicular access is provided to a site, it must occur from a side street and not from Haywood Road, unless this option is determined infeasible by the city traffic engineer. For sites that must be accessed from Haywood Road, no more than one driveway is allowed with a maximum width of 24 feet. 
4.  The city traffic engineer may require the closure of existing curb cuts on Haywood Road where proposed site and building improvements exceed 75 percent of the appraised value of the existing improvements (as determined by Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser) and alternatives to access from Haywood Road are available. 
5.  Aside from street tree and sidewalk requirements noted in each district, individual developers will not be required to implement the street cross-sections found in the form based code document such as travel lane widths, creation of bump-outs, etc. 
 
R.  Building elements. Individual building elements are allowed for by sub-district (see subsection 2.3 through subsection 2.6). 
1.  Awning/canopy. A wall-mounted, cantilevered structure providing shade and cover from the weather for a sidewalk. 
a.  An awning/canopy must be a minimum of nine feet clear height above the sidewalk and must have a minimum depth of three feet. The planning and development director may approve a modification to these standards in order to fit an awning or canopy on an existing building. 
b.  An awning/canopy may extend into a required setback above private property. 
c.  An awning/canopy may encroach up to nine feet into the public right-of-way but must be at least two feet inside the curb line or edge of pavement, whichever is greater. The encroachment requires city or DOT approval, based on the ownership of the right-of-way. 
 
2.  Balcony. A platform projecting from the wall of an upper-story of a building with a railing along its outer edge, often with access from a door or window. 
a.  A balcony may extend within two feet of a front property line; and three feet into a side setback, of any lot line. 
b.  A balcony must have a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. 
c.  A balcony may be covered and screened, but cannot be fully enclosed. 
d.  A balcony may encroach up to 6 feet into the public right-of-way but must be at least two feet inside the curb line or edge of pavement, whichever is greater. The encroachment requires city or DOT approval, based on the ownership of the right-of-way. 
e.  Balconies must avoid conflicts with required street trees. 
 
3.  Gallery. A covered passage extending along the outside wall of a building supported by arches or columns that is open on three sides. 
a.  A gallery must have a clear depth from the support columns to the building's façade of at least eight feet and a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. 
b.  A gallery must be contiguous and extend over at least 75 percent of the width of the building façade from which it projects. 
c.  A gallery may extend into a required setback. 
d.  A gallery may encroach up nine feet into the public right-of-way but must be at least two feet inside the curb line or edge of pavement, whichever is greater. The encroachment requires city or DOT approval, based on the ownership of the right-of-way. 
 
4.  Front porch. A raised structure attached to a building, forming a covered entrance to a doorway. 
a.  A front porch must be at least six feet deep (not including the steps). 
b.  A front porch must be contiguous, with a width not less than 33 percent of the building façade from which it projects. 
c.  A front porch must be roofed and may be screened, but cannot be fully enclosed. 
d.  A front porch may extend up to nine feet, including the steps, into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
e.  A front porch may not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
 
5.  Stoop. A small raised platform that serves as an entrance to a building. 
a.  A stoop must be no more than six feet deep (not including the steps) and six feet wide. 
b.  A stoop may be covered but cannot be fully enclosed (must not be screened in). 
c.  A stoop may extend up to six feet, including the steps, into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.  A stoop may not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
 
6.  Courtyard. An open area at grade, or within 30 inches of grade, that serves as an open space, plaza or outdoor dining area, that does not extend across the full length of building. 
a.  A courtyard must be no more than one-third of the length of the building face. 
b.  A courtyard may be no more than 35 feet in depth. 
c.  A courtyard is considered as part of the building for the purpose of measuring the build-to zone. 
 
7.  Forecourt. An open area at grade, or within 30 inches of grade, that serves as an open space, plaza or outdoor dining area that extends across the full length of building. 
a.  A forecourt may be placed in front of a building, provided that it extends no more than 20 feet in depth. 
b.  A forecourt extends the depth of the build-to zone in an amount equal to the courtyard depth. 
c.  A forecourt of at least ten feet in depth satisfies the building stepback requirement above the second floor (where applicable). 
d.  A forecourt may extend the entire width of the lot. 
e.  A forecourt may also be located internal to the lot, adjacent to one or more sides of the building. 
S.  Stepback details. 
1.  Building stepback. Building step backs are provided for the purpose of providing air and light to the street, sidewalk and neighboring properties and are not a 'form element' or architectural detail historically found along the corridor. When a building step back is required because of building height, any combination of setbacks for the creation of required or additional sidewalk width to meet the minimum standard, or building setbacks prescribed by overhead or underground utility easements that meet or exceed a minimum of ten feet, will be deemed to satisfy the building step back requirement for upper floors. 
2.3.  HR-1: Core. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-1: Core sub-district is intended to preserve existing buildings and to maintain the historic character of the two traditional centers on Haywood Road. Existing buildings should be reused where possible and new infill buildings should respect the existing form and context. Height requirements are set to ensure that existing buildings can compete successfully with new infill buildings. Buildings in the HR-1: Core sub-district are pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Mixed use is encouraged, and a variety of commercial uses are allowed on the ground floor. Residential and office uses are allowed in upper floors. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
2.4.  HR-2: Expansion. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-2: Expansion sub-district is intended to extend the urban character of the Core. New buildings are encouraged in this sub-district. Since the majority of this area can be expected to redevelop, new buildings are allowed to be taller than in the Core. Mixed-use buildings in the HR-2: Expansion sub-district are pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Residential buildings are set slightly further back from the street. Mixed use is encouraged, and a variety of commercial uses are allowed on the ground floor. Residential and office uses are allowed in upper floors of mixed use buildings, and a totally residential building is also allowed. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
2.5.  HR-3: Corridor. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-3: Corridor sub-district is intended to provide a green frontage along Haywood Road to provide relief from the urban areas of the Core and Expansion sub-districts. Existing buildings should be reused where possible and new infill buildings should respect the traditional form and context. Buildings in the HR-3: Corridor sub-district with active ground floors are pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Residential buildings are set slightly further back from the street, providing a green edge along Haywood Road. A variety of uses are allowed in this sub-district, with a focus on residential and office uses. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
2.6.  HR-4: Traditional & HR-7: Traditional Community. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-4: Traditional and HR-7 Traditional Community sub-districts are intended to preserve existing buildings and to expand the historic character this center on Haywood Road. Existing buildings should be reused where possible and new infill buildings should respect the traditional form and context. Height requirements are set to ensure that existing buildings can compete successfully with new infill buildings. Buildings in the HR-4: Traditional and HR-7 Traditional Community sub-districts are pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Mixed use is encouraged, and a variety of commercial uses are allowed on the ground floor. Residential and office uses are allowed in upper floors of mixed use buildings, and a totally residential building is also allowed. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
2.7.  HR-5: Live-Work. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-5: Live-Work sub-district is intended for new residential or live-work buildings that address and conform to the steep topography of the area. Live-work buildings in the HR-5: Live-Work sub-district are pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Residential buildings are set slightly further back from the street. A variety of live-work and residential uses are allowed in this sub-district. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
2.8.  HR-6: Town. 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
The HR-6: Town sub-district is intended to provide a new center of activity where Haywood Road meets Patton Avenue. Redevelopment with new, taller buildings is encouraged in this sub-district in order to take advantage of the spectacular views afforded by this hilltop location. Mixed-use buildings in the HR-6: Town sub-district are pulled up to the sidewalk along Haywood Road to encourage pedestrian activity in the area. Buildings along Patton Avenue may be pulled back to allow limited parking between the building and the street. Mixed use is encouraged, and a variety of commercial uses are allowed on the ground floor. Residential and office uses are allowed in upper floors of mixed use buildings. 
 
STREET CROSS-SECTION 
 
1.  Lot criteria. 
 
2.  Siting. 
 
3.  Height. 
 
4.  Activation. 
 
3.0.  Land use. 
3.1.  Classification of uses. This section establishes the uses allowed. A lot or building must be occupied with only the uses allowed in this section. Any one or more allowed uses may be established on a lot, subject to the requirements of this section, and in compliance with all applicable requirements of this Haywood Road Form District. 
A.  Principal uses. 
1.  Allowed principal uses by sub-district are shown in the permitted use table in subsection 3.2. 
2.  Any use not listed is not allowed unless the planning and development director determines that the use is similar to a listed use. Prohibited uses found in the Table of Uses in 7-8-1d of this chapter also apply to the Haywood Road Form District. 
3.  When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use, the planning and development director will consider the following: 
a.  The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use. 
b.  The relative amount of site area or floor area and equipment devoted to the proposed use. 
c.  Relative amounts of sales. 
d.  The customer type. 
e.  The relative number of employees. 
f.  Hours of operation. 
g.  Building and site arrangement. 
h.  Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements. 
i.  The number of vehicle trips generated. 
j.  How the proposed use is advertised. 
k.  The likely impact on surrounding properties. 
l.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. 
4.  Where a use is determined not to be similar to any listed use, a text amendment is required prior to establishment of that use. 
B.  Accessory uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures are permitted in conjunction with an allowed principal use. Accessory uses and structures must be accessory and clearly and customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use or structure. 
2.  No accessory use or structure may be established prior to the establishment of a permitted principal use or structure. 
3.  All accessory structures must meet the requirements of subsection 2.0. 
4.  The planning and development director is authorized to determine when a use or structure is accessory. In order to classify a use or structure as accessory, the planning and development director must determine that the use or structure: 
a.  Is subordinate to the principal use in terms of area, extent and purpose; 
b.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use or structure served; 
c.  Is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership; 
d.  Does not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the principal use or structure served; and 
e.  Is not of a nature likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would normally be expected for the principal use or structure. 
C.  Temporary uses. 
1.  Temporary uses are allowed following provisions found in Article 14 of the UDO. 
3.2.  Permitted use table. 
	Core HR-1 	Expansion HR-2 	Corridor HR-3 	Tradi- 
tional 
HR-4 	Live-Work HR-5 	Town HR-6 	Tradi- 
tional 
Community HR-7 	Special Standards 
Residential 
Dwelling, single family detached 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 		— 	
Dwelling, duplex 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling, townhouse 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling, multifamily 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling, upper-story 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Assisted living facility 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Dormitory 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Group home 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Public and Institutional 
Civic, social service or fraternal organizations 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
College, university, vocational or technical school 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Community center 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Day-care center, adult or child 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Fire or police station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Government building and use 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Library, museum 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Park, playground, greenway 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Performance center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Place of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Post office without distribution facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Public utility and related facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
School 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Food, Beverage and Entertainment 
Eating/drinking establishment 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Eating/drinking establishment with drive-through 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	— 	Sec. 3.3.A 
Microbrewery 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Movie theater 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Nightclub 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Recreational uses, commercial indoor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Lodging 
Bed and breakfast inn 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(10) 
Boardinghouse 	— 	S 	S 	S 	— 	S 	S 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(11) 
Homestay 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(9) 
Hotel, extended stay 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Hotel, large 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Hotel, small 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Short-term vacation rental 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(64.1) 
Retail, Service and Office 
Art gallery 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Barber shop or beauty salon 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Business incubator 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Clinic, medical 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Clinic, veterinary 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Farm products market, flea market 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Financial Institution 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Financial Institution with drive-through 	— 	— 	S 	— 	— 	S 	— 	Sec. 3.3.A 
Funeral establishment 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	S 	S 	§ 7-16-1(c)(33) 
Gasoline sales 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	
Grocery store 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Hardware, garden supply store 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Health or fitness facility 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Hospital or medical center 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Instructional services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Laundry or dry cleaning 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Laundry or dry cleaning with drive-through 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Sec. 3.3.A 
Motor vehicle or boat service and repair 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	
Motor vehicle service facility 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Pharmacy 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Pharmacy with drive-through 	— 	— 	S 	— 	— 	S 	— 	Sec. 3.3.A 
Plant sales, nursery, greenhouse 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Print and publishing 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Research & technology production uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Retail sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Small engine service and repair 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	
Studio, gallery or workshop for arts and crafts, low impact 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	P 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Studio, gallery or workshop for arts and crafts, high impact 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Tailor or dressmaker 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Tattoo parlor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Other Use Types 
Agriculture 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	§ 7-16-1(c)(4.1) 
Light industrial 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Live work units 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parking deck, garage, structure 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Sec. 3.3.C 
Parking lot 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Sec. 3.3.D 
Telecommunication tower 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Telecommunication tower/support structure concealed 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Wireless telecommunication facility, microcell 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	§ 7-16-1(c)(75) 
Wireless telecommunication facility, co-location 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	§ 7-16-1(c)(77) 
Wireless telecommunication facility, (concealed) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	§ 7-16-1(c)(76) 
KEY: P = Permitted Use S= Permitted Use Subject to Special Standards C = Conditional Use — = Use Not Permitted 
 
3.3.  Special standards. 
A.  Drive-through facility. 
1.  Adequate space must be made available on-site for the stacking, storage and queuing of vehicles. 
2.  Vehicles using drive-through facilities may not encroach on or interfere with the public use of streets and sidewalks by vehicles or pedestrians. 
3.  All drive-through areas, including but not limited to menu boards, stacking lanes, trash receptacles, ordering box, drive up windows, and other objects associated with the drive-through area, must be located to the side or rear of the building. Drive-through windows and lanes may not be placed between the street and the associated building. 
4.  A restaurant with a drive-through must provide at least four queuing spaces, measured from the first pick-up window. 
5.  A bank or pharmacy with a drive-through must provide at least three queuing spaces per drive-through lane, measured from the teller box or window. 
6.  All other uses determined by the city traffic engineer. 
B.  Live-work. 
1.  In a mixed-use building containing live-work units, at a minimum, the ground floor primary street-facing façade must be activated with permitted commercial uses. This does not preclude other commercial spaces being included in additional locations in the building. 
2.  The live-work unit cannot exceed 1,500 square feet in gross floor area. 
C.  Parking structures. 
1.  Parking structures must meet all the requirements for a principal structure as specified in subsection 2.0. In no case can structured parking exceed the height of the principal building on the site. 
2.  The ground story of a structured parking garage facing Haywood Road or Patton Avenue must have active uses (such as, but not limited to, residential, commercial, office or civic space, where permitted) located between the parking structure and the street (not including an alley). 
3.  Where upper stories of structured parking are at the perimeter of a building, they must be screened so that cars are not visible from ground level view from adjacent property or adjacent public street right-of-way (not including an alley). 
4.  Architectural and vegetative screens must be used to articulate the façade, hide parked vehicles and shield lighting. In addition, any ground floor façade treatment (building materials, windows, and architectural detailing) must be continued on upper stories. 
5.  Parking structure entries must not exceed 16 feet clear height and 25 feet clear width. 
D.  Parking lots. 
1.  Parking lots are to be located on a parcel no closer to the street than the minimum building setback. Normal parking lot landscaping and screening from the street apply. 
4.0.  Site development. 
4.1.  Parking. 
A.  Applicability. The parking requirements of section 7-11-2 apply in the Haywood Road Form District, except the sections identified below: 
1.  Subsection 7-11-2(c), Off-Street Parking Requirements; 
2.  Subsection 7-11-2(d), Off-Street Loading Requirements; and 
3.  Subsection 7-11-2(e)(2), Remote Parking. 
4.  Subsection 7-11-2(f), On-street parking spaces. Existing or newly created on-street spaces are counted one for one to meet parking requirements. 
B.  Required parking. The following minimum vehicle and bicycle parking spaces are required. 
Use 	Vehicle Parking Spaces (min) 	Bicycle Parking (min) 
	HR-1: Core HR-2: Expansion 	HR-3 Corridor HR-4: Traditional HR-6: Town HR-7: Trad. Comm. 	HR-5: Live-Work 	Spaces 	Short-term/Long term 
Existing Building 
Eating/drinking establishment, microbrewery, nightclub 	1 per 250 sf 	same as new building 	same as new building 	same as new building 	same as new building 
All other uses 	none 	same as new building 	same as new building 	same as new building 	same as new building 
New Building or Addition 
Dwelling, multifamily or upper-story 	1 per unit (upper story only) 	1 per unit 	1 per unit 	.5 per unit up to 2 bedrooms plus .25 per additional bedroom 	80%/20% 
All other residential uses 	1 per unit 	1 per unit 	1 per unit 	none 	— 
Park, playground, greenway, fire or police station, public utility or related facility 	none 	none 	none 	none 	— 
Place of worship 	greater of 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 40 sf 	greater of 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 40 sf 	greater of 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 40 sf 	1 per 5,000 sf 2 min 	90%/10% 
All other public and institutional uses 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 5,000 sf 2 min 	90%/10% 
All food, beverage and entertainment uses 	1 per 250 sf 	1 per 250 sf 	— 	1 per 2,500 sf 2 min 	80%/20% 
All lodging uses 	1 per guest room 	1 per guest room 	1 per guest room 	1 per 2,500 SF 2 min 	80%/20% 
Health and fitness facility 	1 per 250 sf 	1 per 250 sf 	1 per 250 sf 	1/2,500 SF 2 min 	80%/20% 
All other retail, service and office uses 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 500 sf 	1/2,500 SF 2 min 	80%/20% 
All other uses types 	none 	none 	none 	none 	— 
 
C.  Location of required vehicle parking. Required vehicle parking must be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve, except as listed below. 
1.  On-street parking. See subsection 7-11-2.(f). 
2.  Remote parking. 
a.  All required parking spaces can be located off-site if the remote parking area is located within 660 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. Accessible parking spaces shall meet building code requirements. 
b.  Up to 50% of the required parking spaces may be located more than 660 feet off-site, if the parking area is located within 1,320 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. 
c.  Specifically designated parking spaces for employees may be located off-site up to 2,640 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. 
d.  All remote parking spaces used to meet an on-site parking requirement must be located within the boundaries of the Haywood Road Corridor District or other commercial districts; except that parking spaces for permitted non-residential uses in a residential district may be used for corridor parking. 
e.  The off-site parking area is measured in walking distance from the nearest point of the remote parking area to the primary entrance of the use served. 
f.  Any remote parking spaces must be guaranteed by a written agreement between the owner of the remote parking area and the owner of the use served by the remote parking area. Change of ownership of either parcel requires a renewal of the agreement. 
D.  Location of required bike parking. 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Bicycle parking spaces must be located on paved or pervious, dust-free surface with a slope no greater than three percent. Surfaces cannot be gravel, landscape stone, or wood chips. 
b.  Bicycle parking spaces must be a minimum of two feet by six feet. There must be an access aisle a minimum of five feet in width. 
c.  Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle and its placement must not result in a bicycle obstructing a required walkway. 
d.  Up to 25 percent of bicycle parking may be structured parking, vertical parking or wall mount parking, provided there is a five-foot access aisle for wall mount parking. 
e.  All racks must accommodate cable locks and "U" locks and must permit the locking of the bicycle frame and one wheel to the rack and must support a bicycle in a stable position. 
2.  Short-term bicycle parking. Required short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in a convenient and visible area at least as close as the closest non-accessible vehicle parking and within 100 feet. 
3.  Long-term bicycle parking. 
a.  Required long-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in enclosed and secured or supervised areas providing protection from theft, vandalism and weather and must be accessible to intended users. 
b.  Required long-term bicycle parking for residential uses can be located within dwelling units or within deck, patio areas, or private storage areas accessory to dwelling units. 
c.  With permission of the planning and development director, long-term bicycle parking spaces for nonresidential uses may be located off-site within 300 feet of the site. 
d.  The off-site parking area is measured in walking distance from the nearest point of the remote parking area to the closest primary entrance of the use served. 
E.  Required vehicle loading. 
1.  General provisions. 
a.  Loading and unloading activities may not encroach on or interfere with the use of sidewalks, drive aisles, queuing areas and parking areas by vehicles or pedestrians. 
b.  With the exception of areas specifically designated by the city, loading and unloading activities are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
c.  If determined necessary by the planning and development director, adequate space must be made available on-site for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping. 
2.  Location. If a loading area is required or provided, it must meet the following. 
a.  The loading area must be located on the same lot occupied by the use served and must be accessible from a public street or alley. 
b.  The loading area must be located to the side or rear of buildings. Loading areas may not be placed between the street and the associated building. 
4.2.  Landscaping and screening. 
A.  Applicability. The landscape and buffering requirements of section 7-11-3 apply in the Haywood Road Form District, except as identified below: 
1.  The Haywood Road Form District is exempt from subsection 7-11-3(d)(5), Building impact landscaping and subsection 7-11-3(d)(7), Tree save areas. 
2.  Any Haywood Road Form District may modify the street buffer requirement of subsection 7-11-3(d)(5) by placing a wall at a minimum height of three feet in place of the required shrubs. 
3.  When abutting a RS or RM district, the property line buffer requirements of subsection 7-11-3(d)(1) for a Type A Bufferyard apply, except that when a wall is used (as described below), the bufferyard may be provided as follows: 
 
a.  Depth: 10 feet min. 
b.  Wall height: 6 feet min./8 feet max. 
c.  Evergreen Trees: 3. 
d.  Deciduous Trees (large): 3. 
e.  Shrubs (large): 8. 
B.  Grading. 
1.  Speculative grading of land is not permitted within the Haywood Road Form District. No grading or removal of vegetation is permitted prior to approval of a site development plan. 
2.  Natural slopes in excess of 45 degrees must not be graded, and existing vegetation must not be removed. 
4.3.  Signs. 
A.  Applicability. The sign requirements of Article XIII apply in the Haywood Road Form District, except as identified below: 
1.  Subsection 7-13-4(a)(8)(a). See subsection 4.3.H for temporary and permanent window sign requirements. 
2.  A-frame signs are permitted as temporary signs, provided they comply with the requirements of subsection 7-13-4(a)(8)(c). 
B.  Sign types allowed by district. Signs are allowed by sub-district as set forth below. Specific requirements for each sign are shown on the following pages. 
	Core HR-1 	Expansion HR-2 	Corridor HR-3 	Traditional HR-4 	Live-Work HR-5 	Town HR-6 	Traditional Community HR-7 
Wall Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Awning Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Canopy Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Projecting Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Window Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Post Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 
Monument Sign 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P * 	— 
A-Frame Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
KEY: P = Sign type allowed — = Sign type not allowed * = Allowed on sites with street frontage on Patton Ave 
 
C.  Number of signs allowed. 
1.  Wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs. A maximum of two signs on a primary street (any combination of wall signs, awning signs or canopy signs) are allowed per tenant space. One additional sign is allowed on a side street. 
2.  Projecting signs. A maximum of one projecting sign is allowed per tenant space. 
3.  Window signs. The number of window signs is unlimited, provided the maximum percentage of all temporary and permanent signs covering ground story windows and doors is not exceeded. 
4.  Post sign, monument sign. 
a.  Where allowed, only one post sign or monument sign is allowed per street frontage, provided all signs are conforming. 
b.  One additional post sign or monument sign is allowed for properties with 1,000 feet or more of street frontage. Where more than one post sign or monument sign is allowed, signs along the same street frontage must be spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart. 
c.  Where a post sign is installed, only one wall, awning or canopy sign is allowed per tenant space. 
5.  A-Frame signs. A-Frame signs will follow regulations found in the City Code of Ordinances concerning placement and size and process for approving such signage. 
D.  Wall sign. 
 
E.  Awning sign. 
 
F.  Canopy sign. 
 
G.  Projecting sign. 
 
H.  Window sign. 
 
I.  Post sign. 
 
J.  Monument sign. 
 
K.  Illumination. Illumination of signs must be in accordance with the following requirements. 
1.  Illumination permitted by sign type. 
	Internal 	External 
Wall Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
Awning Sign 	No 	No 
Canopy Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
Projecting Sign 	No 	Yes 
Window Sign 	No 	No 
Post Sign 	No 	Yes 
Monument Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
 
2.  Prohibited light sources. 
a.  Blinking, flashing and chasing. 
b.  Bare bulb illumination. 
c.  Colored lights used in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
d.  Direct reflected light that creates a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
e.  Lights that outline property lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows or similar area are prohibited, except for seasonal lighting or very low luminosity lighting displays using multiple lamps. 
3.  External illumination. 
a.  Lighting directed toward a sign must be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly onto public right-of-way or adjacent properties. 
b.  Lighting fixtures must be directed downward rather than upward. 
c.  Projecting light fixtures used for externally illuminated signs must be simple and unobtrusive in appearance and not obscure the sign. 
 
4.  Internal illumination. 
a.  Channel letters may be internally lit or back-lit. 
b.  For cabinet signs, the background must be opaque or a darker color than the message of the sign. 
c.  Exposed neon may be used for lettering or as an accent. 
5.  Raceways and transformers. 
a.  If a raceway is necessary, it cannot extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign. 
b.  A raceway must be finished to match the background wall or canopy, or integrated into the overall design of the sign. 
c.  Visible transformers are not allowed. 
4.4.  Outdoor display and storage. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply where merchandise, material or equipment is stored outside of a completely enclosed building. 
B.  Outdoor display. 
1.  Defined. 
a.  The outdoor display of products actively available for sale. The outdoor placement of propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink, video rentals or similar vending machines is considered outdoor display. 
b.  Outdoor display does not include merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers (see limited outdoor storage). 
2.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor display is only allowed with a permitted ground floor nonresidential use. 
b.  Outdoor display must abut the primary façade with the principal customer entrance, and may not extend more than six feet from the façade or occupy more than 25 percent of the horizontal length of the façade. 
c.  Outdoor display cannot exceed six feet in height. 
d.  Outdoor display must be removed and placed inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of each business day, except propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink, video rentals or similar vending machines may remain outside overnight. 
e.  Outdoor display may not encroach upon any public right-of-way or sidewalk. Outdoor display may not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk. There must be a minimum of six feet of clear distance of sidewalk at all times. 
C.  Outdoor storage. 
1.  Defined. 
a.  Outdoor storage is the overnight storage of products or materials outside of a building. 
b.  Outdoor storage includes merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or in shipping containers, the overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair, RV's and boats, garden supplies, building supplies, plants, fleet vehicles and other similar merchandise, material, vehicles, or equipment. 
2.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor storage is not permitted except with planning and zoning commission approval. 
b.  The planning and zoning commission will determine where outdoor storage may be allowed on the site, and its extent (vertically and horizontally) must be shown on an approved site plan. 
5.0.  Administration. 
5.1.  Form-based code administration. 
A.  UDO administrative procedures apply. The administrative procedures of the city's Unified Development Ordinance (chapter 7 of the Municipal Code) apply to this form-based code, except as expressly modified below. 
B.  Pre-application conference required. A pre-application conference with the city's planning and development staff is required prior to any application for approval under this form-based code. 
6.0.  Definitions. 
6.1.  Defined terms. 
A.  General meaning of words and terms. 
1.  All words and terms used have their commonly accepted and ordinary meaning unless they are specifically defined in this Haywood Road Form District or the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary. 
2.  When vagueness or ambiguity is found to exist as to the meaning of any word or term used, any appropriate canon, maxim, principle or other technical rule of interpretations or construction used by the courts of this state may be employed to resolve vagueness and ambiguity in language. 
3.  Terms defined for the purpose of the Haywood Road Form District may be found in section 7-2-5. 
(Ord. No. 4342, § 1e, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 4630, § 1, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1i, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-8-29. - River Arts Form District. 
1.0.  General provisions. 
1.1.  Purpose. The purpose of the River Arts Form District is to implement the City Development Plan 2025, Riverside Drive Development Plan, the River Redevelopment Plan and the River Arts District Form-Based Code Charrette Report. 
1.2.  Intent. It is the intent of this River Arts Form District to: 
A.  Maintain the industrial and creative arts feel of the district; 
B.  Retain an environment that supports working artists and their studios; 
C.  Support the adaptive re-use of existing buildings; 
D.  Improve connections and mobility while balancing walking, biking and vehicular options; 
E.  Apply flood damage prevention requirements that enhance resiliency; 
F.  Allow for development intensities that support future infrastructure improvements; 
G.  Ensure that new development supports the community's vision for the district; and 
H.  Add predictability for residents, tenants and owners. 
1.3.  Applicability. 
A.  Territorial application. The River Arts Form District applies to all property located within the River Arts Form District boundary as shown in subsection 2.1. 
B.  Application of chapter 7, Development. 
1.  All development within the River Arts Form District shall conform with the requirements of chapter 7. The following requirements of chapter 7 do not apply in the River Arts Form District, unless expressly stated otherwise: 
a.  Section 7-10-2. Required setbacks; allowable encroachments into required setbacks. 
b.  Section 7-11-4. Open space standards. 
c.  Section 7-11-6. Traffic impact analysis. 
d.  Section 7-8-1d. Table of uses. 
2.  The use of buildings and land within the River Arts Form District is subject to all applicable local, state, and federal regulations as well as the River Arts Form District, whether or not such other provisions are specifically referenced in the River Arts Form District. References to other regulations or provisions of the River Arts Form District are for the convenience of the reader. The lack of a cross-reference does not exempt a land, building, structure or use from other regulations. 
C.  Conflicting provisions. 
1.  Interpretation of conflicts between the River Arts Form District and any other city ordinance or regulation (including chapter 7) are controlled by the River Arts Form District. 
2.  The graphics, illustrations and photographs used to visually explain certain provisions of River Arts Form District are for illustrative purposes only. Where there is a conflict between a graphic, illustration or photograph and the text, the text controls. 
1.4.  Transitional provisions. 
A.  New development. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 1.4.C below, upon the effective date of the River Arts Form District or any subsequent amendment, any new building or other structure or any use of land must be constructed or developed only in accordance with all applicable provisions of the River Arts Form District. 
2.  No excavation or filling of land or construction of any public or private improvements may take place or commence except in conformity with the River Arts Form District. 
B.  Existing development. Any existing use, lot, building or other structure legally established prior to the effective date of the River Arts Form District that does not comply with any provision of these specific regulations is a legal non-conformity pursuant to article 18. 
C.  Previously issued permits and pending applications. Previously issued permits and pending applications will be processed in accordance with and decided pursuant to the law existing on the date the application was filed. 
2.0.  Districts. 
2.1.  Districts established. 
 
2.2.  Rules applicable to all districts. The following general rules apply to all River Arts sub-districts unless expressly stated otherwise. 
A.  Lot. 
1.  Defined. A parcel of land either vacant or occupied intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or for the future, of transfer of ownership, or possession, or for development. 
2.  Lot area. Lot area is the area included within the rear, side and front lot lines. Lot area does not include existing or proposed right-of-way, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use. 
3.  Lot width. Lot width is the distance between the two side lot lines measured at the primary street property line along a straight line or along the chord of the property line on a curvilinear lot. 
 
B.  Building coverage. 
1.  The maximum area of the lot that is permitted to be covered by buildings, including both principal structures, structured parking and roofed accessory structures, including gazebos. 
2.  Building coverage does not include paved areas such as driveways, uncovered porches or patios, decks, swimming pools, porte cochere, or roof overhangs of two feet or less. Surface parking is not considered part of building coverage. 
 
C.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Generally. There are four types of setbacks - primary street, side street, side interior and rear. Building setbacks apply to both principal and accessory buildings and structures except where explicitly stated otherwise. 
 
2.  Measurement of building setbacks. 
a.  The primary street setback is measured at a right angle from the primary street right-of-way line. In cases where required streetscape elements are installed on private property the building setbacks shall be measured from the back of the streetscape elements. 
b.  On corner lots, the side street setback is measured at a right angle from the side street right-of-way line. 
c.  The rear setback is measured at a right angle from the rear property line or the rear right-of-way or easement line where there is an alley. The rear property line is the property line opposite to the primary street property line. 
d.  All lot lines which are not primary street, side street or rear lot lines are considered side interior lot lines for the purpose of measuring setbacks. Side interior setbacks are measured at a right angle from the side property line. 
e.  In cases where a PUE is on private property the building setbacks may be measured from the easement line or the setback may reduced to zero feet from the easement line. 
3.  Primary street designation. 
a.  Where only one street abuts a lot, that street is considered a primary street. 
b.  The following streets are considered primary streets: 
i.  Clingman Avenue and Clingman Extension: 
ii.  Craven Street; 
iii.  Depot Street; 
iv.  Haywood Road; 
v.  Lyman Street; 
vi.  Ralph Street; 
vii.  Riverside Drive; and 
viii.  Roberts Street. 
c.  A lot can have more than one primary street. 
D.  Parking setbacks. 
1.  All parking spaces must be located behind the parking setback line. Underground parking may encroach into a required parking setback but cannot extend into a required easement or the right-of-way. 
2.  The parking setback applies to surface parking and to the ground story only of a building. 
3.  Parking setbacks are measured from the right-of-way. 
E.  Parking location for townhouses/multifamily. 
1.  General. Garage doors used for the parking of vehicles must be placed entirely to the rear of the unit and be rear-accessed and must face the rear alley or easement. 
 
2.  RAD-RES. In RAD-RES, garage doors may face the street provided the following are met: 
a.  Garage doors may constitute no more than 50 percent of the width of the individual townhouse unit. 
b.  Combined parking and driveway area cannot be more than 50 percent of the area between the front building facade and the front property line. 
c.  Any parking in the front setback must have sufficient depth so that parked cars do not encroach on the adjacent sidewalk. To provide sufficient depth, the garage doors must be set back at least 20 feet from the sidewalk. 
d.  Garage doors must be recessed at least one foot behind the front wall plane or a second-story element over the garage doors must be provided that extends at least one foot beyond the front wall plane. 
 
F.  Build-to zone (BTZ). 
1.  Defined. 
a.  The build-to zone (BTZ) is the area on the lot where a certain percentage of the front building facade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum setback range from the edge of the right-of-way. In cases where required streetscape elements are installed on private property the building setbacks shall be measured from the back of the streetscape elements. 
 
b.  The required percentage specifies the amount of the front building facade that must be located in the build-to zone, measured based on the width of the building divided by the width of the lot. In cases where driveway access is needed, the driveway width may be removed from the BTZ calculations. 
c.  The build-to zone applies up to the minimum required building height. 
2.  Corner lots. On a corner lot, a building facade must be placed within the build-to zone (BTZ) for the first 30 feet along the street extending from the block corner, measured from the intersection of the two right-of-way lines. 
 
3.  Uses allowed. With the exception of parking spaces and outdoor storage, all structures and uses (including outdoor dining) allowed on the lot are allowed in the build-to zone (BTZ). 
4.  Driveways. In no case will driveway access to a lot be denied because of the build-to requirement. 
G.  Nonconforming build-to zone. 
1.  Additions. Expansion of an existing building which is unable to meet the build-to requirement, must comply with the following nonconforming provisions: 
a.  Front: Addition. Any addition to the front that exceed 50 percent of the existing footprint must be placed in the build-to zone; however, the addition does not have to meet the build-to percentage for the lot. A front addition is not allowed on a contributing structure in a National Register Historic District or a structure that is eligible for historic designation (although a variance may be granted where a hardship exists, including but not limited to a conflict with the NC Building Code or specific purposes for the addition that make a front location the most technically, not financially feasible option). 
 
b.  Rear: Addition. Rear additions are allowed because the extension does not increase the degree of the nonconformity. 
 
c.  Side: Addition. Side additions meeting the following conditions are allowed: 
i.  The side addition is no greater than 500 square feet in area or 20 percent of the existing building footprint, (whichever is greater), and is less than 50 percent of the existing building width measured along the primary street. 
 
ii.  In the case of a contributing structure in a National Register Historic District (or a structure eligible for designation), the side addition must be placed no closer than five feet from the street-facing facade of the building. 
2.  New buildings. Where a new building is being constructed on a lot or site with an existing building on it that doesn't meet the build-to requirement, the following nonconforming provisions apply. 
a.  Front: New Building. All new buildings must be placed in the build-to zone until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
b.  Rear: New Building. New buildings located outside of the build-to zone are not allowed until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
c.  Side: New Building. New buildings located outside of the build-to zone are not allowed until the build-to percentage for the lot has been met. 
 
d.  Accessory Structures: New Structure. New accessory structures must be placed behind or to the side of the principal building. Outdoor dining may be placed at the front of the lot to enhance activity at the sidewalk. 
H.  Setback encroachments. All buildings and structures must be located at or behind the required setbacks except as listed below. Unless specifically stated, no building or structure can extend into a required easement or public right-of-way. 
1.  Building features. 
a.  Arcades, awnings/canopies, balconies, front porches and stoops may encroach into a required primary or side street setback as stated in subsection 2.2.R. 
b.  Raised entries may extend into a required primary or side street setback as stated in subsection 2.2.S. 
c.  Building eaves, roof overhangs, gutters, downspouts, light shelves, bay windows and oriels less than ten feet wide, cornices, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features may encroach up to three feet into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.  Chimneys or flues may encroach up to four feet, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
e.  Unenclosed patios, decks, balconies, stoops, porches, terraces or fire escapes may encroach into a side interior or rear setback, provided that such extension is at least six feet from the vertical plane of any lot line and bufferyard requirements, if any, are met. 
f.  Handicap ramps may encroach to the extent necessary to perform their proper function. 
g.  Structures below and covered by the ground may encroach into a required setback. 
2.  Low impact stormwater features. 
a.  Low impact stormwater management features may encroach up to two feet into a primary street setback (but not into the required sidewalk), including, but not limited to: 
i.  Rain barrels or cisterns, six feet or less in height; 
ii.  Planter boxes; 
iii.  Bio-retention areas; and 
iv.  Similar features, as determined by the city engineer. 
b.  Low impact stormwater management features listed above may encroach into a side interior or rear setback, provided such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
3.  Mechanical equipment and utility lines. 
a.  For residential buildings only, mechanical equipment such as HVAC units and security lighting, may encroach into a required rear or side interior setback, provided that such extension is at least three feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
b.  Minor structures accessory to utilities (such as hydrants, manholes, and transformers and other cabinet structures) may encroach into a required rear, side interior or side street setback. 
4.  Other setback encroachments. 
a.  Fences and walls under section 7-10-3. 
b.  Property line buffers under subsection 4.2. 
c.  Signs under subsection 4.3. 
I.  Building height. 
1.  Building height is regulated in both number of stories and feet and is measured from the average grade to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel roof or to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof, not including a maximum six-foot high parapet wall encroachment. In no case is a parapet allowed to exceed six feet in height above the roof deck. 
 
2.  Average grade is determined by calculating the average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or improved grade (whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the primary street setback line. 
 
3.  Except for RAD-IND and RAD-OSP, new principal structures must be a minimum height of two stories, however one-story additions under 500 square feet cumulatively are permitted. Any required second story must be finished out with habitable space. All permitted industrial uses are also exempt from the minimum two story height limit but must be a minimum height of 24 feet. 
4.  An attic does not count as a story where 50 percent or more of the attic floor area has a clear height of less than seven and one-half feet; measured from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
 
5.  A basement with 50 percent or more of its perimeter wall area surrounded by natural grade is not considered a story. 
J.  Height encroachments. Any height encroachment not listed below is prohibited. 
1.  The maximum height limits of the district do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, smoke stacks or other type of structure not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water tanks, beer tanks, water towers or other similar structures which, by design or function, must exceed the established height limits. 
2.  The following specified accessory structures, building and site features, and mechanical equipment may exceed the established height limit provided they do not exceed the maximum height by more than six feet: 
a.  Chimney, flue or vent stack; 
b.  Flagpole; 
c.  Vegetation associated with a rooftop garden or landscaping; 
d.  Skylights; 
e.  Parapet wall; and 
f.  Solar panels, wind turbines and rainwater collection systems. 
3.  The following may exceed the established height limits provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than ten feet, do not occupy more than 25 percent of the roof area, and are set back at least ten feet from the edge of the roof: 
a.  Elevator or stairway access to roof; 
b.  Rooftop shade structure; 
c.  Greenhouse; and 
d.  Mechanical equipment. 
4.  Any of the elements listed in paragraphs 2. and 3. above are considered accessory to the principal structure and must not be used for any purpose other than as incidental to the principal structure. 
K.  Ground floor elevation. 
1.  Ground floor elevation is measured from top of the adjacent curb to the top of the finished ground floor. 
2.  Minimum ground floor elevation applies to the first 30 feet of the lot measured from the right-of-way line, except where ground floor elevation must meet the requirements of section 7-12-1 Flood Protection. 
 
3.  Ground floor elevation must meet the requirements of the NC Building Code. 
L.  Story height. 
1.  Story height is measured from the top of the finished floor to the ceiling above. 
2.  Minimum ground story height applies to the first 30 feet of the building measured inward from the street-facing facade. At least 50 percent of the ground story must meet the minimum height provisions. 
3.  At least 80 percent of each upper story must meet the minimum upper story height provisions. 
 
M.  Building stepbacks. In RAD-NT and RAD-SHP, certain upper stories must be stepped back from the right-of-way line by at least ten feet. A maximum of 20 percent of the building facade width may encroach into the ten foot stepback as shown below. 
 
N.  Transparency. 
 
1.  The minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover a ground or upper story facade is measured from top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate. The percentage is derived for each story based on the transparent area of all ground or upper story windows and doors divided by the total area of the ground or upper story facade. 
2.  Transparency applies to primary and side street-facing facades only. 
3.  Glass is considered transparent where it has a transparency higher than 80 percent and external reflectance of less than 15 percent. 
4.  An opening to a parking garage is not considered transparency. 
5.  Any glass in a garage door for a restaurant or entertainment use (and not for loading purposes) is considered transparent. 
6.  Garage doors that have no or limited transparency that can be rolled up during regular business hours (and are not used for the storing or parking of cars) can count for up to 50 percent of a transparency requirement. 
O.  Blank wall area. 
1.  Blank wall area means a portion of the exterior facade of the building that does not include: windows or doors; columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth; or a substantial material change (paint color is not considered a substantial change). The same material used in a different pattern does not constitute a substantial material change. 
 
2.  Blank wall area applies horizontally to ground and upper story primary and side street-facing facades. 
P.  Pedestrian access. 
1.  An entrance providing both ingress and egress, operable to residents or customers at all times during operating hours, is required to meet the street-facing entrance requirements. Additional entrances off another street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are permitted. 
2.  The entrance spacing requirements must be met for each building, but are not applicable to adjacent buildings. 
 
3.  Doors are not permitted to swing into a public right-of-way. 
4.  An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a building along the street to meet the street-facing entrance requirements. 
5.  See subsection 2.2.S for additional entry requirements in flood prone areas. 
Q.  Streetscape. 
1.  If an appropriate width sidewalk and street trees do not exist or do not meet the subdistrict requirements, the developer is responsible for the installation of sidewalk and street trees as shown in subsection 2.3 through subsection 2.9. Modified dimensions may be approved by the city traffic engineer to account for existing street widths and building locations. 
2.  The required sidewalk may be wholly or partially located on private property, provided the sidewalk is located within an easement permanently dedicated to the city. 
3.  If a public utility easement (PUE) prevents the planting of trees under power lines, an applicant does not have to seek alternative compliance. 
R.  Building elements. Individual building elements are allowed for by sub-district (see subsection 2.3 through subsection 2.9). 
 
1.  Arcade. A covered passage supported by arches or columns that is open on three sides with enclosed habitable space above. 
a.  An arcade must have a clear depth from the support columns to the building's facade of at least eight feet and a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. 
b.  An arcade must be contiguous and extend over at least 75 percent of the width of the building facade from which it projects. 
c.  An arcade cannot encroach into a required setback or the public right-of-way. 
 
2.  Awning/canopy. A wall-mounted, cantilevered structure providing shade and cover from the weather for a sidewalk. 
a.  An awning/canopy must be a minimum of nine feet clear height above the sidewalk and must have a minimum depth of three feet. The planning and urban design director may approve a modification to these standards in order to fit an awning or canopy on an existing building. 
b.  An awning/canopy may extend into a required setback above private property. 
c.  An awning/canopy may encroach up to nine feet into the public right-of-way but must be at least two feet inside the curb line or edge of pavement, whichever is greater. The encroachment requires city approval. 
 
3.  Balcony. A platform projecting from the wall of an upper-story of a building with a railing along its outer edge, often with access from a door or window. 
a.  A balcony extend up to six feet into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
b.  A balcony must have a clear height above the sidewalk of at least nine feet. 
c.  A balcony may be covered and screened, but cannot be fully enclosed. 
d.  A balcony may encroach up to 6 feet into the public right-of-way but must be at least two feet inside the curb line or edge of pavement, whichever is greater. The encroachment requires city approval. 
 
4.  Front porch. A raised structure attached to a building, forming a covered entrance to a doorway. 
a.  A front porch must be at least six feet deep (not including the steps). 
b.  A front porch must be contiguous, with a width not less than 33 percent of the building facade from which it projects. 
c.  A front porch must be roofed and may be screened, but cannot be fully enclosed. 
d.  A front porch may extend up to nine feet, including the steps, into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
e.  A front porch may not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
 
5.  Stoop. A small raised platform that serves as an entrance to a building. 
a.  A stoop must be no more than six feet deep (not including the steps) and six feet wide. 
b.  A stoop may be covered but cannot be fully enclosed (must not be screened in). 
c.  A stoop may extend up to six feet, including the steps, into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.  A stoop may not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
S.  Flood area building entries. In flood prone areas, one of the following entry treatments must be used to meet the street-facing entry requirement. 
 
1.  Raised entry, external. Stairs attached to the outside of a building that provides pedestrian access to the first occupiable floor in a flood prone area. 
a.  Where parking is provided within or below a building on the ground level, the parking area must be screened from the right-of-way with a street wall that is at least 25 percent but no more than 75 percent opaque. 
b.  The area between the street-facing building facade and the sidewalk must be planted at ground level, or in raised planters or planting beds permanently affixed to the ground. Plantings must consist of shrubs within six feet of the building facade that attain a height of at least three feet. Planting is not required at entrances to and exits from the building or within driveways. Seating areas and public art are encouraged but not required. 
c.  A raised external entry may extend into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.  Handrails and fences shall be a maximum of 75 percent opaque. 
 
2.  Raised entry, internal. An at-grade building entrance that provides access to shared entry area of a building in a flood prone area. 
a.  A lobby with a minimum width of 20 feet must be provided along the street-facing building facade at the level of the adjoining sidewalk with a depth of at least ten feet. Transparency must be applied to at least 40 percent of the surface area of the street-facing building facade. 
b.  Where parking is provided within or below a building on the ground level, the parking area must be screened from the right-of-way with a street wall that is at least 25 percent but no more than 75 percent opaque. 
c.  The area between the street-facing building facade and the sidewalk must be planted at ground level, or in raised planters or planting beds permanently affixed to the ground. Plantings must consist of shrubs within six feet of the building facade that attain a height of at least three feet. Planting is not required at entrances to and exits from the building or within driveways. Seating areas and public art are encouraged but not required. 
 
3.  Raised entry, staircase. A staircase integral to the building that provides pedestrian access to the first occupiable floor in a flood prone area. 
a.  Stairs must be constructed between grade and the lowest occupiable floor and the staircase must be a minimum width of ten feet. 
b.  Where parking is provided within or below a building on the ground level, the parking area must be screened from the right-of-way with a street wall that is at least 25 percent but no more than 75 percent opaque. 
c.  The area between the street-facing building facade and the sidewalk must be planted at ground level, or in raised planters or planting beds permanently affixed to the ground. Plantings must consist of shrubs within six feet of the building facade that attain a height of at least three feet. Planting is not required at entrances to and exits from the building or within driveways. Seating areas and public art are encouraged but not required. 
d.  The stairs may extend into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
T.  Maximum building length options. Street-facing building length is the maximum length of a building before a new building must be constructed. The following options can be used to meet the maximum street-facing building length set for each sub-district. 
1.  Flood prone areas. 
 
a.  Parking podium. A one-story parking podium may break the maximum street-facing building length requirement provided the following standards are met every 200 feet: 
i.  A raised staircase is provided (see subsection 2.2.S.3). 
ii.  A direct pedestrian connection on top of the parking podium is provided from the front of the lot to the rear, or to the intersecting alley or street behind. 
iii.  The distance between buildings on top of the parking podium is at least 15 feet. 
 
b.  Upper stories. Stories above the first occupiable story may also break the maximum street-facing building length requirement provided the following standards are met every 200 feet: 
i.  A raised staircase is provided (see subsection 2.2.S.3). 
ii.  A direct pedestrian connection on top of the parking podium is provided from the front of the lot to the rear, or to the intersecting alley or street behind. 
iii.  The pedestrian connection is at least 15 feet in width and has a clear height of at least 11 feet. 
iv.  For the width of the staircase, stories above the first occupiable story must be set back at least 15 feet from the front facade of the parking podium. 
2.  Non-flood prone areas. 
 
a.  Upper stories. The upper stories of building may break the maximum street-facing building length requirement provided the following standards are met every 150/200 feet (as applicable): 
i.  A direct pedestrian connection is provided from the front of the lot to the rear, or to the intersecting alley or street behind. 
ii.  The pedestrian connection is at least 15 feet in width and has a clear height of at least 12 feet. 
iii.  For the width of the pedestrian connection, upper stories must be set back at least 15 feet from the front facade of the building. 
U.  Use of materials. 
1.  Traditional materials such as brick, terracotta, natural stone, cast stone, metal, glass, concrete are preferred for new construction and renovations. Non-traditional materials such as unpainted rough-sawn wood and materials with a rustic image are used carefully and in ways that relate to their traditional context. The use of modern sustainable or green materials may justify deviations from the use of traditional materials. Synthetic finishing system materials are not permitted at the ground or street level. 
2.  Primary material changes must occur only at inside corners or where they wrap around an outside corner a minimum of two feet. 
 
2.3.  RAD-RES: Residential. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-RES is intended to accommodate a variety of small-scale residential buildings that address and conform to the topography of the area. 
2.  Height. Building height is limited to 3 stories. 
3.  Front setbacks. Buildings must be pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity. 
4.  Use. A variety of residential uses are allowed. Live/work and home occupations are allowed subject to standards that limit the extent of the nonresidential activity. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Access and parking. 
 
E.  Bulk and mass. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.4.  RAD-LYH: Lyman Hollow. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-LHY is intended to accommodate a variety of large-scale residential, commercial and mixed use buildings that address and conform to the topography of the area. 
2.  Height. Building height is limited to five stories. 
3.  Front setbacks. Buildings setbacks are more flexible to allow for a variety of building and parking placement options. 
4.  Use. A broad range of commercial, employment, light industrial and residential activity is allowed. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Access and parking. 
 
E.  Height. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.5.  RAD-NT: Neighborhood Transition. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-NT is intended to accommodate a variety of small-scale residential, commercial and mixed use buildings that address and conform to the topography of the area, taking into consideration nearby residential zoning. 
2.  Height. 
a.  Maximum building heights is four stories except for the following: 
i.  Height is limited to three stories when it is adjacent to residentially zoned property (RS, RM districts). 
ii.  Where properties are accessed from side streets adjacent to residential zoning, height is limited to three stories. 
b.  Buildings that back to the French Broad River can utilize the topography for additional height below the grade of the access street. 
3.  Front setbacks. Ground floor facades must be pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity. However, to help ensure compatibility along the street, the 4th story (where allowed) must be stepped back from the street. 
4.  Use. A broad range of commercial and residential uses are allowed. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Access and parking. 
 
E.  Height. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.6.  RAD-SHP: Shopfront. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-SHP is intended to accommodate a variety of mixed use buildings that address and conform to the topography of the area. This area is characterized by narrower ROWs and a walkable pedestrian environment. 
2.  Height. Building height is limited to four stories. However, an additional story is allowed for the provision of affordable units. 
3.  Front setbacks. Ground floor facades must be pulled up to the sidewalk to encourage pedestrian activity. However, to help ensure compatibility along the street, 3rd, 4th and 5th stories must be stepped back from the street. 
4.  Use. A broad range of commercial and residential uses are allowed. However, to encourage maximum levels of pedestrian activity, ground floor residential uses are not allowed. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Access and parking. 
 
E.  Height. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.7.  RAD-RIV: River. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-RIV is intended to accommodate a variety of medium to large-scale residential, commercial and mixed use buildings that address and conform to the flood zone protection requirements. 
2.  Height. Building height is limited to five stories. However, additional stories are allowed for the provision of affordable units as provided in subsection 2.7.E. 
3.  Front setbacks. Buildings must be setback slightly from the street to allow for adequate treatment of building facades that contain restricted ground floor activity (parking, lobbies and storage) due to the flood zone protection requirements. 
4.  Use. A broad range of commercial, manufacturing, industrial and residential uses are allowed. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Access and parking. 
 
E.  Bulk and mass. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.8.  RAD-IND: Industrial. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-IND is intended to accommodate a variety of small and large-scale industrial buildings that address and conform to the flood zone protection requirements. 
2.  Height. Building height is limited to five stories. 
3.  Front setbacks. Buildings must be setback slightly from the street to allow for adequate treatment of building facades that contain restricted ground floor activity (parking, lobbies and storage) due to the flood zone protection requirements. 
4.  Use. A broad range of manufacturing and industrial uses are allowed. Accessory commercial and retail activity is allowed when subordinate to the principal use in terms of area, extent and purpose (see subsection 3.1.D) 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Parking and access. 
 
E.  Height. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
2.9.  RAD-OSP: Open Space/Public Facilities. 
 
A.  Purpose and intent. 
1.  Form. RAD-OPS is intended to provide for public park and recreational facilities, natural areas, trails, wetlands, and similar types of open spaced owned/leased and managed by a local government. 
2.  Height. Height is limited to 40 feet. 
3.  Front setbacks. Buildings setbacks are flexible to allow for a variety of building and parking placement options. 
4.  Use. Uses may include community centers, playing fields, playgrounds, community gardens or other community uses. Accessory uses such as concessions, bike rental, etc. are allowed. In some areas, land may be unoccupied or predominately unoccupied by buildings or other impervious surfaces. 
B.  Lot criteria. 
 
C.  Siting. 
 
D.  Parking and access. 
 
E.  Height. 
 
F.  Public realm. 
 
3.0.  Land use. 
3.1.  Classification of uses. This section establishes the uses allowed. A lot or building must be occupied with only the uses allowed in this section. Any one or more allowed uses may be established on a lot, subject to the requirements of this section, and in compliance with all applicable requirements of this River Arts Form District. 
A.  Principal uses. 
1.  Allowed principal uses by sub-district are shown in the permitted use table in Sec. 3.2. 
2.  Any use not listed or prohibited is not allowed unless the planning and development director determines that the use is similar to a listed use, including but not limited to known or anticipated impacts. The uses found in subsection 3.1.C are expressly prohibited and are not allowed under any circumstances. 
3.  When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use, the planning and development director will consider the following: 
a.  The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use. 
b.  The relative amount of site area or floor area and equipment devoted to the proposed use. 
c.  Relative amounts of sales. 
d.  The customer type. 
e.  The relative number of employees. 
f.  Hours of operation. 
g.  Building and site arrangement. 
h.  Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements. 
i.  The number of vehicle trips generated. 
j.  How the proposed use is advertised. 
k.  The likely impact on surrounding properties. 
l.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. 
B.  Flood protection. Some allowed uses may not be allowed on ground floors under section 7-12-1 Flood Protection. 
C.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited and are not allowed under any circumstances: 
1.  Adult establishments. 
2.  Asphalt plants. 
3.  Chemical storage facilities. 
4.  Detention, jails and correctional facilities. 
5.  Drive-through facilities or uses. 
6.  Gas manufacturing. 
7.  Gasoline sales. 
8.  Gated communities. 
9.  Hazardous waste management facilities. 
10.  Hazardous materials (H1) manufacturing or storage. 
11.  Mining. 
12.  Paper mills. 
13.  Recycling plant. 
14.  Self-storage facility. 
15.  Slaughter house. 
16.  Solid waste landfill. 
17.  Shooting Range. 
D.  Accessory uses and structures. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures are permitted in conjunction with an allowed principal use. Accessory uses and structures must be accessory and clearly and customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use or structure. 
2.  No accessory use or structure may be established prior to the establishment of a permitted principal use or structure. 
3.2.  Permitted use table. Uses in this table are subject to the development review procedures established in section 7-5-9. 
	RAD-RES 	RAD-LYH 	RAD- 
NT 	RAD-SHP 	RAD- 
RIV 	RAD-IND 	RAD-OSP 	Special Standards 
Residential 
Dwelling, Single family detached 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Dwellings, Duplex 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Dwelling, accessory commercial caretaker 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Dwelling, townhouse 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Dwelling, multifamily 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Upper-story residential 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Assisted living facility 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(6) 
Dormitory 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Family care home 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(31) 
Group home 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(37) 
Home occupation 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(38) 
Live-work unit 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Sec. 3.3.A 
Public and Institutional 
Armory 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Civic, social service or fraternal organization 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
College, university, vocational or technical school 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Convention, conference, exhibit center 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Day-care center, adult or child 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Day care home, adult or child 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Fire, police station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Government building and use 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Hospital, medical center 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Library, museum 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Performance center 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Place of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Post office without distribution facility 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Post office with distribution facility 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Public utility and related facility 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(57) 
School 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Stadium, arena 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Transportation terminal 	— 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Recreational 
Community center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	
Parks, passive and greenway 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recreational use 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	
Food, Beverage & Entertainment 
Eating/drinking establishment 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Microbrewery 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Mobile food vending 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(44) 
Movie theater 	— 	S 	S 	S 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(45) 
Nightclub 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Recreational use, commercial indoor 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Lodging 
Bed and breakfast inn 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(10) 
Boardinghouse 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(11) 
Campground/RV Park 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	— 	— 	
Homestay 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(9) 
Hotel, extended stay 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Hotel, large 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Hotel, small 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Short-term vacation rental 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subsection 7-16-1(c)(64.1) 
Retail, Service & Office 
Art gallery 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Barber shop or beauty salon 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 		
Business incubator 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Call center 	— 	P 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Clinic, medical 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Clinic, veterinary (no outdoor kennel) 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Equipment rental business 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Farm products market, flea market 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Financial Institution 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Funeral establishment 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Grocery store 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Hardware, garden supply store 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Health or fitness facility 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Heavy equipment & specialized vehicle sales, rental & service 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Industrial equipment sales 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Instructional services 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Kennel 	— 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Laundry or dry cleaning 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Manufactured home sales and servicing 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Motor vehicle and boat sale, new & used 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Motor vehicle or boat service and repair 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(46) 
Motor vehicle and utility trailer rental 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Motor vehicle service facility 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Office 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Pharmacy 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Plant sales, nursery, greenhouse 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Print and publishing 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Radio/television studio 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Recreational vehicle sales, service & repair 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Research & technology production uses 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Retail sales 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Small engine service and repair 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Stable 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Studio, gallery or workshop for arts and crafts, low impact 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Studio, gallery or workshop for arts and crafts, high impact 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Tailor or dressmaker 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Tattoo parlor 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Industrial 
Concrete plant 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Crematory, animal 	— 	P 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(22) 
Crematory, human 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(21) 
Industrial uses 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Industrial uses, light 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Motor freight terminals 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Recycling operation 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(59) 
Lumber yards 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Wholesale sales 	— 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	— 	
Warehousing and storage 	— 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	— 	
Other Use Types 
Agriculture 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(4.1) 
Antenna 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(5) 
Commercial satellite dishes & related equipment 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	
Cemeteries, animal 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(14) 
Cemeteries, columbarium 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(14) 
Outdoor storage 	— 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	— 	Sec. 4.4 
Parking deck, garage, structure 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	Sec. 3.3.B 
Parking, surface lot 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recycling collection center 	— 	— 	— 	— 	S 	S 	— 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(60) 
Telecommunication tower 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	
Telecommunication tower/support structure concealed 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Telecommunication tower/support structure replacement tower 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Wireless telecommunication facility, microcell 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(75) 
Wireless telecommunication facility, co-location 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(77) 
Wireless telecommunication facility, (concealed) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	subsection 7-16-1(c)(76) 
KEY: P = Permitted Use S = Permitted Use Subject to Special Standards C = Conditional Use 
CZ = Conditional Zoning — = Use Not Permitted 
 
3.3.  Special standards. 
A.  Live-work unit. 
1.  Live/work is only permitted in units with street level access. 
2.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and end no later than 10:00 p.m., including all deliveries; 
3.  A minimum of one person must occupy the live/work unit as their primary place of residence. 
4.  The live/work unit may employ no more than two persons not living on the premises at any one time. 
5.  No business storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment is permitted outside of the live/work unit. 
6.  The nonresidential use of the unit is limited to the following: 
a.  Art gallery; 
b.  Beauty shop; 
c.  Home occupations; 
d.  Instructional services; 
e.  Office; 
f.  Studio, gallery or workshop for arts and crafts, low impact; and 
g.  Tailor or dressmaker. 
7.  Retail sales is allowed but is limited to those products made on site in the live-work unit. 
8.  No equipment or process may be used in connection with the live/work unit that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses, off the premises. 
B.  Parking deck, garage, structure. 
1.  Parking structures must meet all the requirements for a principal structure as specified in subsection 2.0, including the parking setbacks. 
2.  In no case can structured parking exceed the height of the principal building on the site. 
3.  Where upper or ground stories of structured parking are at the perimeter of a building, they must be screened so that cars are not visible from ground level view from adjacent property or adjacent public right-of-way (not including an alley). In addition, any ground story facade treatment (building materials, windows, and architectural detailing) must be continued on upper stories. 
4.  Parking structure entries must not exceed 16 feet clear height and 24 feet clear width and be spaced at least 150 feet apart. 
4.0.  Site development. 
4.1.  Parking. 
A.  Applicability. The parking requirements of section 7-11-2 apply in the River Arts Form District, except the sections identified below: 
1.  Subsection 7-11-2(c). Off-Street Parking Requirements; 
2.  Subsection 7-11-2(d), Off-Street Loading Requirements; 
3.  Subsection 7-11-2(e)(2), Remote Parking; and 
4.  Subsection 7-11-2(g)(1), Width of Access Points. 
B.  Required parking. The following minimum vehicle and bicycle parking spaces are required. 
Use 	Vehicle Parking Spaces (min) 	Bicycle Parking (min) 
		Spaces 	Short/long term 
Residential 
All residential uses 	.75/unit 	.5/unit up to 2 bedrooms plus .25/additional bedroom 	80%/20% 
Public and Institutional 
Fire, police station, day care home, adult or child, public utility or related facility 	none 	none 	— 
Place of worship 	greater of 1/4 seats or 1/40 sf 	1/5,000 sf 2 min 	90%/10% 
School 	0.5 classrooms, plus 1/5 students for high schools 	1/5,000 sf 2 min 	90%/10% 
All other public & institutional uses 	1/500 sf 	1/5,000 sf 2 min 	90%/10% 
Recreational 
Parks, passive and greenways 	none 	none 	— 
All other recreational uses 	1/500 sf + 1/1,000 sf outdoor use area 	1/5,000 sf 2 min 	80%/20% 
Food, Beverage & Entertainment 			
Mobile food vending 	none 	none 	— 
All other food, beverage & entertainment uses 	1/250 sf 	1/2,500 sf 2 min 	80%/20% 
Lodging 
All lodging uses 	.75/guest room 	1/2,500 SF 2 min 	80%/20% 
Retail, Service and Office 
All retail, service & office uses 	1/500 sf 	1/2,500 sf 2 min 	80%/20% 
Industrial 
All industrial uses 	1/500 sf office space + 1/3,000 sf additional indoor space 	1/5,000 sf 2 min 	20%/80% 
Other Use Types 
All other use types 	none 	none 	— 
 
C.  Location of required vehicle parking. Required vehicle parking must be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve, except as listed below. 
1.  On-street parking. See subsection 7-11-2.(f). 
2.  Remote parking. 
a.  All required parking spaces, except required accessible spaces, can be located off-site if the remote parking area is located within 660 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. 
b.  Up to 50 percent of the required parking spaces may be located more than 660 feet off-site, if the parking area is located within 1,320 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. 
c.  Specifically designated parking spaces for employees may be located off-site up to 2,640 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. 
d.  All remote parking spaces used to meet an off-street parking requirement must be located within the boundaries of the River Arts Form District. 
e.  The off-site parking area is measured in walking distance from the nearest point of the remote parking area to the primary entrance of the use served. 
f.  Any remote parking spaces must be guaranteed by a written agreement between the owner of the remote parking area and the owner of the use served by the remote parking area. Change of ownership of either parcel requires a renewal of the agreement. 
D.  Location of required bike parking. 
1.  General Requirements 
a.  Bicycle parking spaces must be located on paved or pervious, dust-free surface with a slope no greater than 3%. Surfaces cannot be soil, vegetation, gravel, landscape stone, or wood chips. 
 
b.  Bicycle parking spaces must be a minimum of two feet by six feet. There must be an access aisle a minimum of five feet in width. 
c.  Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle and its placement must not result in a bicycle obstructing a required walkway. 
d.  Up to 25 percent of bicycle parking may be structured parking, vertical parking or wall mount parking, provided there is a five foot access aisle for wall mount parking. 
e.  All racks must accommodate cable locks and "U" locks and must permit the locking of the bicycle frame and one wheel to the rack and must support a bicycle in a stable position. 
2.  Short-term bicycle parking. Required short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in a convenient and visible area at least as close as the closest non-accessible vehicle parking and within 100 feet. 
3.  Long-term bicycle parking. 
a.  Required long-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in enclosed and secured or supervised areas providing protection from theft, vandalism and weather and must be accessible to intended users. 
b.  Required long-term bicycle parking for residential uses can not be located within dwelling units or within deck, patio areas, or private storage areas accessory to dwelling units. 
c.  Long-term bicycle parking spaces for nonresidential uses may be located off-site within 300 feet of the site. 
d.  The off-site parking area is measured in walking distance from the nearest point of the remote parking area to the closest primary entrance of the use served. 
E.  Required vehicle loading. 
1.  General provisions. 
a.  Loading and unloading activities may not encroach on or interfere with the use of sidewalks, drive aisles, queuing areas and parking areas by vehicles or pedestrians. 
b.  With the exception of areas specifically designated by the city, loading and unloading activities are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
c.  If determined necessary by the planning and urban design director or transportation director, adequate space must be made available off-street for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping. 
2.  Location. If a loading area is required or provided, it must meet the following. 
a.  The loading area must be located on the same lot occupied by the use served and must be accessible from a public street or alley. 
b.  The loading area must be located to the side or rear of buildings. Loading areas may not be placed between the street and the associated building. 
4.2.  Landscaping and screening. 
A.  Applicability. The landscape and buffering requirements of subsection 7-11-3 apply in the River Arts Form District, except as identified below: 
1.  The River Arts Form District is exempt from subsection 7-11-3(d)(5), Building Impact Landscaping and subsection 7-11-3(d)(7), Tree Save Areas. 
2.  Any River Arts Form District may modify the street buffer requirement of subsection 7-11-3(d) (5) by placing a wall at a minimum height of 3 feet in place of the required shrubs. 
3.  When abutting a RS or RM district, the property line buffer requirements of subsection 7-11-3(d)(1) for a Type A Bufferyard apply, except that when an opaque masonry wall is used (as described below), a bufferyard may be provided as follows: 
 
a.  Depth: 10 feet min. 
b.  Masonry Wall Height: 6 feet min / 8 feet max. 
c.  Evergreen Trees: 3. 
d.  Deciduous Trees (large): 3. 
e.  Shrubs (large): 10. 
4.  Properties adjacent to the river are encouraged to select native riparian vegetation. See the River District Tree and Shrub Guidelines for suggested vegetation. 
B.  Grading. Speculative grading of land is not permitted. 
C.  Site fill. Any filling of land in the floodplain will be subject to applicable state laws and the requirements of section 7-12. 
4.3.  Signs. 
A.  Applicability. The sign requirements of article XIII apply in the River Arts Form District, except as identified below: 
1.  Subsection 7-13-4(a)(8)(a). See subsection 4.3.K for temporary and permanent window sign requirements. 
B.  Sign types allowed by district. Signs are allowed by sub-district as set forth below. Specific requirements for each sign type are shown on the following pages. 
	RES 	LYH 	NT 	SHP 	RIV 	IND 	OSP 
A-Frame Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Awning Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Canopy Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Crown Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Monument Sign 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 
Post Sign 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 
Projecting Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Wall Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Window Sign 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
KEY: P = Sign type allowed — = Sign type not allowed 
 
C.  Allocation and number of signs allowed. 
1.  A-frame signs. A-frame signs are permitted as temporary signs, provided they comply with the requirements of subsection 7-13-4(a)(8)(c). 
2.  Awning signs, canopy signs, wall signs. 
a.  Awning signs, canopy signs and wall signs are allocated a combined sign area of one square foot of per linear foot of street-facing building facade, except in RAD-RES. 
b.  Any number of wall signs, awning signs or canopy signs are allowed provided the maximum allocated sign area above is not exceeded and the specific requirements for each sign type are met, except in RAD-RES. 
c.  In RAD-RES, a wall sign cannot exceed 9 square feet in area and only one wall or projecting sign per ground floor tenant space is allowed. 
3.  Crown signs. 
a.  Crown signs cannot exceed a total sign area allocation of 250 square feet per street-facing building facade. 
b.  No more than two crown signs are allowed per building and no more than one crown sign per building facade is allowed. 
4.  Monument signs, post signs. 
a.  Where allowed, only one monument sign or post sign is allowed per street frontage, provided all signs are conforming. 
b.  A monument sign cannot exceed 64 square feet in area. 
c.  A post sign cannot exceed 36 square feet in area. 
d.  One additional monument sign or post sign is allowed for properties with 1,000 feet or more of street frontage. Where more than one monument sign or post sign is allowed, signs along the same street frontage must be spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart. 
5.  Projecting signs. 
a.  A projecting sign cannot exceed nine square feet in area and only one projecting sign per ground floor tenant space is allowed, except in RAD-RES. 
b.  In RAD-RES, only one projecting or wall sign per ground floor tenant space is allowed. 
6.  Window signs. 
a.  The maximum area of all ground story windows and doors that can be covered by signs is 20 percent. 
b.  The number of window signs allowed is unlimited, provided the maximum percentage of signs covering ground story windows and doors is not exceeded. 
D.  Awning sign. 
 
E.  Canopy sign. 
 
F.  Crown sign. 
 
G.  Monument sign. 
 
H.  Post sign. 
 
I.  Projecting sign. 
 
J.  Wall sign. 
 
K.  Window sign. 
 
L.  Illumination. Illumination of signs must be in accordance with the following requirements. 
1.  Illumination permitted by sign type. 
	Internal 	External 
A-Frame Sign 	No 	No 
Awning Sign 	No 	No 
Canopy Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
Crown Sign 	No 	Yes 
Monument Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
Post Sign 	No 	No 
Projecting Sign 	No 	No 
Wall Sign 	Yes 	Yes 
Window Sign 	No 	No 
 
2.  Prohibited light sources. 
a.  Blinking, flashing and chasing. 
b.  Bare bulb illumination. 
c.  Colored lights used in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
d.  Direct reflected light that creates a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
e.  Lights that outline property lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows or similar areas are prohibited, except for seasonal lighting or very low luminosity lighting displays using multiple lamps. 
3.  External illumination. 
a.  Lighting directed toward a sign must be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly onto public right-of-way or adjacent properties. 
b.  Lighting fixtures must be directed downward rather than upward. 
 
c.  Projecting light fixtures used for externally illuminated signs must be simple and unobtrusive in appearance and not obscure the sign. 
4.  Internal illumination. Reverse channel internally back-lit letters are allowed. 
4.4.  Outdoor display and storage. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply where merchandise, material or equipment is displayed outside of a completely enclosed building. 
B.  Outdoor display. 
1.  Defined. 
a.  The outdoor display of products actively available for sale. The outdoor placement of propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink, video rentals or similar vending machines is considered outdoor display. 
b.  Outdoor display does not include merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers. 
2.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor display is only allowed with a permitted ground floor nonresidential use. 
b.  Outdoor display must abut the primary facade with the principal customer entrance, and may not extend more than six feet from the facade or occupy more than 25 percent of the horizontal length of the facade. 
c.  Outdoor display cannot exceed six feet in height. 
d.  Outdoor display must be removed and placed inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of each business day, except propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink, video rentals or similar vending machines may remain outside overnight. 
e.  Outdoor display may not encroach upon any public right-of-way or sidewalk. Outdoor display may not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk. There must be a minimum of six feet of clear distance of sidewalk at all times. 
5.0.  Administration. 
5.1.  Form-based code administration. 
A.  UDO administrative procedures apply. The administrative procedures of the city's Unified Development Ordinance (chapter 7 of the Municipal Code) apply to in the River Arts Form District, except as expressly modified below. 
B.  Pre-application conference required. A pre-application conference with the city's planning and development staff is required prior to any application for approval in the River Arts Form District. 
6.0.  Definitions. 
6.1.  Defined terms. 
A.  General meaning of words and terms. 
1.  All words and terms used have their commonly accepted and ordinary meaning unless they are specifically defined in this River Arts Form District or the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary. 
2.  When vagueness or ambiguity is found to exist as to the meaning of any word or term used, any appropriate canon, maxim, principle or other technical rule of interpretations or construction used by the courts of this state may be employed to resolve vagueness and ambiguity in language. 
B.  Graphics, illustrations and photographs. The graphics, illustrations and photographs used to visually explain certain provisions of River Arts Form District are for illustrative purposes only. Where there is a conflict between a graphic, illustration or photograph and the text, the text controls. 
C.  Defined terms. The following terms are defined for the purpose of this River Arts Form District. Terms not defined may be defined in section 7-2-5. In such case, the definition contained in section 7-2-5 applies. 
Art gallery means a facility that contains a room or series of rooms where works of art are exhibited on a regular basis. 
Attic means habitable or uninhabitable space within a building situated within the structure of a pitched roof and above the uppermost regular story. 
BFE means base flood elevation. 
Building facade means the face of a building that delineates the edge of conditioned floor space. 
Ground floor means the floor of a building that is at or nearest to the level of the ground around the building. Does not include the floor of a basement. 
Recreational uses may include ancillary businesses or concessions related to the recreational uses and could include but not limited to uses such as bike rentals or other park concessions. 
Upper story means any story above the ground story or floor. 
(Ord. No. 4646, § 1(d), 11-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1j, 1-9-18)  
Secs. 7-8-30—7-8-39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-8-40. - Central Business Expansion District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Central Business Expansion District (CBD EXP) is reserved for those projects that meet the definition of a Level III development within the boundaries of the Central Business District (CBD). The CBD is the primary retail, office, hotel, institutional, cultural and entertainment center of our community. There is also a sizable and growing residential population often located in higher density multifamily developments. A high priority is placed on design and placemaking by integrating new development with existing architecture in a respectful and cohesive manner. Design review guidelines in place for the downtown area remain as a companion document for consideration of these applications. Development within this district should facilitate the multimodal circulation patterns and access needs of the sizable pedestrian population. The Central Business District Expansion District is a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses in the Central Business Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Dwellings, multifamily; Dwellings, townhouse 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Convention Center, Colleges, Fire/Police Stations, Government Uses, Libraries, Museums, Performance Center, Places of Worship, Shelters, Arenas 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways 
Commercial/Business/ Office Uses 	All uses allowed in the Central Business District (see 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are permitted in the CBD EXP, Homestay, Hotel (large, small & extended stay), Short-term vacation rental. 
Other 	Parking lots, Parking structures, Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell, co-locate 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the Central Business District (sec 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the CBD EXP. 
(e)  Special Standards. Special standards found in 7-16-1, for 'eating and drinking establishments', 'gasoline sales', and 'microbrewery' in the Central Business District also apply to Central Business Expansion District developments. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Central Business Expansion District shall meet the following development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. None. 
(2)  Structure size standards. Structure size shall not be limited except that height and design and operational standards shall apply. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. None. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Central Business District. 
Front: 
Minimum setback: Zero feet from the right-of-way line. For corner lots buildings are to be placed at the corner. 
Maximum setback: Five feet from the right-of-way line as needed to expand the sidewalk width or provide space for building and use encroachments. The city council may consider allowing greater setbacks under one or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  A setback of up to 50 feet from the edge of the curb may be approved for places of worship, civic and governmental buildings, and residential projects that will provide a public space, such as a courtyard or plaza space. 
b.  A setback of up to 30 feet for uses in the district providing courtyard or plaza spaces in the setback area. 
Courtyard and plaza areas should meet definitions located in 7-2-5 of this chapter which describe form and purpose. The main façade of the building must face this setback area. 
c.  An adopted plan or other official document of the city recommends a greater setback. 
Side: None required, except that a 15-foot setback will be required when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
Rear: None required, except that a 15-foot setback will be required when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. For the definition of height see building height in section 7-2-5 of this chapter. The minimum height for new structures in the Central Business District will be two stories (a minimum of 24 feet). Maximum building height will be determined according to the context transition edge map, the height zone map, the height zone edge setback and shadow impacts described below and with maps following this section. 
a.  The two-story requirement for new construction will mean that: 
1.  A second floor is provided as a full occupiable floor and a mezzanine level will not be sufficient to meet this requirement; and 
2.  Civic uses such as places of worship, arenas, auditoriums, and performance centers will not be required to meet the two-story requirement described in subsection 1 above. 
b.  Context transition edge. The first step in determining the height permitted for a structure is to review the context transition edge map found in 7-8-18 to determine if it is applicable to the specific property. This map shows areas where a gradual scale transition is required for new downtown construction from nearby established residential neighborhoods. The map reflects a specific height overlay for properties located near the context transition edge (a 100-foot-wide area measured from the transition line). Buildings located within this transition edge will have their actual height determined by using the formula for height: H = D/1.5; (where H is the height of the building and D is the distance from the transition edge). The one exception is that a two-story structure with a 15-foot setback when adjacent to residentially zoned property is exempt from the formula requirements. 
 
c.  Height zones - measurement of height: The second step in determining the height permitted for a structure is to review the building height zone map located in section 7-8-18 of this chapter. 
1.  The intermediate height zone is 145 feet and the tallest height zone is 265 feet. 
2.  Actual building heights may exceed this height by an additional overall amount of 50 feet to accommodate such uses as the final occupied floor, mechanical penthouses and roof cap features. 
d.  Height zone edge setback from the right-of-way: To protect certain views in downtown, as illustrated on the height zone map by a dashed line (specific to portions of four streets listed below), a height zone edge setback is established. The height zones for the intermediate height zone and the tallest height zone follow property lines except for the following streets where a height transition between these two zones 40 feet wide measured from the right-of-way line edge will be observed: 
1.  College Street between the tunnel and Town Mountain Road. 
2.  Haywood Street between Battery Park Avenue and N. French Broad Avenue (south side). 
3.  Patton Avenue from Pearl Street to Otis Street (both sides of street) and continuing from Otis Street to the point of Pritchard Park (south side). 
4.  Hilliard Avenue between Clingman Avenue and Pearl Street (north side). 
e.  Shadow impact limits: Shadows from new construction on large or small public parks or public plazas are limited by the following standard: 
1.  Shadows impacts on any one point are limited to no more than two hours between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on the spring or fall equinox at ground level; March 21 or September 21 respectively. 
2.  Where no right-of-way exists between the proposed project and the public park or plaza, a 50-foot buffer free of any shadow limitations will be observed. 
This shadow impact standard will not apply to smaller public spaces such as pocket parks or private plazas, parks and courtyards. See the definition for parks specific to the Central Business District in section 7-2-5 of this chapter for further clarification. 
f.  One story accessory structures that are in support of a primary use on a site are allowed when: 
1.  Placement of the accessory structure is behind or to the side of the primary building or in the case of outside dining spaces for restaurants, may be placed at the front of the lot to enhance activity at the sidewalk level, and 
2.  Fenestration and design requirements if any, apply. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. 
a.  Lodging Facilities with 21 or more guest rooms must provide parking for their use(s) according to the parking table found in 7-11-2. Guest drop off areas shall be located at the interior of the site and not along the primary access corridor. 
b.  Other uses in the district are exempt from off-street parking requirements. 
c.  No parking is allowed between the building and any abutting street. 
d.  If provided, loading facilities shall be placed along alleys or streets not identified on the Key Pedestrian Streets map (found in section 7-8-18) or internal to the development site. 
e.  Parking structures placed on a key pedestrian street shall provide a full habitable story and use along the street-side façade(s) with a minimum depth of 20 feet. Parking structures placed along other streets shall provide this same habitable story or shall comply with the design and operation standards for windows, doors and other openings and design organization requirements for new construction. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that sidewalks shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide along the primary access corridor. Within the sidewalk area a clear pedestrian zone must be maintained with a minimum width of eight feet. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular entries shall be a maximum of 24 feet in width. In addition driveway curb cuts are limited to a single standard driveway per development. Automobile access and services from a rear alley is encouraged. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the Transportation Department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. None. 
(13)  Design and operational standards. New development proposals within the CBD-CZ district will be evaluated for their ability to meet the following standards within the underlying CBD district: 
a.  Street wall and step-back requirements: In order to enhance the traditional scale of downtown and ensure adequate air and light at the sidewalk level and neighboring properties, a visual demarcation will be established across the façade of the building at a height that is defined as the street wall. Corresponding to this elevation on the façade a step-back across the front or side(s) will be provided and in limited circumstances described below, other alternatives may apply to ensure variety in new construction. 
1.  Street wall height: The street wall height and specific alternatives are established in the following ways: 
a.  If the property is located within the Traditional Downtown Core area as illustrated on the map following this section, the street wall will be set at between two and four stories with a recommendation to reflect the height of neighboring buildings; 
b.  If the property is located outside the Traditional Downtown Core the street wall will be established by a one-to-one relationship to the width of the right-of-way (ROW). For example, a ROW of 50 feet would result in a maximum street wall height of 50 feet. Depending on the site the following scenarios may apply: 
1.  If a parcel fronts on more than one street, the street wall shall be established by: 
a.  The ROW width of the key pedestrian street if applicable; or 
b.  Measuring the ROW from the side of the building with the primary pedestrian entrance. 
2.  The street wall may wrap around to the side(s) at the same height or be re-established based on the ROW of the side street. For the purposes of this section frontage on a service alley will be treated the same as an internal property line and therefore would not require a street wall step-back, or; 
c.  Throughout the CBD, a building that provides a setback along the frontage line to create a plaza or courtyard area (minimum depth ten feet), will not be required to establish a street wall. This setback area must exceed two-thirds of the building width along the frontage line; or 
d.  For areas outside the Traditional Downtown Core where the ROW area is greater than 75 feet, a building is not required to provide a street wall step-back or side step-back. Buildings in these situations will be required to meet other design and operational standards as applicable; or 
e.  Throughout the CBD, a proposal may be approved for a special condition from the step-back requirements by meeting design guidelines that specify a clear visual demarcation provided between the base of the building and upper floors corresponding to the height of the street wall; or 
f.  Throughout the CBD, buildings determined to be signature buildings or proposed for landmark locations as noted on the Public View Corridors map for recommended landmark locations found in 7-8-18 may deviate from step-back standards. 
g.  When an existing building that is a contributing structure in the downtown national register district will be incorporated into a development proposal that may include a single or multi-story addition, it will be deemed to satisfy the requirement or that portion of the requirement for the streetwall. 
 
2.  Step-back requirement: In order to enhance the traditional scale of downtown and ensure adequate air and light at the sidewalk level and neighboring properties a step-back at the street wall height is required according to the following standards. In no case shall the required step-back(s) decrease the buildable area by more than ten percent: 
a.  At the street wall height a minimum ten-foot-wide step-back is observed along at least two-thirds of the length of the street-side façade (the remaining one-third may be provided at up to 200 percent (2 X) of the street wall height); or 
b.  A side step-back may be provided as an alternative according to the following requirements as applicable. 
1.  At the street wall height, a 40-foot-wide step-back is provided along the side of the proposed structure. This 40-foot-wide step-back may be split between two sides (such as 20 feet each side); 
2.  Buildings taller than 75 feet shall provide a side step-back that equals one-half of the width of the façade above 75 feet*. 
* The step-back amount may be split between two sides. 
* See street wall height description to determine the height of the corresponding street wall. 
 
3.  Design organization: Buildings shall demonstrate a building design organization on each façade such as but not limited to a base-middle-cap organization, vertical articulation or other organizing principle. 
Building caps: Downtown Asheville has a wealth of buildings with distinctive caps that use special forms and materials. The unique diversity of building caps has become a defining feature of the downtown skyline. In order to frame views and provide attractive landmarks that enhance the skyline of the downtown area, building caps are required. See the design guidelines regarding building caps for recommendations in addition to the following requirements: 
a.  Provide a cap to enhance a base-middle-cap oriented design; or 
b.  Provide a cornice or other decorative band for flat roofs; or 
c.  Vertical organization of building design is an acceptable alternative. 
4.  Pedestrian entrances : All buildings shall have their primary pedestrian entrance on a frontage line. If the site is located on a key pedestrian street then the primary pedestrian entrance shall be located along that street. See the Asheville Downtown Design Guidelines for additional recommendations. 
5.  Windows, doors and other openings: Building fenestration is required because it enhances the character of downtown Asheville by providing features of visual interest at the sidewalk for the benefit of pedestrians, by defining the scale of buildings between the ground floor and upper floors and by improving the skyline vista of Asheville. The following requirements apply: 
a.  For buildings along streets designated as key pedestrian streets (see map at the end of this section), at least 70 percent of the street-level façade is composed of windows, doors and other openings. 
b.  For buildings along streets that are not designated as key pedestrian streets, at least 50 percent of the street-level façade is composed of windows, doors and other openings. 
c.  Residential buildings shall provide at least 30 percent (40 percent for live/work units) windows, doors or other openings along the street-level façade unless located along a key pedestrian street where it will be required to meet the 70 percent standard noted above. 
d.  All buildings are required to provide a minimum of 20 percent of the upper story areas as windows, doors or other openings with each face calculated independently. This requirement applies to exposed building sides unless otherwise restricted by the NC State Building Code. 
e.  At street-level, areas of opaque wall may extend no more than 20 feet horizontally before beginning a window, door or other opening. 
f.  Glass may be tinted but shall not be reflective. 
g.  When the façade of a building follows the natural grade of a sloping site, windows and other openings which may start out at pedestrian-level quickly go overhead and no longer relate to the sidewalk; in these situations where the surface level of the floor reaches six feet or more above the sidewalk, that floor will be deemed to no longer be at the pedestrian level. Requirements for windows, doors or other openings will be reassessed for the remaining ground level façade length. 
b.  Requirements for floors above 75 feet. The following requirements apply to all floors extending above 75 feet: 
 
1.  Floor plate limited: 
a.  For parcels 20,000 square feet and larger, the gross floor plate area is limited to 40 percent of the lot area; 
b.  For parcels smaller than 20,000 square feet, gross floor plate area may not exceed 8,000 square feet. 
c.  For parcels greater than 16,000 square feet, city council may consider floor plates up to 50 percent if the structure is surrounded by substantial permanent public or private open space that allows for views and access to direct sunlight. 
2.  Maximum dimension defined: The maximum horizontal wall dimension in any direction is limited to 145 feet for additional floors above the 75 feet. 
3.  External vista points: Photomontages modeling the proposed building are required from each of the established external vista points as a tool to evaluate development proposals: 
Merrimon Avenue at Gracelyn Street 
College Street at the west side of the tunnel 
Stephens-Lee Recreation Center 
Biltmore Avenue at Short Coxe Avenue 
I-240 at the Smokey Park Bridge 
Town Mountain Road at the bridge over I-240 
4.  Public view corridors: If a project lies within a public view corridor based on the map provided in 7-8-18, a photomontage from the internal vista point is required and where possible, building mass should be oriented to preserve views and roof forms should help to frame views. 
c.  Additional site related standards for all projects: 
1.  Street furnishings: Street furnishings placed in the public right-of-way shall be approved by the department of public works and will include but not be limited to benches, tree grates, lighting fixtures and waste receptacles. 
2.  Mechanical equipment and appurtenances necessary for the function of the building shall be enclosed and screened or otherwise designed to be integral with the overall building design, including but not limited to elevators, stairs, cooling towers and vent stacks. 
3.  The design of the base of a building, as well as the quality and durability of its materials, shall be emphasized at the first floor of structures. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are prohibited as a base material. 
4.  Private dumpsters and freestanding service equipment shall be screened by solid partitions or other screening. 
5.  Development on key pedestrian streets shall meet the following requirements: 
For new construction along key pedestrian streets, buildings are required to be constructed along a minimum of 80 percent of the frontage line of the lot. This standard is not intended to restrict site access especially for smaller lots. Access is covered under access standards above. On corner lots the 80 percent frontage requirement applies to the primary street. 
(14)  Downtown design review guidelines. All construction work requiring building, sign, demolition, and zoning permits, within the downtown boundaries designated by the city council, shall be submitted for mandatory review, and city council and developer agreement for compliance with the adopted Downtown Asheville Design Review Guidelines, with the exception of locally designated historic landmarks which shall be reviewed by the historic resources commission of Asheville and Buncombe County in accordance with the applicable review procedures of the historic resources commission. 
(15)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1k, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-8-41. - Institutional Expansion District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Institutional Expansion District (INST EXP) is established for the development of major educational facilities, major medical facilities and other complementary and supporting uses such as health related developments, offices, and public services that meet the definition of a Level III development. Development standards for uses in this district are established to minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. The Institutional Expansion District is a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses in the Institutional Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Not allowed 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Assisted living facilities, Institutional, Convention center, Colleges, Fire/Police stations, Government uses, Libraries, Museums, Performance center, Places of worship, Shelters, Arenas, Hospitals 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways 
Commercial/Business/ Office Uses 	
(Uses in this use category shall be ancillary to the principal use and shall not exceed 3% of the total gross square footage proposed) 	Office, Clinics, Research and technology production uses 
Other 	Parking lots, Parking structures, Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell/co-locate 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the Institutional District (sec 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the INST EXP. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Institutional Expansion District shall meet the following development standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. Minimum lot size: one acre. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Institutional Expansion District. 
Front: 15 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to zero feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 10 ft. 
Rear: 10 ft. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Institutional Expansion District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. None required, except as described below in subsection (13). 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle uses(s) within in the development and shall meet a ten foot wide minimum standard. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
a.  The front of the building shall be oriented towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should be similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner. 
b.  All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 75 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. 
c.  Fenestration is required along the building façade(s) facing the primary access corridor, for a minimum of 40 percent of the ground floor horizontal dimension. 
d.  Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area, the height of buildings and other structures shall be subject to the height limitations of the residential zone to form a transition area. 
e.  Trash collection and other delivery functions should be directed away from residentially zoned areas. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-8-42. - Commercial Expansion District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Commercial Expansion District (COM EXP) is established to provide areas for large scale commercial and office developments that meet the definition of a Level III development. This district is intended to encourage innovative design that is integrated with adjacent uses. It is not the intent of the district to encourage strip commercial areas, but rather a concentration of commercial activities with an overall design connected by cross access and shared parking as part of a multimodal development plan. The Commercial Expansion District is a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses . All permitted uses in the Commercial Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Not Allowed 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Fire/Police stations, Government uses, Libraries 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways, Recreation Uses- membership 
Commercial/Business/Office Uses 	Eating and drinking establishments, Nightclubs, Microbreweries, Recreational uses Commercial, Clinics, Clinics veterinary, Movie theaters, Office, Financial services, Flea markets, Funeral homes, Hotel (large, small & extended stay), Retail, Research and technology production uses, Self storage, Studios (Low and High impact), Galleries, Taxistand 
Industrial 	Light industrial, Lumber yards, Motor freight terminals, Wholesale sales, Warehousing 
Other 	Parking lots, Parking structures, Outdoor storage, drive-thru facilities (subject to additional standards below), Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell/co-locate 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the Highway Business District (sec 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the COM EXP. 
(e)  Drive-thru . Drive-thru uses, if provided, must be located internally to the development utilizing internal access and avoiding the primary access corridor. In addition, drive thru uses may not be located within 250 feet of residentially zoned property. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Commercial Expansion District shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. None. 
(4)  Lot width standards. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. For through and corner lots, the minimum street frontage shall be required along the property line abutting the larger thoroughfare. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Commercial Expansion District. 
Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: None required. 
Rear: 10 feet. 
Corner lot, street side: Maximum 25 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Commercial Expansion District shall be 80 feet. 
(8)  Landscape and buffering standards. Landscape and buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking and loading facilities. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. Parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of all building(s) fronting the primary street(s), and are encouraged to be placed to the side or rear of all buildings located along the internal access routes (as applicable). 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle uses(s) within in the development and shall meet a minimum standard width of ten feet. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
a.  The front of the building shall be oriented towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should be similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner. 
b.  All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 75 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. 
c.  Fenestration is required along the building façade(s) facing the primary access corridor, for a minimum of 40 percent of the ground floor horizontal dimension. 
d.  Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area, the height of buildings and other structures shall be subject to the height limitations of the residential zone to form a transition area. 
e.  Trash collection and other delivery functions should be directed away from residentially zoned areas. 
f.  There should be general compatibility with an adopted form based code (if any) or other adopted plans or design guidelines in place for the project area. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1l, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-8-43 - Residential Expansion. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the Residential Expansion District (RES EXP) to permit a full range of high density single and multi-family housing for developments that meet the definition of a Level III development. It is intended that proposals in this district include a broad range of housing types and be located near employment centers, shopping facilities, roads and other urban infrastructure capable of handling the demand generated by higher density residential development. The Residential Expansion District is a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses Residential Expansion District, are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Dwellings, duplex/triplex/quadraplex, Dwellings multifamily, Dwellings, townhouse, Dwellings, single-family detached, Cottage developments 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Police/Fire stations, Libraries, Community centers, Schools 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways 
Commercial/Business/ Office Uses 	Home occupation, Homestay 
Industrial 	Not Allowed 
Other 	Parking lots, Parking structures 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the Residential Multifamily High Density District (RM-16) (section 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the RES EXP. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Residential Expansion District shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Residential Expansion District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 50 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units meet affordability standards set by the City for households earning 80 percent or less of area median income. Affordable units must be affordable to and leased to income eligible households for at least 15 years. For sale units must be available to income qualified households for the initial sale. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None required. 
(3)  Lot size standards. 
a.  Multifamily development: one acre 
b.  Single family development: 3,500 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Residential Expansion District. 
	Multifamily 	Single family 
Front: 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
Side: 	15 ft. 	6 ft. 
Rear: 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) will apply such that other residentially zoned properties shall be buffered with minimum 'A' buffer. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. 
a.  Multifamily: Maximum 80 percent 
b.  Single family: Maximum 50 percent 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Residential Expansion District shall be 60 feet for multifamily developments. For single family structures, building height is limited to 40 feet. 
(8)  Landscape and buffering standards. Landscape and buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter except that a property line 'A' buffer is required for multifamily developments when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
(9)  Parking and loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. In addition, for multifamily developments, parking is not permitted between the building(s) and the primary access corridor(s). Parking may occur outside of required setbacks along secondary streets or along driveways within the development. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle residential buildings within the development and shall meet a ten-foot wide minimum standard for multifamily development and a five-foot wide minimum standard for single family and duplex development. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection for multifamily developments. Developments that propose a single family layout with individual lots or a development that most closely resembles a single family pattern, vehicular access may occur from local streets with the approval by the city traffic engineer. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter except that open space may be scattered throughout the development as provided for in 7-11-4 but at least one common open space with a minimum area totaling 100 square feet per residential unit with park or plaza-type features must be provided. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. It is the intent of the residential expansion district to provide a wide range of housing types within the development. When a proposed project is located adjacent to residentially zoned areas, it should be compatible with the immediate neighborhood context in the following ways: building scale, setback and relative height of structures should transition to the existing neighborhood fabric. The proposed development shall comply with adopted neighborhood plans or design guidelines if applicable. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-8-44. - Industrial Expansion. 
(a)  Purpose. Realizing the importance of large industrial uses to the economy of the city and the region, it shall be the purpose of the Industrial Expansion District (IND EXP) to promote areas for the creation of new industrial development that meet the definition of a Level III development. Development standards are established to ensure that land uses located outside the Industrial Expansion District are not affected by the negative impacts of industrial uses. These developments shall be located to capitalize on existing infrastructure and transportation facilities. The Industrial Expansion District is only a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses in the Industrial Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Dwellings, commercial caretaker 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Fire/Police Stations, Government uses 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways 
Commercial/Business/ Office Uses 
,i>(Uses in this use category shall be ancillary to the principal use and shall not exceed 3% of the total gross square footage proposed) 	Eating and drinking establishments, Microbreweries, Industrial equipment sales, Research and technology production uses 
Industrial 	Concrete plant, Industrial uses, Light industrial, Recycling plant, Lumber yards, Motor freight terminals, Studio, Gallery, Workshop: High Impact, Wholesale sales, Warehousing 
Other 	Outdoor storage, Parking Lots, Parking Structures, Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell/ co-locate 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the River District (sec 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the IND EXP. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Industrial Expansion District shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Industrial District shall be two dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. Minimum lot size: one acre. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Industrial Expansion District. 
Front: 30 feet. 
Side: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then the setback shall be 50 feet. 
Rear: None required unless adjacent to residential district, then the setback shall be 50 feet. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. None. 
(7)  Height standards. None. 
(8)  Landscape and buffering standards. Landscape and buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking and loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-1 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required front setback. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle uses(s) within in the development and shall meet a ten foot wide minimum standard. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. None. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
a.  When located within 250 feet of a residentially zoned area, delivery entrances of a building(s) shall be directed away from residential uses. 
b.  Exposed sources of light shall be shielded to minimize impacts to neighboring parcels. Site lighting shall comply with the lighting ordinance (section 7-11-10). 
c.  Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited in the required front setback and within 50 feet of a residential district. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-8-45. - Lodging Expansion. 
(a)  Purpose. The Lodging Expansion District (LODG EXP) is established to provide areas for the development of lodging uses that may also include conference/retreat facilities. This district will provide areas for the development and expansion of lodging facilities that meet the definition for Level III development. Development standards are established to ensure the integration of the lodging use with the surrounding neighborhood and to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The Lodging Expansion District is a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses in the Lodging Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Dwellings, multifamily 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Convention center, Performance center 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways 
Commercial/Business/Office Uses 	Eating and drinking establishments, Nightclubs, Recreational uses commercial, Bed & Breakfast Inn, Boardinghouse, Campground, Hotel (large, small & extended stay) Short-term vacation rental, Office 
Industrial 	Not Allowed 
Other 	Parking Lots, Parking Structures 
 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Lodging Expansion District shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Lodging Expansion District shall be 20 dwelling units; or 40 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units meet affordability standards set by the City for households earning 80 percent or less of area median income. Affordable units must be affordable to and leased to income eligible households for at least 15 years. For sale units must be available to income qualified households for the initial sale. 
(2)  Structure size standards. None. 
(3)  Lot size standards. Minimum lot size: .75 acres. 
(4)  Lot width standards. Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Lodging Expansion District. 
Front: 35 feet, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to five feet in pedestrian-oriented areas where road widening is not anticipated provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Side: 15 feet. 
Rear: 25 feet. 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Lodging Expansion District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. The maximum height of structures in the Lodging Expansion District shall be 80 feet except as described below in subsection (13). 
(8)  Landscape and buffering standards. Landscape and buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking and loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. Guest drop off areas shall be located at the interior of the site and not along the primary access corridor. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-8 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle uses(s) within in the development and shall meet a ten foot wide minimum standard. 
(11)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. 
a.  The front of the building shall be oriented towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should be similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner. 
b.  All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. Secondary entrances may face internal drop off or parking areas. 
c.  Fenestration is required along the building façade(s) facing the primary access corridor, for a minimum of 50 percent of the ground floor horizontal dimension. 
d.  Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area, the height of buildings and other structures shall be subject to the height limitations of the residential zone to form a transition area. 
e.  Within 100 feet of a residentially zoned area the following facilities may not be located: restaurants, bars and nightclubs, dumpster facilities, loading docks and maintenance facilities. 
f.  There should be general compatibility with an adopted form based code (if any) or other adopted plans or design guidelines in place for the project area. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1m, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-8-46. - Mixed Use Expansion. 
(a)  Purpose. The Mixed Use Expansion District (MXD EXP) is established to foster higher density, mixed-use development following place-making principles that include: building orientation that creates a strong pedestrian environment; buildings that provide regular entrances and meet fenestration standards; wide sidewalks and street trees to create an attractive streetscape with multimodal access into and around the project area. The Mixed Use Expansion District is appropriate for areas where the design and appearance of the built environment is important to the vitality and growth of the area for proposals that meet the definition for Level III development. The Mixed Use Expansion District is suitable for both vertical mixed-use building and/or a mix of uses in the same development (including single use structures). There should be general compatibility with height and building step-back standards with an adopted form based code (if any) or other adopted plans or design guidelines in place for the project area. The Mixed Use Expansion District is only a conditional district that is applied for through a rezoning application. 
(b)  Allowable land uses. All permitted uses in the Mixed Use Expansion District are identified in the following table and the Table of Permitted Uses, Sec. 7-8-1(d): 
Residential Uses 	Dwellings, multifamily, Dwellings, townhouse 
Public and Institutional Uses 	Assisted living facilities, Convention center, Colleges, Fire/Police stations, Government uses, Hospitals, Libraries, Museums, Performance center, Places of Worship, Schools, Shelters, Arenas 
Recreational Uses 	Parks, Plazas, Greenways, Recreational uses government or membership 
Commercial/Business/Office Uses 	Eating and drinking establishments, Nightclubs, Microbreweries, Recreational uses, Commercial, Office, Clinics, Clinics veterinary, Financial services, Health and Fitness, Homestay, Hotels (large, small & extended stay), Instructional services, Laundry/dry cleaning, Research and technology production uses, Retail, Short-term vacation rental, Taxi, Gallery, Studio/workshop: low impact 
Industrial 	Light Industrial, Studio, gallery, workshop: high impact 
Other 	Parking Lots, Parking Structures, drive-thru facilities (subject to additional standards below), Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell/ co-locate 
 
(c)  Mix of Uses. To qualify for the mixed use expansion district, a proposal must include a mix of a different development type(s) totaling at least 10 percent of the development square footage. For example, a predominately residential proposal must include commercial or institutional uses totaling 10 percent or more of the development square footage. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in the Central Business District (sec 7-8-1) within the Table of Permitted Uses are expressly prohibited in the MXD EXP. 
(e)  Drive-thru. Drive thru uses, if provided must be located internally to the development utilizing internal access and avoiding the primary access corridor. In addition, drive thru uses may not be located within 250 feet of residentially zoned property. 
(f)  Development standards. All proposals in the Mixed Use Expansion District shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Mixed Use Expansion District shall be 35 dwelling units; or 70 dwelling units if 20 percent of the dwelling units meet affordability standards set by the City for households earning 80 percent or less of area median income. Affordable units must be affordable to and leased to income eligible households for at least 15 years. For sale units must be available to income qualified households for the initial sale. At least 25 percent of the gross floor area in the development shall be residential units. 
(2)  Building size: Building size is limited to: A maximum footprint of 75,000 square feet, with a maximum gross floor area of 200,000 square feet for structures with multiple floors. 
(3)  Lot size: Minimum lot size: One acre. 
(4)  Lot width: Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. 
Front and street side: Minimum zero feet and maximum 25 feet from right-of-way line. 
Side: None 
Rear: None 
(6)  Height standards. Maximum height six stories or 80 feet, whichever is greater, however the building height will be limited by the maximum height specified in an adopted form based code or other adopted plan (if any) in place for the project area. 
(7)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Mixed Use Expansion District shall be 80 percent. 
(8)  Landscape and buffering standards. Landscape and buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter with the exceptions noted below. In the Mixed Use Expansion District, street trees may be placed within tree grates, bulbouts, etc. as a part of a coordinated streetscape design developed with the proposal. 
(9)  Parking and loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter with the following additions: 
a.  Parking shall be provided at the side or rear of the primary structure(s) and not closer to the street than the face or edge of the structure(s). On corner lots, the side of the building that fronts on the secondary street is also considered a front or face of the building. 
b.  Parking may be provided in the street right-of-way adjoining the property as on-street parking with the approval of the city traffic engineer or the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
c.  Uses in the Mixed Use Expansion District are permitted up to a 25 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter provided that multimodal options such as: transit shelters, pedestrian amenities, bike racks, and bike lanes are incorporated into the development proposal. Pedestrian amenities may include but are not limited to wide sidewalks in excess of minimum standards, public courtyards, and public park areas. 
d.  Parking structures may be provided as a secondary use in meeting a project's parking requirements; such structures may contain more than the maximum number of spaces required for the associated use(s) if there are shared parking or commercial parking arrangements acceptable to the planning and urban design director. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by and pursuant to the requirements for sidewalks as set forth in section 7-11-7 of this chapter except that in addition to sidewalks provided along the primary access corridor, sidewalks will be required to connect to the principle uses(s) within in the development and shall meet a ten foot wide minimum standard. 
(11)  Open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. Public sidewalk spaces two or more feet wider than the minimum requirement and featuring public-pedestrian amenities, outside dining facilities and pocket parks are encouraged and may count toward open space requirements. Donations of land for green space and greenways is also encouraged. 
(12)  Access and mobility standards. Multimodal access to the development shall be analyzed at the planning stage. Vehicular access to the development should be limited to arterials or collector streets with a single driveway connection. Bike lanes into the development and on internal streets (if applicable) should be a part of the development plan. Access and cross access should be evaluated to connect to adjoining properties to improve roadway capacity, ensure driver safety and mobility options for bicyclists and pedestrians. Stub out connections may be constructed if cross access is not available. Transit shelters should be considered for developments along transit routes coordinated with the transportation department. Greenway connections through the development or to nearby existing or planned greenways should be provided for. 
(13)  Design and operational standards. 
a.  The front of the building shall be orientated towards the primary access corridor. Building sides should appear similar to their fronts. On corner lots the building or portions of the building must be located at the street corner. 
b.  All buildings shall include a well-defined operable entrance at regular intervals not exceeding 75 feet on each primary façade to encourage access by pedestrians. Secondary entrances may face second tier streets, driveways or parking areas. Buildings on corner lots may place the entrance at the corner, eliminating the need for dual entrances. 
c.  Windows shall be evenly distributed at pedestrian level across the length of the façade on the first floor of the building. Windows shall make up at least 40 percent of the area of the street-facing first story façade. Upper story windows shall make up at least 20 percent of the wall surface. All storefront windows shall be transparent or lightly tinted and shall not appear false or applied. Windows glass shall be non-reflective. Windows are also required along the sides of structures that are visible from roadways or have surface parking lots located adjacent to them. 
d.  When new building façades will be wider than 75 feet, the façade surface shall be subdivided into portions not exceeding this distance by varying setbacks, roof forms, or adding design details such as pilasters, secondary bays or other architectural treatments. 
(14)  Emergency wireless communications. Communication requirements shall be provided as required by section 7-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4560, § 1l, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1n, 1-9-18)  
ARTICLE IX. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 7-9-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3328, § 1(j), adopted Jan. 24, 2006, deleted § 7-9-1 in its entirety. Former § 7-9-1 pertained to planned unit development overlay district and derived from Ord. No. 2369, § 1, May 27, 1997.  
Sec. 7-9-2. - Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. Local historic districts are hereby deemed important assets of the City of Asheville. The historic districts are established for the purpose of protecting and conserving the heritage of the City of Asheville, Buncombe County and the State of North Carolina; for the purpose of safeguarding the character and heritage of the historic districts by preserving the historic districts as a whole and individual property therein that embodies important elements of its social, economic, cultural, political, archeological or architectural history; for the purpose of promoting the conservation of such historic districts for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the historic districts, the City of Asheville, Buncombe County, and the State of North Carolina as a whole; for the purpose of fostering civic beauty; and for the purpose of stabilizing and enhancing property values throughout the historic districts as a whole; thereby contributing to the improvement of the general health and welfare of the City of Asheville and the residents of the historic districts. 
(b)  Establishment of the historic districts. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-400.4, local historic districts are hereby established as districts which overlay the general use zoning districts, the extent and boundaries of which historic districts are indicated on the official zoning maps for the City of Asheville. The city hereby re-adopts and designates as historic districts those historic districts described in Appendix 7E of this chapter. Additional local historic districts may be established following the required statutory procedure. 
(c)  Historic district commission. The Asheville-Buncombe Historic Resources Commission ("HRC") established by the City of Asheville in Ordinance No. 1109, and by the County of Buncombe in Ordinance No. 1644, shall constitute a joint preservation commission and shall have the powers of a joint preservation commission as set forth in Part 3C of article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, or its successor. 
(d)  Permitted uses. The historic districts contain several zoning classifications. All uses permitted in each of the zoning districts shall be permitted in the historic district pursuant to the requirements set forth in that zoning classification. Provided, however, when the provisions of this section 7-9-2, and the guidelines and regulations promulgated hereunder, impose higher standards than are required for that zoning classification, the provisions of this section, and the regulations and guidelines promulgated hereunder, shall govern. 
(e)  Compliance with requirements. Structures within the historic districts shall meet all requirements and standards of article VIII of this chapter in addition to those set forth in this section. Provided, however, no structure or part thereof within the historic districts shall extend nearer to or be required to be set back further from the front property line than the arithmetic mean distance of the setbacks of the nearest principal building within 150 feet on each side of such building and fronting on the same side of the street. Additionally, proposed subdivisions within historic districts must be reviewed by the HRC as part of the overall subdivision review process in accordance with article XV of this chapter. 
(f)  Authentic restoration and reconstruction. 
(1)  Authentic restoration or reconstruction is permitted, subject to approval of the HRC, even though the authentic restoration or reconstruction does not meet with current setback and other requirements and standards of article VIII of this chapter. Authentic restoration or reconstruction shall mean exact replication of an historic structure to include, but not limited to siting, scale, massing, and materials of structure. Where it is found by the HRC that an application for a building permit covers activity consisting of an authentic restoration or reconstruction in the same location as the original location and in the original structural conformation for a structure of historic and/or architectural significance to the historic district, such activity may be approved by the HRC. 
(2)  The board of adjustment hears requests for variances from the requirements for setback and other standards established by article VIII of this chapter. 
a.  The board of adjustment, may attach reasonable and appropriate conditions to the granting of such variances so that the public health, safety, and general welfare shall be protected. 
b.  The board of adjustment shall not be authorized, in action undertaken by this subsection, to approve a use of property which is not permitted by right within the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(g)  Parking waiver. Where the HRC, in considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, shall find that the number of off-street parking spaces required by zoning regulations for a building or structure for which a building permit is requested would render the building incongruous with the historic aspects of the historic district, it may recommend to the board of adjustment that a variance be granted from the off-street parking requirements. 
The board of adjustment may authorize a lesser number of off-street parking spaces provided the board finds, in addition to the required findings for granting a variance, as follows: 
(1)  That the reduced number of spaces will not create problems due to increased on-street parking; and 
(2)  That the reduced number of spaces will not constitute a threat to the public safety. 
(h)  Certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  From and after the designation of a historic district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, landscape and color or other appurtenant features), nor above ground utility structure, nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished within such historic district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the HRC. Further, no archeological resource associated with such a structure or building shall be altered, moved, or removed within such historic district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to the archeological evidence has been submitted to and approved by the HRC. Further, no subdivision of land within an historic district shall be approved until it has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-8 of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to subdivisions which are exempted pursuant to section 7-15-1 of this chapter. 
No building permit granted for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving, or demolishing structures within the historic districts shall be issued prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the HRC. 
A certificate of appropriateness may be issued subject to reasonable conditions to carry out the purposes of this section. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required. Any building permit or such other permit not issued in conformity with this section shall be invalid. 
For the purpose of this section, "exterior features" shall include the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior building or other structure, including the kind, texture and color of the building materials, the size and scale of the building, and the type, color and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures and important landscape and natural features of the lot on which the building or other structure is located. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, "exterior features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size, and location of all such signs. 
The HRC shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall take no action under this section except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving, or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, outdoor advertising signs, or other significant features in the historic district which would be incongruous with the special character of the historic district. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in the historic district which does not involve a substantial change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, re-construction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any such feature which the chief building inspector of his designee shall certify in writing to the HRC is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(3)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the relocation, demolition, or destruction of a building or structure or the removal or obliteration of an archeological resource within the historic district may not be denied except for as set forth hereinafter. However, the effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days from the date of approval of the certificate of appropriateness. The maximum period of delay authorized by this subsection shall be reduced by the HRC where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such period the HRC may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building, structure of site. If the HRC finds that the building, structure or site has no special significance or value toward maintaining the character of the historic district, it shall waive all or part of such period and authorize earlier demolition or removal. 
If the HRC has voted to recommend designation of an area as a historic district, and final designation has not been made by the city council, the demolition or destruction of any building, structure, or site located in the proposed historic district may be delayed by the HRC for a period of up to 180 days or until the city council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. 
It shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the property owner where any building or structure which is located within a historic district is subject to demolition due to neglect; provided, however, where the property owner can show evidence of undue economic hardship satisfactory to the HRC, no violation shall be deemed to have occurred. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, structure, or site determined by the state historic preservation officer, or his/her successor, as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied except where the HRC finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
The procedures for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness are set forth in section 7-5-12 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 4736, §§ 1f, g, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 7-9-3. - Downtown Design Review Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. Downtown design review assists in protecting the downtown local architectural heritage and in the preservation of the considerable economic investments that have occurred over the years. The downtown design review process seeks to encourage renovation and new development in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance the historical integrity, and develop creative design solutions. While the design guidelines will not dictate architectural styles, they will suggest a variety of design options for achieving compatibility within the designated boundaries. 
(b)  Establishment. There is hereby established a Downtown Design Review District as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Chestnut Street and Furman Street in the City of Asheville and running thence westerly along Chestnut Street to Elizabeth Place; then southerly along Elizabeth Place to Starnes Avenue; thence westerly along Starnes Avenue to Flint Street; thence southerly along Flint Street to Cherry Street; thence westerly along Cherry Street to Montford Avenue; thence northerly along Montford Avenue to Hill Street; thence westerly along Hill Street to Michael Street; thence crossing Interstate Highway 240 in a southerly direction following its entrance ramp to Haywood Street; thence southwesterly along Haywood Street, crossing Patton Avenue, and continuing southwesterly along Haywood Street to Knoxville Place; thence southeasterly along Knoxville Place to Hilliard Avenue; thence easterly along Hilliard Avenue to South French Broad Avenue; thence southerly along South French Broad Avenue to Dailey Drive; thence easterly along Dailey Drive to South Grove Street; thence southerly along South Grove Street to Blanton Street; thence southerly along Blanton Street to Choctaw Street; thence easterly along Choctaw Street to Biltmore Avenue; thence northerly along Biltmore Avenue to McCormick Place; thence northeasterly along McCormick Place to South Charlotte Street, thence northerly along South Charlotte Street to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive; thence northeasterly along Martin Luther King Jr. Drive to Mountain Street; thence easterly along Mountain Street to College Street; thence due north to Interstate Highway 240; thence westerly along Interstate Highway 240 to its intersection with a southerly projection of Furman Avenue; thence northerly along Furman Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(c)  Boundaries. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall be and is hereby authorized to divide the Downtown Design Review District into the following boundaries as it may find appropriate: 
(1)  Core area. The centralmost portion of the downtown area, wherein the greatest concentration of properties exist which reflect the unusual character and identity for the downtown area. 
(2)  Gateway corridors. Properties along major streets that lead into the core area and establish a sense of character for the downtown area. 
(3)  Periphery. That portion of the Downtown Design Review District not included in the core area or gateway corridors. 
The official Downtown Design Review District map can be reviewed in the planning and development department and at the permitting center. 
(d)  Authority to establish guidelines for new construction and rehabilitation. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall be and is hereby authorized to establish guidelines for new construction and rehabilitation in the Downtown Design Review District, including new construction, rehabilitation, illumination, signs, color, painting and cleaning, and landscape and site design. The Asheville Downtown Commission may establish different guidelines for each of the three categories of property within the Downtown Design Review District. 
(e)  Review of work requiring permits, review, or variance. All construction work that requires a building, sign, zoning, or demolition permit, or a variance, must be submitted to the planning and development department for review prior to the issuance of the permit. Routine maintenance shall not be subject to review, but procedures for cleaning and painting buildings must be reviewed. In addition, proposed exterior illumination, erection of fences and walls, and parking lot modifications must be reviewed. 
(f)  Application for design review. Each person desiring to undertake an activity which is subject to review pursuant to this section shall submit to the planning and development department a written application for design review. In the case of new construction, rehabilitation construction, illumination, signs, landscape or site design, the application shall be accompanied by plans sufficient in detail to describe the proposed undertaking. In the case of applications for review regarding color, painting and cleaning, the application shall be accompanied by such written statement as may be required to describe sufficiently the proposed undertaking. 
(g)  Review of applications for design review. Applications for design review shall be scheduled for review by the planning and development department and the Asheville Downtown Commission as follows: 
(1)  Minor works, as defined in subsection 7-5-10(a)(1), shall be reviewed and processed by the planning and development department staff. 
(2)  For design review applications involving new construction over 5,000 square feet in size, significant rehabilitation, and site design and demolition, the Asheville Downtown Commission shall review the application at its first regular meeting immediately following the filing of the application and supporting documentation, without the necessity of giving notice of a public hearing. 
(h)  Recommendations on the design. The Asheville Downtown Commission shall make recommendations regarding the design of the undertaking proposed by the applicant based upon the guidelines adopted by the downtown commission. 
(i)  Implementation of plans according to recommendations. Applicants are strongly encouraged by the city council to implement their plans for such activities within the Downtown Design Review District in accordance with the recommendations of the Asheville Downtown Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2624, § 2, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 7-9-4. - Manufactured Housing Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Manufactured Housing Overlay District is established to provide a procedure for identifying areas in which manufactured housing may be located on individual lots and to establish standards for the individual manufactured homes. This overlay district will expand the range of housing opportunities available to residents of Asheville while assuring that manufactured housing is compatible with existing homes in the area. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, individual manufactured homes located on individual lots shall be permitted in the Manufactured Housing District provided that manufactured homes meet the development standards set forth in subsection 7-9-4(c) below. 
(c)  Development standards. Manufactured homes to be located on an individual lot shall meet the following standards. No variances shall be granted from these standards. 
(1)  The manufactured homes must meet the standards set by the department of housing and urban development (hereinafter referred to as "HUD") as of the date the application is made for a zoning permit to locate the manufactured home on an individual lot. If the manufactured home does not meet the standards set by HUD as of that date, a zoning permit for location of the manufactured home on an individual lot may be issued only if the city, or county if in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, building inspector inspects the plumbing, heating and air conditioning, and electrical systems of the manufactured home and determines that any deviations from the current HUD standards are not life threatening. After a zoning permit has been issued for the location of the manufactured home on an individual lot, a new zoning permit must be issued in order for it to be relocated to another individual lot. Before a zoning permit is issued for the relocation, the manufactured home must meet the standards of the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of original construction. 
(2)  The tongue, axles, running lights, and removable towing apparatus must be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the individual home. 
(3)  The manufactured home shall be placed so that its longest side is parallel to the front property line of the lot. Provided, however, the manufactured home may be placed so that its longest side is perpendicular to the front property line if an addition, whose design is compatible with the manufactured home, is attached to the manufactured home at the point nearest the front property line and if the width of the manufactured home with the addition exceeds 50 percent of its length. 
(4)  Exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood, hardboard, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted aluminum, but in the case of painted aluminum, the painted finish shall not exceed the reflectivity of gloss white paint). The exterior siding shall be comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction. 
(5)  The manufactured home shall be attached to a continuous permanent foundation of brick or block which is unpierced except for required ventilation and access as required by the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(6)  The roof pitch for the manufactured home shall have a minimum vertical rise of three feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run. The roof shall be finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction. All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than six inches, which may include a gutter. 
(7)  The manufactured home may be attached to a basement structure, but the basement structure must meet the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(8)  The length of the manufactured home shall not exceed four times the width of the home, excluding additions. 
(9)  Structural additions to manufactured homes (such as, but not limited to, porches and decks) are encouraged, but not required. Those structures shall comply with the standards of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(10)  The manufactured home shall have a minimum of 1,100 square feet of enclosed and heated living area. 
(11)  The manufactured home must be set up in accordance with the standards established by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and shall be properly anchored in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. The set up and anchoring must be done by persons licensed by the State of North Carolina for such work. 
(12)  Walks and driveways for the manufactured home must be paved, graveled, or be of some other dustless, all-weather surface. 
(13)  Individual lot dimensions and yard requirements for manufactured homes on individual lots shall meet the standards established by the underlying zoning district for single-family residential development. 
(d)  Designation of manufactured housing districts. 
(1)  Treated as map amendments. Designation of properties as manufactured housing districts shall be treated as map amendments. The designation shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(2)  Guidelines for identifying manufactured housing districts. The following guidelines shall be used in identifying potential areas for designation as manufactured housing districts: 
a.  Manufactured homes located on individual lots and meeting the development standards set forth in subsection 7-9-5(c) above would be architecturally compatible with existing site-built homes in the area; 
b.  Manufactured homes should be located in the area prior to its designation as a manufactured housing district and should comprise at least 20 percent of the homes in the area; 
c.  Vacant land should be available upon which to locate manufactured homes; and 
d.  The area should be a minimum of five acres. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-9-5. - Manufactured Housing Community Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Manufactured Housing Community Overlay District is established to provide standards for the development of manufactured housing communities in Asheville and its area of jurisdiction. Manufactured housing communities can provide alternative, affordable housing opportunities for residents of the city. Standards are established in this district for the following additional purposes: 
(1)  To establish requirements designed to assure that the design and construction of the street system, utilities, lot layouts, and other improvements in the manufactured housing community are in harmony with surrounding development; and 
(2)  To protect property values, preserve the character and integrity of the community or individual neighborhoods within the community, and promote the health, safety, and welfare of area residents through the provision of standards for infrastructure and open space. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, manufactured housing communities meeting the standards set forth in this section shall be permitted in this overlay district. Single manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots provided they comply with standards set forth in section 7-9-4(c) of this chapter. 
(c)  Design standards. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  No manufactured housing community shall be approved for a site less than three contiguous acres under single ownership or control. 
b.  Maximum allowable density in the manufactured housing community shall be seven dwelling units per buildable acre (land area excluding floodways, wetlands, and slopes in excess of 33 percent). 
c.  A manufactured housing community shall comply with the provisions for subdivision and multi-family development signs in Article XIII of this chapter. 
d.  A manufactured housing community may have a manufactured home as a designated office for the operator/manager. 
e.  There shall be no more than one manufactured home or mobile home per manufactured home space. 
f.  Each manufactured home shall be set up and installed in accordance with the State of North Carolina regulations for installation of manufactured homes adopted and published by the North Carolina Department of Insurance. 
g.  The operator/manager of a manufactured housing community shall designate and enforce an uniform type of underpinning of all manufactured homes in the community. 
(2)  Manufactured home space requirements. 
a.  Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum width of 50 feet and shall be open and unobstructed. 
b.  Minimum lot size for a manufactured home space shall be 5,000 square feet. 
c.  Each manufactured home shall be located at least 20 feet from any other manufactured home or structure within the community, excluding storage buildings for use with the individual home. Each home shall be at least 35 feet from any property line. If the property abuts a public street, the setback shall be 40 feet. Each home shall be setback at least 20 feet from streets within the community. 
d.  A manufactured home shall not occupy an area in excess of one-third of the area of its respective space. The total occupied area of the manufactured home and its accessory buildings shall not exceed one-half of the total area of the space. 
e.  Each manufactured home space shall have a permanent site number sign that is clearly visible from the street running in front of the home and located on the power panel box serving the home. 
f.  There shall be front and rear steps for each manufactured home. If the residents elect to have decks, the home shall be required to have steps until the decks are completed. These decks shall comply with the North Carolina State Building Code. The deck area shall be not less than 16 square feet in area, and not less than four feet in width. 
(3)  Open spaces. 
a.  A minimum of ten percent of the total area of the manufactured housing community shall be designated as common open space. This open space may include active or passive recreation facilities to cater to the occupants of the community. Such open spaces shall be centrally located and accessible to all manufactured homes within the community by means of sidewalks and walkways. 
b.  The following areas shall not be included as open space: 
1.  Area within the required individual manufactured home space; 
2.  Parking areas; 
3.  Area used for landscaping along streets or at the perimeter of the property of the manufactured housing community; and 
4.  Not more than 50 percent of the area required for setbacks shall be designated as open space. 
c.  Open spaces shall be maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection 7-9-5(c)(8) of this chapter. 
(4)  Off-street parking. 
a.  A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home. 
b.  A minimum of one parking space for every five manufactured homes shall be provided for visitor parking purposes. 
c.  Handicapped parking shall be provided as required by the North Carolina Accessibility Code. 
d.  Parking spaces shall be constructed with a minimum of three inches of compacted gravel, stone, or hard surface materials, bordered by landscaping timbers, brick, block, or other material which defines the edge of the parking area/driveway. 
(5)  Street and walkways. 
a.  All streets within the manufactured housing community shall have a right-of-way width of 30 feet with a pavement width of at least 20 feet, not including parking spaces. 
b.  Streets within the manufactured housing community shall be constructed to provide all weather access to all manufactured home areas. Streets shall be constructed with a minimum of six inches of compacted stone base and one and one-half inches of I-2 asphalt. 
c.  The grade of streets within the community shall not exceed 15 percent. 
d.  The street layout shall be designed to provide for the continuous flow of traffic with cul-de-sacs permitted. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a maximum length of 1,000 feet and shall include a cul-de-sac bulb of 45 feet radius. All dead-end streets shall have a turn-around area with a minimum 45-foot radius. 
e.  Traffic control signs (stop, yield, and speed signs) shall be placed throughout the community where necessary as determined by the director of public works. 
f.  Each street shall have a permanent sign installed with a designated name identifying each street. The sign shall be approved by the director of public works. 
g.  Streets and parking areas shall be maintained by the operator/manager of the community. 
h.  Each space within the community shall have direct access to a local community street. The driveway shall be an unobstructed area, not less than ten feet in width and shall be constructed with a minimum of three inches of compacted gravel, stone, or hard surface materials. It shall be well-drained and shall meet the standards of residential driveways as set forth in the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. If constructed of gravel or stone, the driveway shall be bordered with materials which define the edge of the driveway. 
i.  The community shall abut a public street, with a minimum street frontage of 50 feet. 
j.  Street lighting shall be provided throughout the community. 
k.  Permanent, well-drained walks not less than four feet in width shall be provided from each manufactured home space to the community buildings and to public street or community streets. 
(6)  Utilities. 
a.  An adequate, safe potable supply of water shall be provided for the community. The source of the water supply shall be either through a municipal or public water system, with the community connecting to the public water system within the city limits. When such a system is not available in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the community must be serviced by a water supply approved by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management or the Buncombe County Health Department. 
b.  An adequate and safe sewage disposal system shall be provided in the manufactured home community. If the park is located within the city limits, it must be connected to the sewer system of the Metropolitan Sewerage District of Buncombe County. In the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the collection systems, sewage treatment facilities or individual septic tank systems shall be approved by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management or the Buncombe County Health Department. 
c.  Plans for utilities shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies. 
d.  There shall be a storage and disposable system for solid waste for the community in order to alleviate health and pollution hazards. The residents of each home shall have a sufficient number of containers that have adequate capacity and can be tightly sealed. It shall be the responsibility of the operator/manager of the community to see that a municipal or private solid waste disposable service is provided to the residents of the community on a weekly basis. This may or may not be at the expense of the residents. 
e.  Each manufactured home space shall have proper drainage to prevent accumulation of water. Storm drainage facilities shall include suitable on-site detention facilities when deemed appropriate by the director of public works and/or the city engineer. Such facilities shall be sufficient to transport safely through the community all volumes of water generated upstream and on-site. Storm drainage shall be provided in accordance with the stormwater management regulations set forth in article XII of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations of the City of Asheville and other governmental agencies. 
(7)  Landscape and buffering. 
a.  Buffering shall be provided around the boundaries of the community as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. In no case shall the required buffer be less than a type "B" buffer as described in section 7-11-3. 
b.  Street trees shall be provided along internal streets within the community at the ratio established by section 7-11-3 of this chapter for street trees along public streets. 
c.  Trees shall be provided along the lot lines of manufactured home spaces parallel to internal streets at the ratio of one tree per 40 feet of lot line. 
d.  Material and equipment storage buildings, outdoor storage areas, refuse collectors, and dumpsters shall be screened from view from adjoining properties, streets, and open spaces. 
(8)  Grounds and buildings. 
a.  The grounds of a manufactured home community shall be maintained free of debris, trash, and litter. 
b.  Grounds, buildings, and storage areas within the community shall be maintained to prevent the infestation of rodents, flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. 
c.  Grounds within the community shall be maintained to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, and other weeds. 
d.  All grounds within the community shall have proper drainage to prevent the accumulation of water. 
e.  All recreational areas provided by the owner of the manufactured home community shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary manner by the operator/manager. 
f.  The operator/manager of the community shall provide space on the grounds for mail service to the residents of the community. 
(d)  Inspection. Employees of the City of Asheville shall have the right to make inspections of the community to determine that the requirements of this section are met. These inspections shall be conducted at least once a year. It shall be the responsibility of the operator/manager of the manufactured home community to see that the requirements of the section are met. The operator/manager shall be responsible for correcting any and all violations of this section. 
(e)  Expansion of existing manufactured housing communities. Manufactured home communities existing at the time of adoption of this section shall not be allowed to expand or increase unless such expansion meets the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 10, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 3210, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 4208, § 1a, 6-25-13)  
Sec. 7-9-6. - Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. Realizing the importance of the Blue Ridge Parkway to the economy of Asheville and western North Carolina, the Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District is created to protect and preserve the unique features of this asset to the city and region. The standards established in this district will protect the scenic quality of the Blue Ridge Parkway and reduce encroachment on its rural setting. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions set forth in this section for the Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District shall apply to all properties within 1,320 feet of the centerline of the Blue Ridge Parkway located within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Both privately and publicly owned property shall be subject to the requirements set forth herein. 
(c)  Development standards. 
(1)  Setback requirements. 
a.  Principal buildings. Principal buildings and structures to be located adjacent to the Blue Ridge Parkway shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from the edge of property owned by the United States government and designated as the Blue Ridge Parkway if the buildings and structures are visible from the Blue Ridge Parkway roadway. 
b.  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and structures to be located adjacent to the Blue Ridge Parkway shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet from the boundary of property owned by the United States government and designated as the Blue Ridge Parkway if the buildings and structures are visible from the Blue Ridge Parkway roadway. 
(2)  Building heights. No building or structure shall be constructed with a height in excess of 40 feet within 1,320 feet of the centerline of the Blue Ridge Parkway. 
(3)  Buffering requirements. Development of any type, other than single-family residential, that is: 
a.  On property adjacent to Blue Ridge Parkway property; and 
b.  Is located within 1,320 feet of the centerline of the Blue Ridge Parkway; and 
c.  Which development will be visible from the Blue Ridge Parkway, shall provide a type "B" buffer, as described in subsection 7-11-2(d)(1)(a) of this chapter between the proposed development and the Blue Ridge Parkway. The preservation of existing trees within the bufferyard is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(l), 1-8-08)  
Sec. 7-9-7. - Transition Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. Transition overlay districts address concerns unique to an area when other zoning mechanisms cannot achieve the desired results. An area may be unique based on natural, economic, or historic attributes; be subject to problems from gradual, rapid, or severe transitions of land use; or contain public facilities which require specific land use regulations for their efficient operation. Transition districts provide a means to modify zoning regulations for specific areas defined in special plans or studies. 
(b)  Establishment. A Transition Overlay District may be established as the result of an area planning study following review and approval as set forth in section 7-5-7 of this chapter. A neighborhood plan, a corridor plan, or an area plan shall be completed prior to the establishment of the Transition Overlay District. 
(c)  Scope of transition overlay districts and relationship to other regulations. Transition overlay district standards are applied in conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The transition district provisions may modify any portion of the standards of the underlying zoning district. The provisions may apply additional requirements or allow exceptions to general regulations. When there is conflict between the transition overlay district and the standards established by the underlying zoning district or other regulations of this chapter, the transition overlay district standards shall control. 
(d)  Adoption criteria. A Transition Overlay District may be established if all the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The area proposed for the transition district has special characteristics or problems of a natural, economic, historic, public facility, or transitional land use or development nature which are not common to other areas of the city; 
(2)  Existing general use districts and other overlay zoning districts are inadequate to achieve a desired public benefit or to address an identified problem in the area; 
(3)  The proposed transition overlay district and standards are the result of a study and plan documenting the special characteristics or problems of the area and describing how a transition overlay district will best address the relevant issues; and 
(4)  The standards of the transition overlay district are in conformance with the comprehensive plan, or there is a determination that the comprehensive plan should be amended to reflect the proposed standards, and continue to meet the general purpose and intent of the underlying zoning district and any applicable overlay zoning district and do not prohibit uses or development allowed by the underlying zoning district without clear justification. 
(e)  Review. Transition overlay districts and their standards shall be reviewed periodically to determine whether they are still needed, should be continued or amended. Transition overlay districts and their standards shall be reviewed as part of the process for the update of the comprehensive plan. 
(f)  Transition district overlay maps. The boundaries of each transition district established shall be identified on the Official Zoning Maps of the City of Asheville. Copies of this map shall be maintained in the planning and development department. 
(g)  Standards. In developing the transition overlay district, all standards for land development in the area may be addressed. Standards established for the transition overlay district shall be based upon recommendations set forth in the plan prepared for the area to be included in the transition overlay district. Standards for the transition overlay district may exceed or otherwise vary from the standards found in the underlying zoning district. 
The standards which may be addressed in the transition overlay district include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Uses 
Setbacks 
Parking 
Lot dimensions 
Landscaping 
Signage 
Building scale and height 
All standards must be approved as part of the transition overlay district in accordance with the procedure for text amendments and map amendments set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-9-8. - Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Head of Montford Transition Overlay District is established to provide for the development of civic, office, limited retail, and residential uses in an area of transition between the Central Business District and the Montford neighborhood. The development standards for this overlay district are designed to be sensitive to the historic context of the area, to minimize impacts on adjacent residential uses, and to encourage compatibility in the design of new developments. This district should be sensitive to a significant pedestrian population, but also provide for adequate and safe vehicular access. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
Residential: 
Accessory apartments 
Dwellings, multi-family 
Dwellings, single-family detached 
Dwellings, single-family zero lot line 
Recreational: 
Passive parks 
Institutional: 
Civic, social service, and fraternal facilities 
Libraries 
Places of worship 
Schools 
Public/semi-public: 
Community centers 
Fire/police stations 
Museums 
Public utilities and related facilities 
Office/business: 
Offices 
Home occupations 
Residential related commercial service 
Studios, galleries, and workshops for artists, craftspeople, designers, photographers (shall not create noise, vibrations, glare, fumes or odors off premises) 
Other: 
Accessory structures 
Parking lots as accessory to a principal use 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District is prohibited. 
(d)  Uses by right subject to special requirements. 
Antenna 
Bakeries 
Barber shops and salons 
Grocery stores 
Pharmacies 
Restaurants 
Retail sales (excluding retail gasoline sales) 
Tailors/dressmaker shops 
Video rental stores 
(e)  Conditional uses. Those uses by right, subject to special requirements, which are allowed in this district and which exceed the total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density standards. The maximum residential density per acre within the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be 12 dwelling units. 
(2)  Structure size standards. In no case shall the size of individual structures within the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District exceed 45,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot size standards. The minimum lot size for non-residential uses in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be one acre. The minimum lot size for residential uses in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be 5,445 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width standards. The minimum lot width for non-residential uses in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be 100 feet. The minimum lot width for residential uses in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be 50 feet. 
(5)  Setback standards. In no case shall the front setback for structures within the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District exceed 25 feet. 
(6)  Impervious surface standards. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be 80 percent. 
(7)  Height standards. Front façades of structures within the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall not exceed three stories in height. Four story façades are permitted on the side and rear of structures within the district only if the lower level is completely below grade as measured at the front façade of the structure. 
(8)  Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter. Parking lots exceeding ten spaces shall be buffered from all adjacent residential uses and schools by a type "D" buffer, as described in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. In addition, parking lot landscaping [shall] be increased by 50 percent above the minimum required set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(9)  Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. No parking shall be permitted in any required setback. Parking lots exceeding ten spaces shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from Gudger Street and a minimum of 30 feet from properties housing residential uses or schools. Parking shall be provided at the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the structure. Uses in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be permitted a 25 percent reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required by section 7-11-2 of this chapter. 
(10)  Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks, as specified in the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual, shall be required for all new construction and major improvements in the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(11)  Vehicular access standards. Vehicular access to non-residential uses shall not be provided from Gudger Street. 
(12)  Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as required by section 7-11-4 of this chapter. 
(13)  Design and operation standards. All new development within the Head of Montford Transition Overlay District shall be reviewed by the Historic Resources Commission (HRC) for consistency with the design guidelines for the Montford Local Historic District. All new development shall be required to conform to the requirements of the HRC with regard to structure and site design, massing, scale, building setbacks and height. An application for a certificate of appropriateness from HRC must be approved prior to submitting an application for any other review process as described in section 7-5 of this chapter. 
Drive through facilities and outdoor loudspeaker systems shall not be permitted. Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 12 feet in height and shall be shielded and directed away from adjoining residential properties and street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2622, § 1(a), 10-12-99; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(6), 8-24-04)  
Sec. 7-9-9. - Conditional Use District. 
From and after July 1, 2005, the Conditional Use District shall not be available for use in rezoning property within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Asheville. Any conditional use district ordinance adopted prior to July 1, 2005, shall remain valid and subject to the provisions contained herein and in the adopted ordinances establishing said districts. 
(a)  Purpose. The Conditional Use District is established to provide for flexibility in the development of property while ensuring that the development is compatible with neighboring uses. Additional standards and regulations may be attached to a proposed development to ensure compatibility with the surrounding uses and with applicable adopted plans in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. When applying for designation as a Conditional Use District, the owner shall specify the nature of the proposed development and shall propose conditions to ensure compatibility between the development and the surrounding uses. 
(b)  General requirements. The use of the Conditional Use District is strongly encouraged due to the refinement of requests permitted by this option. Conditional use overlay zoning affords a degree of certainty in land use decisions not possible when rezoning to a general use district. 
(1)  A Conditional Use District application shall be considered only upon request by the property owner or a duly authorized representative of the property owner. 
(2)  Prior to submittal of the application, it is strongly recommended that the applicant meet with representatives of the surrounding property owners and of the surrounding neighborhood(s) to discuss the proposed development. 
(3)  All standards and requirements of the underlying zoning district shall be met, except to the extent that the conditions imposed by the conditional use zoning are more restrictive than the underlying standards. 
(4)  No use shall be permitted except those allowed by approval of a conditional use permit. 
(5)  The conditions imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit approval shall be stated on the permit and may limit the uses which are permitted on the property. Such conditions may further specify location on the property of the proposed structure(s), the number of dwelling units, the location and extent of supporting facilities such as parking lots, driveways, and access streets, the location and extent of buffer areas and other special purpose areas, the timing of development, the height of structures, the location and extent of rights-of-way and other areas to be dedicated for public purposes, and other such matters as may be identified as appropriate for the proposed development. 
(6)  Minor modifications of the approved conditional use permit may be approved by the planning and development director. The minor modifications authorized herein are intended to provide relief where conditions, established by the conditional use permit granted, create a hardship based upon a unique physical attribute of the property itself or some other factor unique to the property which was not known at the time of permit approval and which subsequently rendered the land difficult or impossible to use due to the condition(s) imposed. The permit holder shall bear the burden of proof to secure the modification(s). Such modifications shall be limited to the following: 
a.  A deviation of up to ten percent or 24 inches, whichever is greater, from the approved setback, provided that the conditions for approving a deviation from the required setback established by subsection 7-11-8(c)(1) of this chapter are met. 
b.  A reduction of up to 25 percent in the number of parking spaces required for the use provided that the conditions established by subsection 7-11-8(c)(2) of this chapter are met. 
(7)  Any violation of a condition included in the approval of a conditional use permit shall be treated the same as any other violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the same remedies and penalties as any other such violation. 
(8)  If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to these regulations is found to be illegal or invalid, or if the applicant should fail to accept any condition, the approval of such Conditional Use District shall be null and void, the property shall revert to its previous zoning classification and the conditional use permit shall be deemed revoked, all without further action by the city council. 
(9)  If no action has been taken to begin development of the property in accordance with the approved conditional use permit within 24 months of its approval by city council, the Conditional Use District zoning shall be null and void, the property shall revert to its previous zoning classification and the conditional use permit shall be deemed revoked, all without further action of the city council. 
(10)  If the use or uses commenced pursuant to a permit issued under this section are deemed abandoned or discontinued pursuant to sections 7-17-5 or 7-17-6, then the conditional use permit issued pursuant to this section shall be deemed revoked, the Conditional Use District zoning shall be null and void, and the property shall revert to its previous zoning classification, without action by the city council. 
(c)  Application procedure. Applications for Conditional Use District zoning and for issuance of a conditional use permit shall be processed, considered, and voted upon using the same procedures and subject to the same requirements as those established by sections 7-7 and 7-5-5 of this chapter, except as otherwise provided below: 
(1)  The application shall include site plans, landscape plans, building elevations, floor plans, and such other information required to provide the approving bodies with a complete and accurate description of the proposed development. 
(2)  The application and supporting materials shall be reviewed by the technical review committee in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 7-5-5 of this chapter prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the application is to be considered. Notice of this meeting shall be provided as the same is required for a public hearing for rezoning property as set forth in subsection 7-5-20(a)(4) of this chapter. The recommendations and comments of the technical review committee shall be reported to the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  In establishing conditional districts, the city council may prescribe dimensional requirements (height, setback, etc.) that are different from the requirements of the corresponding general zoning classification, and may prescribe development and design standards that are different from those set out in article XI; provided, that any request for a modification to a dimensional requirement or development and design standards (landscape, parking, etc.) that is less restrictive than would be applicable for the corresponding general zoning classification must be specifically described in any notices required for the public hearing on the conditional zoning application, if it is part of the application, and must be set out separately in any ordinance establishing said conditional zoning district, together with an explanation of the reason for the modification. Except as modified pursuant to this paragraph, or pursuant to paragraph (6), below, all standards and requirements of the corresponding general zoning district must be met. Variances to the standards established for any conditional zoning shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the recommendations from the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the requests for Conditional Use District zoning and issuance of a conditional use permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-20 of this chapter. The city council shall take separate actions on consideration of the zoning request and the conditional use permit request. 
(5)  The Asheville City Council shall not approve the conditional use permit unless and until it has approved the rezoning request. The standards for granting conditional use permits under this section shall be the same as for conditional use permits issued pursuant to subsection 7-16-2(c). 
(6)  Upon review of the requests for approval of Conditional Use District zoning, the Asheville City Council may authorize the amendment of the official zoning map of the City of Asheville to add the Conditional Use District zoning and issue the conditional use permit for the proposed development; deny the requests for the zoning and issuance of the conditional use permit; or continue the consideration of the requests in order to receive further information regarding the requests. 
(7)  In approving the conditional use permit, the Asheville City Council may impose such conditions and requirements as it deems necessary in order for the purpose and intent of this chapter to be served. 
(8)  The Conditional Use District zoning and conditional use permit authorized and approved as provided herein shall be perpetually binding upon the affected property unless subsequently changed or amended as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2669, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 3237, § 1(a), 5-24-05; Ord. No. 3369, § 1(a), 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3374, § 1(v), 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3700, § 1f, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 7-9-10. - Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District. 
(a)  General description. The Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District is established to assist in the advancement and implementation of the Charlotte Street Corridor Plan (the "Plan"). The district provides for and encourages a mixture of uses, including medium density business and service uses serving several residential neighborhoods, and medium to high density residential uses. Additionally, the district encourages development which is compatible with its surroundings and provides incentives for property owners to develop property in a manner that is consistent with the goals and recommendations of the plan. This district may serve as a workplace and/or residence for many individuals and should be sensitive to a significant pedestrian population, but also provide for adequate and safe vehicular access. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The uses permitted within the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District shall be those listed as permitted uses within the underlying general use zoning district(s). 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The uses prohibited within the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District shall be those listed as prohibited uses within the underlying general use zoning district(s). 
(d)  Uses by right subject to special requirements. The uses by right subject to special requirements within the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District shall be those listed as uses by right subject to special requirements within the underlying general use zoning district(s). 
(e)  Conditional uses. The conditional uses within the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District shall be those listed as conditional uses within the underlying general use zoning district(s). 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Structure size standards. 
a.  New structures in the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District may have a building footprint of not more than 6,000 square feet. The gross floor area of new structures shall not exceed 12,000 square feet. 
b.  Existing structures may not be expanded to exceed a footprint or gross floor area of 12,000 square feet. 
c.  Structures may exceed the permitted structure size indicated in subsection a. above, up to 25 percent above the maximum structure size if the specific design criteria set forth in paragraph (2)b. below, are met. 
(2)  Design criteria. 
a.  General principles and intent of the design criteria: 
The intent of the following design criteria is to maintain and strengthen the unique historic character of Charlotte Street by helping to ensure that new buildings are architecturally compatible with the historic character of the street and that design characteristics are employed which are consistent with the historic architectural vocabulary of the area. These characteristics include historic building forms and silhouettes, proportions, treatments, exterior materials, massing and/or architectural style. Additionally, it is intended that the front elevations and overall massing of new buildings be pedestrian scaled and related to the street. 
It is not the intent that new buildings mimic historic designs, but rather that they combine elements from the historic design palette in new ways to achieve a design which is compatible with and complementary to the historic character of the street. 
In general, the predominant historic style of architecture within the boundaries of the overlay district is of a residential form with pitched roofs, porches and paned windows and is less urban than the structures south of E. Chestnut Street. To a lesser degree, brick historic commercial structures exist in the corridor and these have pitched roofs and sometimes use a combination of brick and stucco. 
When developing designs for new buildings, it is advisable to reference existing historic buildings or other documentation to identify elements that are to be used in the project. 
b.  Specific design criteria: 
1.  The proposed structure shall be two stories as measured from the Charlotte Street side of the building. 
2.  Roof forms shall be similar to those used historically within the boundaries of the overlay district. The dominant roof shapes shall be gabled or hipped. The minimum roof pitch shall be 5:12. Gable ends shall face the street. The addition of dormers is permitted. Areas of flat roofs are discouraged and shall not exceed 25 percent of the primary façade and shall be located behind a sloped roof or parapet. 
3.  All rooftop equipment shall be fully screened from view and the method of screening shall be integrated into the overall building design, for example within or behind pitched roofs. Ground mounted equipment shall be located to the rear of buildings and shall be screened with an enclosure compatible with the architectural style of the structure and/or evergreen plant material that provides an opaque screen. 
4.  Where new building façades will be wider than 35 feet, the façade surface shall be subdivided into portions not exceeding this distance by varying setbacks, roof forms and perhaps materials. This subdivision of the façade surface will break up the façade into increments similar to historic façade widths found within the boundaries of the overlay district. 
5.  Use building materials that are similar to those used historically. These include "pebbledash" or "rough-cast" stucco, wood shingles, and horizontal wood siding for buildings which are residential in character. Brick was typically used for original historic commercial structures, sometimes in combination with stucco above or as a foundation material for structures which are residential in character. Stone was also used, to a lesser degree, as a material at the foundation or first floor level with shingles or stucco above. 
6.  A minimum of 40 percent of the first floor and 20 percent of the upper floor(s) on the front façade shall have window/door fenestration. Windows shall be set to the inside of the building face wall. Tinted or mirrored glass is not permitted. 
7.  Skylights shall not be used on the front façades. 
(3)  Additional design standards. Structures which incorporate all of the design criteria in subsection (2)b. above, may further exceed the permitted structure size indicated in subsection (1) above, according to the total number of points received for incorporating the following elements in the proposed development. 
Developments accumulating between 50 and 79 points shall be allowed to exceed the permitted structure size indicated in item (1) up to 50 percent above the maximum structure size. Developments accumulating 80 or more points shall be allowed to exceed the permitted structure size indicated in subsection (1) above, up to 75 percent above the maximum structure size. 
a.  The proposed structure is a "mixed use" building, housing two or more distinct use types (i.e. retail, office, residential, etc.); and (point totals are cumulative): 
1.  No single use type exceeds 75 percent of the total gross square footage of the building: 30 points. 
2.  If residential uses are provided which occupy at least 40 percent of the total gross square footage of the building: 40 points. 
3.  If residential uses are provided which occupy at least 40 percent of the total gross square footage or the building and at least 25 percent of those units are designed to have a total net square footage of 600 square feet or less: 45 points. 
b.  The proposed structure contains one or more of the following uses with an operable storefront entrance facing the street: 
Bakeries 
Barber shops and salons 
Bicycle shops 
Bookstores 
Candy, pastry, ice cream and snack shops 
Delicatessens 
Florists 
Fruit and vegetable markets 
Gift shops 
Grocery stores 
Hardware/garden supply stores 
Pharmacies 
Restaurants 
Tailors/dressmaker shops 
Video rental stores 
Other similar uses which serve the surrounding community and which may generate significant pedestrian activity: 20 points 
c.  The landscaping for the proposed development exceeds the requirements of subsections 7-11-3(f) and (g) of this Code by at least 50 percent. (Hardscape which incorporates features determined by the planning and development director to be pedestrian oriented may be used in combination with or instead of landscaping along the street frontage of the lot). Examples of these features include benches, outdoor dining, planting boxes, etc. Street trees and hardscape features shall be consistent with any approved streetscape plan for the area: 20 points. 
d.  A connection is made between the parking area of the developing property and the parking area of one or both adjoining properties which allows for internal circulation between properties and results in there being only one drive entrance on Charlotte Street to access the developing property: 15 points. 
e.  Entrances to the proposed structure are defined either by front porches, if designed with a residential character, or are recessed from the primary façade and defined with awnings or canopies: 15 points 
f.  The proposed development is designed to sensitively preserve the principal historic structure(s) on the site. For the purposes of this section, historic buildings shall be defined as contributing structures within the boundaries of a National Register Historic District or those that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places: 20 points. 
Demolition of a historic structure: Minus 20 points. 
g.  A minimum of 25 percent of the total number of residential dwelling units provided in a proposed single-use residential development are designed to have a total net square footage of 600 square feet or less: 20 points. 
(g)  Setback standards. The following minimum setbacks shall be required for uses in the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District. 
	
Front: 	5 ft. minimum 
20 ft. maximum 
Side: 	None required 
Rear: 	None required 
Corner lot, 
 street side: 	10 ft. 
 
The landscape and buffering standards (section 7-11-3) may require additional setback; if so, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
(h)  Other standards. All other development standards for the Charlotte Street Transition Overlay District shall be the same as those required within the underlying general use zoning district(s). 
(Ord. No. 2690, § 1, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 7-9-11. - Adaptive Reuse Overlay District. 
(a)  General description. The Adaptive Reuse Overlay District is created to implement several infill development, community compatibility, and economic development goals and strategies of the comprehensive plan through an overlay district that allows and provides incentives for adaptively reusing valuable existing buildings. Asheville has a stock of fine older buildings that greatly contribute to the city's quality of life and urban character. Due to design, location, and/or condition, these buildings may become physically or functionally obsolete for use under their current zoning. The application of an Adaptive Reuse Overlay District to properties containing these buildings permits a wider range of land uses to be available to these existing buildings for the purpose of extending their useful life. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Those uses allowed as permitted uses under the underlying zoning district. Additionally: 
(1)  In single-family residential districts, multi-family and professional office uses are allowed as permitted uses subject to the development and design standards provided in this section; multifamily uses are not subject to the density limitations of the underlying zoning districts. 
(2)  In multi-family residential districts, except the urban residential district, professional office and gift shop uses are allowed as permitted uses subject to the development and design standards provided in this section; multi-family uses are not subject to the density limitations of the underlying zoning districts. 
(3)  In urban residential districts, those office/business uses allowed as permitted uses in the Neighborhood Business District are allowed as permitted uses subject to the development and design standards provided in this section; multi-family uses are not subject to the density limitations of the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  In office districts, those office/business uses allowed as permitted uses in the Neighborhood Business District are allowed as permitted uses subject to the development and design standards provided in this section; multi-family uses are not subject to the density limitations of the underlying zoning districts. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. 
• Outdoor storage. 
• Uses with drive-through facilities. 
• Uses with outdoor loud speaker systems. 
• Any use not specifically listed in this section or specifically listed as a permitted use or a use by right, subject to special requirements, or a conditional use in the underlying zoning district is prohibited. 
(d)  Uses by right, subject to special requirements. Those uses allowed as uses by right, subject to special requirements, under the underlying zoning district. 
(e)  Conditional uses. Those uses allowed as conditional uses under the underlying zoning district. 
(f)  Development and design standards. 
(1)  Application. The provisions of the adaptive reuse overlay district shall be limited to the reuse of existing principal structures and shall not apply to new construction of principal structures or to accessory structures. 
(2)  Multistory structures. For multistory structures in single-family and multi-family zoning districts, including the urban residential district, at least one story shall be devoted to residential use. 
(3)  Reduction in required off-street parking. There shall be a 25 percent reduction in the minimum amount of required off-street parking for adaptive reuse projects; in addition to this provision, flexible development standards, as applicable, may also be utilized to further reduce the amount of required parking. 
(4)  Location of off-street parking. Parking shall be located in the rear of the site and shall be screened with vegetation from adjacent single-family uses. The vegetative screening shall consist of the planting required for a Type A buffer or its equivalent as determined through the alternative landscape compliance process. On-street parking or parking in the front or side of the lot may be approved by the planning and development director provided that any off-street parking area can be adequately screened from adjacent residential uses and: 
• The topography of the site or the placement of the principal structure makes it impractical to access the rear of the property; or 
• The majority of the residentially-zoned properties on both sides of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed have parking located in the front or side; no more than three parking spaces shall be provided in front using this option in single-family zoning districts. 
(5)  Maintenance of architectural character. The architectural character of the principal structure, including its fenestration (i.e., door and window openings), shall be maintained with regard to any façade that faces a street or is prominently visible from adjoining properties. 
(6)  Expansion. The gross floor area of the principal structure may be increased by up to 25 percent provided that such expansion maintains the architectural character of the structure pursuant to subsection (5) above. 
(7)  Compliance with building and life safety codes. The structure or use shall comply with all applicable building and life safety codes. 
(8)  Buffer and landscaping requirements. The planning and development director may reduce or waive buffer and landscaping requirements to maintain consistency in appearance with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(9)  Compatibility. The planning and development director may establish conditions regarding lighting, landscaping, hours of operation, and other operational and site design features necessary to maintain compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 3436, § 1(b), 1-23-07)  
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-10-1. - Number of principal buildings per lot. 
(a)  General. There shall be no limit on the number of principal buildings on an individual lot, except as indicated in (b) below, and, provided that all other requirements set forth in this chapter or other federal, state, or local laws are met. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings. There shall be no more than one single-family dwelling on an individual lot in a single-family residential zoning district, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. This requirement does not affect the use of accessory dwelling units in conjunction with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(k), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 4431, § 1d, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(l), 8-22-17)  
Sec. 7-10-2. - Required setbacks; allowable encroachments into required setbacks. 
(a)  General. A building, structure, or lot shall not be developed, used, or occupied unless it meets the minimum setback requirements set forth in article VIII and article X of this chapter for the use or overlay zoning district in which it is located, except as otherwise established in this chapter for particular uses or for encroachments as set forth in (f) below. See also section 7-10-4, Requirements for Lots Along Thoroughfares. 
(b)  Method of calculation. 
(1)  Minimum setback. Minimum setback is the space defined by measuring perpendicularly from and along the entire boundary of the lot (property line) to the building line. Front setbacks shall be measured from the street right-of-way line, except, on streets greater than 45 feet in travel lane width, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the travel lane. The accompanying corner lot, street side setback shall also be measured from the edge of the travel lane. In no case shall the minimum setback be closer to the street than the right-of-way line. A setback may be the front, rear, or side setback. For illustrations of the location of front, rear, or side setbacks, see Figure 10-1. Except as set forth for through lots in subsection 7-10-2(d) below, there shall be one front setback area which is determined at the time of site plan approval or zoning permit issuance. 
 
fig. 10-1 
(2)  Overlap of setbacks. When more than one setback depth applies, the greatest setback dimension requirement must be met. 
(c)  Corner lots - setbacks. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning district or overlay zoning district regulations, the second street side of a corner lot shall have a setback requirement of 50 percent of the front setback requirement in that district. Alleys are not classified as secondary side streets and would only require typical side setbacks. 
 
fig. 10-2 
(d)  Through lots - setbacks. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning district or overlay zoning district regulations, both street sides of through lots shall be considered a front yard and shall conform to the front setback requirements or the established building lines in the area (see subsection 7-10-2(e) below). Parcels abutting an alley at the rear of the lot are not considered through lots and rear setback requirements would apply along the rear property line. 
 
fig. 10-3 
(e)  Adjusting building lines. Where there are lots which comprise 50 percent or more of the entire length of the street frontage on the same side of the street, and within the block, and which are developed such that buildings on those lots have front setback depths with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be required to have a front setback greater than the average front setback depth of those lots. Provided further, no front setback need exceed the average setback of the two adjoining buildings on either side thereof, if such two adjoining buildings are less than 200 feet apart. 
 
fig. 10-4 
(f)  Allowable encroachments into required setbacks. The following buildings and structures may encroach upon required setbacks as set forth below unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in this chapter. 
(1)  Sills, cornices, and similar ornamental features projecting from the principal building may encroach up to 18 inches into any required setback. 
(2)  Bay windows, balconies, and similar features projecting from the principal building may encroach up to three feet into any required setback. 
(3)  Decks, steps, uncovered porches, patios, and terraces may encroach into a required side or rear setback, but no closer than six feet to the side or rear property line. 
(4)  Steps, terraces, and patios and uncovered decks with a height of not more than 30 inches may encroach up to ten feet into a required front setback. Handrails installed in conjunction with steps, decks, etc. shall not be included in figuring the height of the steps, terraces, patios and uncovered decks. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures (see article XIV of this chapter) may encroach into any required side and rear setback, but no closer than six feet to the side or rear property line. The term structure shall not include facilities for stormwater management, landscaping, or measures to control erosion. 
(6)  Fences and walls may be located within the required minimum front, side, or rear setback as set forth in section 7-10-3. 
(7)  Handicapped accessibility and life safety features (such as ramps, fire escapes, etc.) that are required by the North Carolina State Building Code may encroach into any required setback, but no closer than three feet from a side or rear property line. If a handicapped accessibility or life safety feature cannot meet this requirement due to the location of an existing structure or other impeding site feature on a residential lot, then the setback requirement for these structures can be adjusted to the extent necessary by the planning director. 
(8)  Setbacks shall not be required for bus shelters and benches, which may overlap property lines and encroach into public right-of-way, provided they do not restrict vehicular or pedestrian flow or obstruct sight visibility triangles as required by subsection 7-11-2(g) of this chapter. 
(g)  Outdoor storage and displays. 
(1)  Where and when permitted, the outdoor storage and display of materials or products related to a business and not otherwise classified as temporary under subsection (2) must comply with all building setback requirements for the district in which the business is located. Should required buffers, street tree planting strips, or other landscaped areas exceed the width of the building setback, then the greater of these distances shall apply. 
(2)  The temporary outdoor display of products is allowed to encroach within required building setbacks, but cannot be located within required buffers, street tree planting strips, or other landscaped areas required under section 7-11-3. For the purposes of this provision, temporary outdoor displays are defined as products that are placed outside during operating hours for the business and removed at other times. 
(3)  The placement of outdoor storage and displays shall not reduce the amount of parking on a site below the minimum standards defined in section 7-11-2. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 11, 12, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2755, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 3063, § 1, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3326, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3700, § 1g, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 7-10-3. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Height standards. 
(1)  Fences and walls located outside the minimum front, side, or rear setback may be erected to any height permitted for buildings in the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  Unless otherwise required to comply with other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville fences and walls located within the minimum front setback shall not exceed six feet in height unless serving as a retaining structure. Fences and walls located within the minimum side or rear setback shall not exceed eight feet in height unless serving as a retaining structure. No fence or wall shall obstruct the site visibility triangles required by subsection 7-11-2(g) of this chapter. 
(3)  All fences and walls shall comply with the applicable provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code, the Asheville Fire Prevention Code, and the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
(b)  Sight triangles. No wall or solid fence higher than three and one-half feet shall be placed within the sight visibility triangle of a public street, private street, or driveway contained either on the property or on an adjoining property. See section 7-11-2 concerning sight visibility triangles. 
(c)  Electrified security fences. Private use of electrified security fences shall be allowed only in the Industrial, Commercial Industrial, and Light Industrial districts and only for the purpose of securing outdoor storage areas. Such fences are allowed by right with special standards in the Industrial and Light Industrial districts (section 7-16-1), and allowed by conditional use permit (section 7-16-2) in the Commercial Industrial district. Electrified security fences are also allowed for government facilities and utility facilities or if required by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security for public security purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 13, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2776, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 2-11-14)  
Sec. 7-10-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3572, § 1(m), adopted Jan. 8, 2008, deleted § 7-10-4 in its entirety. Former § 7-10-4 pertained to requirements for lots along thoroughfares and derived from Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997.  
Sec. 7-10-5. - Retaining walls. 
Retaining walls in excess of eight feet in height shall be faced with natural or artificial stone, brick, form-liner art or patterns, or vegetation in order to avoid a stark appearance. Foreground landscaping or attached vegetative screening of retaining walls or retaining wall sections over six feet in height and closer than 35 feet to a public or private street shall also be required in accordance with the following standards. Foreground landscaping or attached vegetative screening in accordance with the following standards shall also be required for any retaining walls or retaining wall sections over 20 feet in height regardless of location relative to a public or private street. Attached vegetative screening shall consist of stainless steel other approved vine supports structurally integrated into the wall to support vine planting from the approved species list for such applications. Foreground landscaping or attached vegetative screening may be considered part of any required buffer, as applicable. Retaining walls 15 feet or less in height shall be exempted from the foreground landscaping or attached vegetative screening requirements if faced with natural or artificial stone. 
Terracing of retaining walls is allowed and encouraged, provided that no single retaining wall shall exceed 20 feet in height and each successive wall shall be setback at least five feet from the face of the lower wall. The application of foreground landscaping or attached vegetative screening shall be based on the cumulative height of the terraced walls except that a one level reduction in required landscaping from the following table shall be allowed. 
Retaining Wall Height 	Required Foreground Landscaping or Vegetative Screening (Either/Or) 
	Minimum Required Foreground Landscaping 	Minimum Required Attached Vegetative Screening 
>6—10 feet 	5-foot wide planting strip at wall base with 3 gallon-sized bushes planted 5 feet on center 	5-foot wide planting strip at wall base with attached vegetative screening supports covering 50% of wall face and plantings consisting of 2 gallon-sized vines planted 3 feet on center 
>10—20 feet 	5-foot wide planting strip at wall base with 3 gallon-sized bushes planted 5 feet on center plus 1 small maturing tree for every 30 linear feet 	5-foot wide planting strip at wall base with attached vegetative screening supports covering 50% of wall face and plantings consisting of 2 gallon-sized vines planted 3 feet on center 
>20—30 feet 	8-foot wide planting strip at wall base with 3 gallon-sized bushes planted 5 feet on center plus 1 small maturing tree for every 30 linear feet 	5-foot wide planting strip at wall base with attached vegetative screening supports covering 60% of wall face and plantings consisting of 2 gallon-sized vines planted 3 feet on center 
>30 feet 	10-foot wide planting strip at wall base with 3 gallon-sized bushes planted 5 feet on center plus 1 large maturing tree for every 40 linear feet 	5 foot wide planting strip at wall base with attached vegetative screening supports covering 75% of wall face and plantings consisting of 2 gallon-sized vines planted 3 feet on center 
 
(Ord. No. 3493, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(n), 1-8-08)  
Sec. 7-10-6. - Navigable airspace. 
(a)  Affected properties. Any property located within or underneath the boundaries of the airspace of the Asheville Regional Airport, as defined by Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77, upon which it is determined that a proposed object or structure may impact navigable airspace. 
(b)  Limitations. The allowable height of an object or structure shall not be permitted to encroach into the airspace of the Asheville Regional Airport, unless it is determined that it is not a hazard to air navigation through an Aeronautical Study performed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Prior to zoning approval, and/or issuance of a building permit, the landowner, developer, contractor, or other responsible party (collectively referred to as the responsible party), shall submit to the FAA a request for the conduct of an Aeronautical Study on the object or structure being proposed on the property, utilizing FAA Form 7460-1 "Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration." In the event that multiple objects or structures are proposed for the same property, multiple submittals may be required. The responsible party shall include all information required on the appropriate forms in order for the study to be undertaken. 
(2)  Aeronautical Study requests to the FAA shall be submitted no less than 30 days in advance of the scheduled start of any construction on the property. 
(3)  Cranes and other temporary objects that may themselves encroach into navigable airspace shall require individual and separate Aeronautical Study submittals. 
(4)  The responsible party shall be required to follow any and all reporting instructions determined necessary by the FAA during construction of the structure or placement of the object if identified as a result of the Aeronautical Study. 
(d)  Lighting and marking. All objects and structures that are determined through an Aeronautical Study by the FAA that lighting or marking is required or recommended, shall light and mark the object or structure in accordance with FAA Advisory Circular 70/7460-1K "Obstruction Marking or Lighting" (or its successor). 
(Ord. No. 4524, § 1, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 7-10-7. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-10-8. - Neighborhood-scale multifamily design standards. 
(a)  Purpose. Neighborhood-scale multifamily design standards apply to multi-family developments in RM-6, RM-8, or RM-16 zoning districts and are intended to be compatible with the character of residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Applicability. These design standards shall apply to all new multi-family construction and building expansions located in RM-6, RM-8, and RM-16 zoning districts resulting in structures with a minimum of three up to a maximum of 12 dwelling units and/or expansion of parking lots. 
(c)  Maximum number of units per building. The maximum number of units per multi-family structure in the RM-6, RM-8, and RM-16 zoning district shall be 12 units. 
(d)  Design standards. 
(1)  There shall be no more than one ground level entrance per street-facing façade. An entrance may be in the form of a recessed foyer and include multiple doors. 
(2)  A minimum of two windows are required per building façade, making up at least 15 percent of the area of any street-facing façade. 
(3)  No street-facing façade shall exceed 50 feet in length without at least a two foot change in the horizontal wall plane. 
(4)  Street-facing roofs that exceed 50 feet in length shall be subject to the following standards based on the type of roof provided: 
a.  Sloped roofs shall provide one or more of the following: 
•  A two foot horizontal variation in the roofline, or 
•  A roof element, that includes one of the following: dormer, cupola, gable, hip detail, or roof projections. 
b.  Flat roofs shall provide a cornice or other decorative band shall be provided to serve as a building cap for the entire roof. In addition, a minimum two foot vertical variation shall be provided for at least 15 percent of the length of the façade. 
(5)  Parking shall be provided to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the street-facing facade of the structure. 
(6)  Parking lots with more than four spaces shall be screened when adjacent to a single-family use. Screening shall include: 
a.  A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs to result in a vegetative screen that is 75 percent opaque year round and planted in a minimum five foot-wide planting strip, or 
b.  A fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet with the finished side of the fence facing the abutting property or street. Fences longer than 25 linear feet shall be landscaped with trees and/or shrubs planted in a minimum five-foot planting area, except around access areas, spaced no farther than eight feet apart in order to screen at least 50 percent of the fence or wall. Placement of such fence shall be on the development side of the required five-foot planting area. 
(7)  For structures with more than four units, the side setback shall be at least ten feet. 
(8)  The front of the structure shall be oriented to face the primary access street. 
(9)  The height shall not exceed three stories or the maximum permitted height of the zoning district, whichever is less. 
 
(Ord. No. 4608, § 1(n), 8-22-17)  
ARTICLE XI. - DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-11-1. - General. 
The standards contained in this section are set forth to provide for the proper design and development of property within the City of Asheville's jurisdiction as it relates to parking, loading, access, landscape and buffering, open space and traffic impact analysis. 
The following types of development must bring the entire site into full compliance with the requirements found in article XI, except those relating to sidewalks which shall be required as set forth in subsection 7-11-8(b): 
(1)  Any new development public or private with the exception of single-family or two-family housing developments (refer to "new development" description below); 
(2)  Changes of use to a higher impact use (refer to subsection 7-17-3(c) Land use impact table); 
(3)  Major subdivisions of eight lots or greater; 
(4)  Renovations with a total cost exceeding 75 percent of the appraised value of the building, as determined by Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser; 
(5)  Building expansions or additions exceeding 50 percent of the pre-expansion floor area; and 
(6)  Existing unpaved vehicular use areas of which 50 percent or more is paved or existing paved vehicular use areas of which 50 percent or more is demolished and repaved. 
"New development" shall be interpreted to include the use of a building or property where the use has ceased for a period of more than 180 days. Refer to subsections 7-17-2(c) and 7-17-3(c) concerning "overcoming presumption of discontinuation of use." 
The value of any expansion, addition, enlargement, or reconstruction of such structures over a three-year period occurring under the same ownership and/or developed by the same developer shall be used when calculating the 75 percent threshold. 
Building expansions or additions occurring under the same ownership and/or developed by the same developer over a three-year period or less shall be considered to be one development and standards will be applied as such. 
(Ord. No. 3417, § 1(a), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3700, §§ 1h, i, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3791, § 1a, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 7-11-2. - Parking, loading, and access standards. 
(a)  Purpose. Off-street parking, loading, and access standards are established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To ensure the proper and uniform development of parking areas throughout the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  To provide for safe and adequate space for the temporary storage of vehicles. 
(3)  To relieve traffic congestion on public streets. 
(4)  To promote the efficient use of parking areas. 
(5)  To ensure the safe ingress and egress of vehicles entering and exiting the public street system. 
(6)  To provide for immediate access for fire and emergency services. 
(b)  Parking lot design. The following standards shall be met in designing off-street parking facilities. 
(1)  Parking aisle widths shall be as set forth in the Asheville Standards, Specifications, and Details Manual. 
 
(2)  Dimensions of parking spaces. Parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet, except handicapped spaces which shall be as set forth in (b)(3) below. 
 
(3)  Handicapped parking spaces. The specifications for handicapped parking spaces shall meet the standards of the Americans With Disabilities Act, as amended, and are set forth below: 
If parking spaces are provided for self-parking by employees or visitors, or both, then handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as indicated in the table below. Spaces required by the table need not be provided in the particular lot. They may be provided in a different location if equivalent or greater accessibility, in terms of distance from an accessible entrance, and convenience are ensured. 
Total 
Spaces 
in Lot 	Required 
Minimum 
Number of 
Handicapped 
Spaces 
1 to 25 	1 
26 to 50 	2 
51 to 75 	3 
76 to 100 	4 
101 to 150 	5 
151 to 200 	6 
201 to 300 	7 
301 to 400 	8 
401 to 500 	9 
501 to 1000 	2% of total 
1001 and over 	20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000 
 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet by 18 feet. 
Access aisles adjacent to handicapped spaces, except access aisles adjacent to van accessible handicapped spaces, shall have a minimum width of five feet. One in every eight handicapped spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle not less than eight feet wide and shall be designated "van accessible." Access aisles may be shared by adjacent handicapped parking spaces. original 
 
(4)  Channelized automobile storage. Channelization designs for parking structures are exempt from these standards but must be approved by the city traffic engineer and found to adequately address public safety and welfare. Al other parking lot entrances from public rights-of-way shall provide channelized automobile storage space as follows: 
Parking Lot Size in Spaces 	Channelized Storage 
less than 50 	20 ft. 
50 to 250 	45 ft. 
more than 250 	90 ft. 
 
 
Figure 11-4 
  
(5)  Parking surface treatment. The material for surface parking spaces and corresponding access drives required by this section shall consist of suitable paving material which will prevent the exposure of subsoil. Suitable paving material for required parking areas includes, but is not limited to asphalt, porous asphalt, concrete, compacted stone (road bond), gravel, and aggregates such as bituminous surface treatment (BST) and "chip and seal". 
Porous paving blocks and pervious paving materials are permitted and encouraged as material for parking lots. The use of grass as a parking lot surface is permitted for overflow and intermittent parking. Pervious paving systems are required for parking spaces which exceed the maximum number of spaces required by subsection 7-11-2(c). The use of grass or other vegetation as a parking surface is permitted only for parking spaces which are provided in excess of the maximum number of parking spaces required by subsection 7-11-2(c) or used for intermittent or overflow parking. Parking lots associated with arenas, sporting facilities, amphitheaters, fairgrounds, and religious institutions may, however, use grass or other vegetation for the entire parking lot. 
Additional requirements are as follows: 
a.  Parking lots utilizing road bond, gravel or other vegetative surfacing are prohibited within the Central Business District, unless otherwise allowed under Article XIV. 
b.  Parking lots utilizing road bond or gravel shall provide such material with a minimum thickness of at least four inches and must be maintained in a stable condition. 
c.  Parking lots utilizing road bond or gravel shall be designed and constructed such that siltation resulting from stormwater run-off does not enter adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. The lots must be designed so as to prevent loose stone, aggregate or other materials from leaving the lot. 
d.  All driveway aprons, which are defined as that portion of the parking lot entrance which abuts the street, shall consist of concrete, asphalt, or bituminous surface treatment for a length of at least ten lineal feet starting at the street and extending into the driveway. Subsection 7-11-2(g) sets forth specific driveway entrance requirements. 
e.  The individual parking spaces shall be delineated in all parking lots, except lots utilizing road bond, gravel, grass or other vegetative surfacing. 
f.  All handicapped parking spaces and corresponding access paths to the building entrance shall consist of concrete, asphalt or bituminous surface treatment. 
g.  All driveways with an average grade exceeding five percent shall consist of concrete, asphalt or bituminous surface treatment. 
h.  Parking spaces serving one, two, three and four family dwellings are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
i.  All driveways and parking lots shall be of sufficient strength and thickness to safely support fire emergency vehicles. 
(6)  Use of public rights-of way for access and maneuvering. No access to individual off-street parking spaces shall be allowed directly from public rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way shall not be used for maneuvering in the process of entering or leaving individual off-street parking spaces. Public rights-of-way may be used for maneuvering by delivery vehicles entering or leaving off-street loading berths as set forth in subsection 7-11-2(c), but those berths shall be designed so that no public rights-of-way are blocked by parked delivery vehicles. 
(7)  Parking lot landscaping requirements are described in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(8)  Parking lot sign requirements are described in article XIII of this chapter. 
(c)  Off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  Number of spaces required. The requirements for off-street parking are set forth in the table below. For uses not covered in this table, the appropriate number of maximum and minimum parking spaces based upon the most recent Parking Generation edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Refer to subsection 7-11-2(d) below for specific requirements related to off-street loading. The square footage requirements below refer to gross floor area of the building, existing or proposed. Please see subsection 7-11-2(b)(3) for handicapped accessible parking space requirements, subsection 7-11-2(c)(3) for bicycle parking space requirements, and subsection 7-11-2(f) for on-street parking allowances. 
Type of Land Use 	One Parking Space Required for Each: 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Residential 		
Boardinghouses 	1 per 2 boarding rooms, plus 1 per resident manager 	1 per boarding room, plus 1 per resident manager 
Dwellings, multi-family with 2 bedrooms or less 	1 per unit 	2 per unit 
Dwellings, multi-family with 3 bedrooms or more 	2 per unit 	3 per unit 
Dwellings, multi-family elderly or disabled 	1 per unit 	2 per unit 
Dwellings, single-family with 2 bedrooms or less 	1 per unit 	2 per unit 
Dwellings, single-family with 3 bedrooms or more 	2 per unit 	3 per unit 
Dwellings, subsidized low-income 	1 per unit 	2 per unit 
Public Facilities and Institutions 		
Assisted living facilities 	1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 2 units 	1 per employee, plus 1 per 2 units 
Adult care facilities 	1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 6 adults 	1 per employee, plus 1 per 6 adults 
Child care facilities 	1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 10 children 	1 per employee, plus 1 per 10 children 
Churches and wedding chapels 	1 per each 4 seats or each 40 sq. ft. of floor area available for movable seats or for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area 	1 per 3 seats or each 30 sq. ft. of floor area available for movable seats or for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Civic, social service, cultural, and fraternal facilities 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Colleges and universities 	1 per 3 employees, plus one per 3 full-time students not residing on campus 	1 per employee, plus one per each full-time student not residing on campus 
Family care homes and group homes, children 	1 per 2 employees 	1 per employee 
Family care homes and group homes, adults 	1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 2 residents 	1 per employee, plus 1 per 1 resident 
Museums and art galleries 	1 per 350 sq. ft., plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per 250 sq. ft., plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 
Medical facilities 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
Schools, elementary and middle 	2 per classroom 	3 per classrooms 
Schools, high 	5 per classroom 	10 per classroom 
Shelters 	1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per employee on shift of greatest employment 
Office, Business, and Industrial Uses 		
Barber shops and salons 	2 per operator station, plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	3 per operator station, plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 
Bed and breakfast homestays and inns 	1 per room, plus 1 space for the resident manager/owner and 1 per each employee 	2 per room, plus 2 spaces for the resident manager/owner and 1 per for each employee 
Car wash 	2 per wash bay, plus 2 stacking spaces per wash bay 	3 per wash bay, no stacking maximum 
Convenience stores with gas pumps 	1 per 350 sq. ft. (spaces at gas pumps are not recognized as parking spaces) 	1 per 200 sq. ft. (spaces at gas pumps are not recognized as parking spaces) 
Funeral establishments 	1 per 4 seats of largest public room, plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per 2 seats of largest public room, plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 
Health and fitness facilities 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 	1 per 100 sq. ft. 
Lodging 	1 per 2 bedrooms , plus additional spaces as required for other uses within the hotel/motel 	1 per 1 bedroom , plus additional spaces as required for other uses within the hotel/motel 
Live-work unit 	1 per residential unit plus 1 per each 350 sq. ft. of office/business space 	1 per residential unit plus 1 per each 250 sq. ft. of office/business space 
Manufacturing, assembly or finishing operations 	1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per employee on shift of greatest employment 
Office 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Rental establishments 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Repair and service businesses providing on-site services 	1 per 300 sq. ft. 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
Repair and service businesses providing off-site services 	2 employees 	1 per employee 
Restaurants, bars, night clubs (plus 11 spaces for stacking if drive-through service is proposed) 	1 per 3 seats, plus one space per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per 2 seats, plus one space per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 
Retail sales 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
Self-service storage facility 	1.4 per 100 units plus 1 per 2 employees on shift 	2 per 100 units plus 1 per every employee on shift 
Servicing, packaging, and storage of commodities 	1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	1 per employee on shift of greatest employment 
Theaters, stadiums, arenas, and sports fields and courts 	1 per 4 seats or 1 per 6 feet of bench area 	1 per 3 seats or 1 per 4 feet of bench area 
Vehicle service stations and auto repair garages (spaces at gas pumps are not recognized as parking spaces) 	1 per service bay, plus one per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 	3 per service bay, plus one space per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment 
Warehouses, wholesale, and distributive businesses 	1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment, plus one per 350 sq. ft. of area open to the public 	1 per employee on shift of greatest employment, plus one per 350 sq. ft. of area open to the public 
 
(2)  Parking areas exceeding the maximum number of spaces. The number of parking spaces for a proposed use may exceed the maximum number of spaces permitted only if a pervious paving system is used and provided that the pervious paving system is approved by the planning and development director. Parking areas exceeding the maximum number of spaces shall provide additional landscaping as required by subsection 7-11-3.G.2 of this chapter. 
(3)  Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided for all uses except single family dwellings and duplex dwellings. The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces required shall be equal to five percent of the total number of automobile parking spaces in the lot. Bicycle parking facilities shall include standard bile racks and other secured, lockable facilities. Bike parking shall be located within 50 feet of a publicly-accessible entrance. 
(4)  Parking requirements for urban residential developments. Residential developments located within the area described below shall not be required to provide off-street parking if on-street parking is permitted on the street(s) on which the development is proposed and the developer investigates with the Asheville Transit Authority the provision of a transit stop to serve the development. The boundaries of the area shall be: 
To the north, one mile from the Central Business District boundary; 
To the south, one mile from the Central Business District boundary; 
To the west, the French Broad River; and 
To the east, the ridge of Town Mountain and the ridge of Beaucatcher Mountain. 
This area shall be identified on a map kept in the office of the City of Asheville Planning and Development Department. 
(5)  Parking requirements for the River Parking Reduction Area. All properties located within the River Parking Reduction Area (see map: Planning and Development Department) will be eligible for reductions based on the following: 
a.  Projects with a base requirement of 30 spaces or less may receive a 50 percent reduction. 
b.  Projects with a base requirement of 31—50 spaces may receive a 30 percent reduction. 
c.  Projects with a base requirement of 51—75 spaces may receive a 20 percent reduction. 
These reductions may not be combined with other reductions offered through individual zoning districts. 
(d)  Off-street loading requirements. 
(1)  An area shall be provided for loading and unloading delivery vehicles for all institutions, businesses, or industries of more than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, except in the Central Business District. 
(2)  The minimum size of an off-street loading berth shall be 250 square feet plus any additional area needed for maneuvering delivery vehicles. 
(3)  The number of berths required is based on the gross floor area of the building and is as follows: 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) 	Minimum Number of Berths 
5,000 - 24,999 	1 
25,000 - 49,999 	2 
50,000 - 74,999 	3 
75,000 and over 	4 plus 1 for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 
 
(e)  Shared and remote parking. 
(1)  Shared parking. The planning and development director shall approve the joint use of up to 100 percent of the required parking spaces for two or more uses located on the same parcel or adjacent parcels, provided that the developer can demonstrate that the uses will not overlap in hours of operation or in demand for the shared spaces. 
Any sharing of required parking spaces by uses located on different parcels shall be guaranteed by a written agreement between the owner of the parking area and the owner of any use located on a different parcel and served by the parking area. 
Should the uses change such that the new uses overlap in hours of operation or in demand for the shared spaces, the shared parking approval shall become void. Parking meeting the requirements of this chapter shall then be provided for each use. 
(2)  Remote parking. If the required number of parking spaces for any land use cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such parking space may be provided on any land within 500 feet walking distance of the property on which the principal use is located, provided that the zoning use regulations for the district in which the remote parking space is located permit the principal use which the parking spaces serve. 
Any remote parking spaces located on a different parcel than the use for which the remote parking spaces serve shall be guaranteed by a written agreement between the owner of the remote parking area and the owner of the use located on a different parcel and served by the remote parking area. Change of ownership of either parcel shall require a renewal of the agreement. 
(f)  On-street parking. On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the fulfillment of the off-street parking requirements for a development, subject to the following standards. Any on-street parking space meeting these standards shall count as 0.75 of a required off-street parking space. 
(1)  The on-street parking spaces are newly constructed as part of a development. No existing on-street parking spaces may be counted except as permitted for a particular use district. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of four contiguous on-street spaces constructed for the development. 
(3)  All counted spaces must be parallel on-street parking spaces unless otherwise approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(4)  Parking spaces must be located not more than 500 feet from the proposed development. Parking spaces that are located more than 150 feet from the proposed development must be located within a zoning classification that permits the use served and must not be located adjacent to property that is not within a zoning classification that permits said use. 
(5)  Sidewalks must abut all counted on-street parking spaces in such a fashion as to allow direct pedestrian connectivity to the building or development served by the spaces. For the purpose of this section, parking spaces located directly across a street from a building or development may be counted, if a crosswalk (marked or unmarked) is provided for convenient pedestrian access. 
(6)  The city traffic engineer shall approve the overall design of street modifications (including curbs, sidewalks, paving and marking locations) associated with any counted on-street parking. Parking shall not restrict existing travel lanes unless approved by the city traffic engineer nor shall counted parking restrict current or future access to abutting parcels. 
(7)  Any on-street spaces created in accordance with this provision shall be public parking spaces and not for the exclusive use of the development. Full access easements or rights-of-way incorporating the parking and the abutting sidewalks shall be conveyed to the city. 
Approved on-street parking spaces shall not be considered to violate the provisions of this chapter restricting parking within setbacks or those provisions of this chapter requiring that parking be provided at the side or rear of a development and that it be no closer to the street than the edge of the structure. 
(g)  Access point requirements (Driveways). The following standards shall be met when designing vehicular access points from public streets to individual properties: 
(1)  Width of access points. The width of access points shall be measured parallel to the street at the point beyond the driveway apron radius, according to the following: 
a.  For single-family structures and duplexes, the following standards shall apply: 
Minimum width within the front setback: 9 feet 
Maximum width within the front setback: 18 feet 
b.  For multifamily residential structures located within 150 feet of a publicly-maintained road, the following standards shall be applied: 
Minimum width within the front setback: 9 feet 
Maximum width within the front setback: 36 feet 
c.  For multifamily residential structures located beyond 150 feet of a publicly-maintained road and for commercial property, the following standards shall be applied: 
Minimum width within the front setback: 20 feet 
Maximum width within the front setback: 36 feet 
 
Figure 11-5 
(2)  Distance from street intersections. 
a.  Minimum distances between access points and street intersections shall be determined by the access triangle. No access points shall be permitted within the access triangle. The access triangle is that triangle formed by the intersecting undisturbed right-of-way lines ("A" and "B" in the graphic below) and a line connecting the ends of the undisturbed right-of-way lines. 
 
Figure 11-6 
b.  The undisturbed right-of-way lines ("A" and "B" in the graphic above) extend from the intersection of the right-of-way lines and have a specific length as defined by the table below. 
Street Type 	Length of Undisturbed Right-of-way "A" 	Length of Undisturbed Right-of-way "B" 
Residential Access 	25 feet 	25 feet 
Residential Subcollector 	50 feet 	50 feet 
Residential Collector 	75 feet 	75 feet 
Arterial 	100 feet 	100 feet 
 
c.  Where the length of the required undisturbed right-of-way exceeds the street frontage of the lot, one access point shall be permitted along the property line furthest from the intersection. 
(3)  Distance from other access points. The distance measured along the right-of-way line between the tangent projection of the inside edges of adjacent access points shall be at least 25 feet. 
 
Figure 11-7 
(4)  Distance from property line. Unless the access point will be shared between two or more adjoining properties, all access points shall be located at least five feet from all property lines perpendicular to the street. Shared access points are encouraged to reduce the amount of impervious surface area and to limit the number of access points along a street. 
 
Figure 11-8 
(h)  Sight visibility triangles at street intersections. 
(1)  Sight visibility triangle required. In order to ensure visibility at intersections, sight visibility triangles shall be maintained at all intersections of public streets, private streets, and driveway access points. 
(2)  Public street intersections. At an intersection of two public streets with no traffic sign or other device, a sight visibility triangle is that triangle formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 50 feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines. 
(3)  All other intersections. At all other types of intersections, a sight triangle is defined as that triangle formed by a ten-foot side measured along the right-of-way of the minor approach from the right-of-way of the major approach, and a 50-foot side measured along the right-of-way of the major approach from the right-of-way of the minor approach. 
a.  For intersections formed by two public streets with a traffic control sign or other device, the minor approach is the street which must stop or yield. 
 
Figure 11-9 
b.  For intersections formed by a public street and a private street or driveway, the public street is the major approach. 
c.  For a private street or driveway, the short side of the sight visibility triangle shall be measured along the edge of the private street or driveway. 
   
Figure 11-10 
  
d.  For a public or private street or driveway where the building displays a 0-foot setback, the long side of the triangle shall be measured along the face of curb, with additional measures to be applied if deemed necessary by the city's traffic engineer in accordance with sound engineering principals. 
 
figure 11-11 
(4)  Sight visibility at state-maintained intersections. On roadways maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, additional sight visibility triangle requirements may be applied by that department. 
(5)  Applicability and exemptions. Within the triangles identified above, and except as provided below, no structure, sign, plant, shrub, tree, berm, fence, wall, or other object of any kind or parking or storage of automobiles shall be installed, constructed, set out or maintained so as to obstruct cross-visibility at a level between three and ten feet above the level of the center of the street intersection. These restrictions shall not apply to: 
a.  Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise three feet above the level of the center of the intersection; 
b.  Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the area between three and ten feet above the level of the intersection; 
c.  Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental signs, and traffic control devices; 
d.  Any structure, sign, plant, shrub, tree, berm, wall, or fence located in the Central Business District; 
e.  Trees which are planted in order to meet the street tree requirement as set forth in subsection 7-11-3(f). 
(i)  Access onto residential streets by nonresidential uses 
(1)  Access onto residential streets limited. In order to preserve the residential character of streets that function primarily to provide direct access to residences, access onto these streets by nonresidential uses shall be limited. Those streets abutted primarily by residential uses and that provide direct access to these residences shall be considered to be a residential street. These standards shall not apply to those nonresidential uses permitted by right, subject to special requirements, or as conditional uses in residential zoning districts. Furthermore, these standards shall not apply to nonresidential uses located in nonresidential or mixed use zoning districts that are located on residential streets and have their only access from residential streets. 
(2)  Standards for access for nonresidential uses. Except as provided for below, nonresidential uses located on corner lots, through lots, or other lots with frontage on more than one street shall have their access from the street that is abutted by uses most consistent with the use located on or proposed for the lot for which access is being sought. Nonresidential uses having frontage on more that one street may have access onto a residential street if the traffic engineer for the City of Asheville determines that the access results in improved traffic flow and that the access does not negatively impact the residential uses on the street by promoting cut-through traffic, creating conflicts with residential driveways/access, or endangering pedestrian safety. 
(j)  General requirements for access to streets for residential lots. 
(1)  General. All residential lots must abut a public street or an approved private street built to public street standards: Residential lots shall meet the minimum lot width requirements of the applicable zoning district where they abut a street, except for lots on a cul-de-sac or flag lots. 
(2)  Lots on a cul-de-sac. A lot on a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 25 feet at the front property line, and shall be 80 percent of the required lot width at the front setback line. 
(3)  Flag lots. A flag lot may be approved if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  A flag lot shall serve only single-family residential development and accessory buildings. 
b.  The minimum width of the flag lot at the street shall not be less than 20 feet. 
c.  Minimum width of the flagpole portion of the lot shall be 20 feet. 
d.  The flagpole portion of the lot shall not be used to calculate compliance with minimum lot area, width, and depth or to provide off-street parking. 
e.  Where public water is available, any occupied building on the flag lot must be within 500 feet of a fire hydrant, as specified in the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. This distance shall be measured along the street, then along the flagpole portion of the lot, and then in a straight line to the building location. 
f.  Where public sewer is available, occupied buildings on the flag lot shall have a gravity sewer service line, or the sewer requirement shall be noted on the preliminary plat. 
g.  Use of a shared driveway to serve a flag lot and an adjoining lot is permitted and encouraged. 
h.  Maximum length for the flagpole portion of the lot shall be 250 feet. 
i.  No more than one lot in a subdivision of less than eight lots shall be a flag lot. No more than two lots or ten percent of the total lots in the subdivision, whichever is greater, shall be flag lots in a subdivision of eight or more lots. 
j.  Maximum lot area for a flag lot, excluding the flag pole, may not exceed 12,000 square feet unless located in an RS-2 zoning district, where a flag lot may not exceed 24,000 square feet. 
(k)  General requirements for access to streets for non-residential lots. Except as set forth below, lots used for non-residential purposes must abut a public street or an approved private street built to public street standards. Lots or parcels used for non-residential purposes are not required to abut a public street if all of the following requirements are met. 
(1)  An easement or right-of-way with a minimum width of 30 feet connects the lot to a public street. 
(2)  The easement or right-of-way is recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County. 
(3)  A paved road with a minimum width of 20 feet (not including parking) provides access from the lot(s) or parcel(s) to a public street. 
(4)  The access road is located within the recorded easement or right-of-way. 
(5)  The access road shall be constructed to the standards established by the City of Asheville for commercial streets. 
(6)  A road maintenance agreement, which identifies the responsibilities for the maintenance of the access road and clearly states that the City of Asheville is not responsible for maintenance of the road, is prepared and recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County. 
(7)  Not more than five lots nor more than ten acres shall be served by the easement or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 14, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2823, § 1, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(7), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3209, § 1c, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3223, § 1, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 3272, § 1(c), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 3367, § 1, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(b), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3466, § 1(e), 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3484, §§ 1(a)—(c), 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1j, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3712, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3739, § 1a, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3856, § 1c, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3956, § 1a, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 4016, § 1, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(o—s), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4613, § 1(a), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 7-11-3. - Landscape and buffering standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of Asheville has an abundant and diverse tree and vegetative cover that contributes to the aesthetic value of the city and provides numerous ecological and economic benefits. Asheville's location on the habitable edge of the Appalachian Mountains (one of the oldest ranges in the world); its truly fascinating cultural heritage; the accidents of history that endowed the city with more of than its share of memorable architecture; its site on the French Broad River (one of the country's oldest rivers—and the only one in the Southeast that flows north); and its location in the center of a geographical area that includes four neighboring states, make Asheville truly different from all other American cities. The landscape and buffering standards set forth below require landscaping between dissimilar zoning, along public rights-of-way, in and around parking lots and outdoor storage areas, and on properties supporting new development or extensive re-development, in order to: 
(1)  Encourage the preservation and health of existing trees, tree canopies, and other existing vegetation, and to replenish removed vegetation; 
(2)  Improve and protect the visual quality of the City of Asheville, city forests, and forested view sheds, and minimize potential negative impacts of development such as noise, dust, glare of lights, parking lots, traffic, heat, overcrowding, and odor; 
(3)  Provide environmental benefits, such as climate modification, decreased energy consumption, reduced stormwater runoff, decreased erosion, improved water and air quality, and protection of wildlife habitat; 
(4)  Provide a transition between dissimilar zoning districts to protect abutting properties from potential negative impacts of neighboring development, particularly between residential-commercial interfaces, and to preserve the character and value of a property and provide a sense of privacy; 
(5)  Improve standards for quantity, location, size, spacing, protection, and maintenance of plants and other screening materials to assure a high level of quality in the appearance of Asheville while allowing flexibility to promote well designed and creative landscape plantings. 
(6)  Enforce the maintenance of landscaping installed to meet the requirements of these high standards to ensure that the landscaping continues to thrive and enhance the visual quality of the City of Asheville. 
(b)  Applicability. Landscape standards are required for developments within the City of Asheville's zoning jurisdiction, including the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Applicants are advised to meet with planning and development department staff prior to submitting a site plan to discuss applicable landscape requirements, other ordinance requirements, and coordination of plantings with utility plans. A landscape plan drawn to scale must be submitted with the site plan and prepared in accordance with the standards established by the planning and development department. Separate landscape requirements are considered cumulative unless noted otherwise. 
(1)  Development of property as referenced in section 7-11-1 must bring the entire site into full compliance with the requirements of article XI of this chapter (parking, loading, access, landscape and buffering, open space and traffic impact analysis). 
(1.1)  The following types of development must only comply with the landscape and buffering standards that are specifically defined in each of the following sections: 
a.  Existing unpaved vehicular use areas of which less than 50 percent is paved or existing paved vehicular use areas of which less than 50 percent is demolished and repaved must meet the parking lot landscape requirements in subsection 7-11-3(d)(4) only for the disturbed area. For properties where the area of disturbance is located along the perimeter of the vehicular use are the following landscape standards shall also be required adjacent to the disturbed area, if applicable: property line buffer, street buffer, street trees. Maintenance and repair of disturbed areas less than 500 square feet are exempt from this requirement with an exception that any landscaping removed to accommodate the maintenance or repair of such areas must be replaced with vegetation equivalent to that which was removed. 
b.  Building expansions or additions that are less than 50 percent of the pre-expansion floor area must meet the landscaping requirements only in the area around the addition which is parallel to any edge of the expansion area and extending to the property line or street pavement edge (see illustration below): 
  
 
expansion /addition 
  
c.  Building expansions or additions occurring on properties zoned Commercial Industrial or Industrial that result in an expansion of less than five percent of the pre-expansion floor area or 3,000 square feet in size whichever is less, are not required to meet additional landscape standards. Cumulative expansions occurring over a three-year period that exceed this threshold shall have to meet all applicable landscape standards. 
(2)  Central business district alternatives. In order to preserve and promote existing development patterns within the Central Business District specific landscape requirements are described below: 
a.  The CBD areas within the Downtown Design Review Overlay District are exempt from building impact landscaping and property line buffers; 
b.  Other CBD areas are exempt from building impact landscaping but developers will be required to provide a property line buffer which may be the standard buffer outlined in [section] 7-11-3 or an alternative buffer described in the ordinance for the district [in section] 7-8-18; 
c.  All CBD areas may modify the requirement for a street buffer by placing a wall at a minimum height of three feet in place of the required shrubs; 
d.  Street tree, parking lot and screening requirements shall apply as described in the ordinance. 
(3)  Urban zoning district exemption. In order to promote a high density, urban form of development within these districts, the tree save requirements of this subsection shall not apply to properties zoned Urban Village (UV), Neighborhood Corridor (NCD), Urban Residential (URD), and Urban Place (UP). 
(c)  Preservation and protection of existing vegetation. Preserving existing vegetation protects the visual quality of the City of Asheville's urban landscape and should be encouraged. 
(1)  Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation. Projects intending to preserve existing vegetation in order to receive credit for required landscaping must graphically show the location of each tree on a the landscape plan and must note the dbh (diameter at breast height) and species of each tree. Any development that proposes to preserve existing vegetation will receive credit for that vegetation at the rate of: 

Diameter at Breast Height 	# of Tree Credits 
	
2" — 6" 	1 
	
7" — 12" 	2 
	
13" — 18" 	3 
	
19" — 24" 	4 
	
25" 	+5 
	
Shrubs will be credited at a rate of 1:1 	
 
In order to receive credit, preserved vegetation must be in good health and condition and must meet the spacing requirements of the standards it is intended to satisfy. Protective barriers must also be shown on the landscape and grading plans in accordance with the requirements of this section. If a preserved tree dies within 24 months of completion of the project, it must be replaced with the total number of trees which were credited to the existing tree. No credit will be given to invasive-exotic species. 
(2)  Protection of existing trees during construction. No grading or other land-disturbing activity can occur on a site with existing trees which are designated to be preserved in order to meet the landscaping requirements until protective barriers are installed by the developer and inspected by the planning and development director. The dbh of the preserved trees and the location of protective barriers must be shown on the landscape and grading plans with the dimension between the tree trunk and barrier indicated. 
a.  Placement of protective barriers. Barricades shall be placed around the critical root zone of preserved trees that are within 50 feet of any grading or construction activity. The critical root zone is a circle extending around the tree with a one-foot radius for every one inch of tree diameter. All protective barriers must include clear and visible signage that describes the delineated area as a "Tree Protection Area", or equivalent. All protective barriers and signs must be maintained throughout the building construction process. 
b.  Protective barriers shall consist of either: 
• A fence which is at least three feet high and constructed in a post and rail configuration, using two by four posts and one by four rails; or 
• A fence with two by four posts placed no farther than ten feet apart covered with a four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing.  
tree/fence 
c.  Prohibited activities. All contractors must be made aware of the areas designated for protection. No disturbance can occur within the tree protection area including: 
• Grading 
• Filling 
• Parking 
• Storage of debris or materials, including topsoil 
• Sedimentation and erosion control measures 
• Disposal of hazardous wastes or concrete washout 
• Attaching of nails, ropes, cables, signs, or fencing to any preserved tree. 
d.  Permissible encroachments. Where physical site constraints exist, utilities may encroach into the tree protection area provided they are tunneled at least two feet directly below the tree roots to minimize root damage. A construction detail shall be required. 
Other encroachments various in nature may be permitted provided that the contractor follows-through on the written recommendation of a certified arborist or consulting arborist to minimize any potential impact and certify that the activity will not damage the tree under normal circumstances. 
e.  Silt fencing. If silt fencing is required to control sedimentation, the fencing must be placed along the uphill edge of a tree protection zone in order to prevent sediment from accumulating in the critical root zone area (refer to the City of Asheville's Standards and Specifications Manual for details). 
(d)  Standards. Landscape requirements are broken down in the following categories: 
a.  Property line buffer — Landscaping along property lines separating different zoning districts. 
b.  Street buffer — Landscaping along street rights-of-way between parking areas and pedestrian zones. 
c.  Street trees — Shade trees planted along street frontages to improve the pedestrian environment and enhance the urban streetscape. 
d.  Parking lot landscaping — Landscaping in and around vehicular use areas. 
e.  Building impact landscaping — Landscaping used to enhance the site. 
f.  Screening — Landscaping around utility use, outdoor storage, and loading areas. 
g.  Tree save areas — Tree preservation and/or replanting areas for residential developments. 
(1)  Property line buffer. Some land uses may create an adverse impact when developed adjacent to other less intensive land uses commonly found in certain zoning districts. Bufferyards shall be required for proposed developments adjacent to parcels of dissimilar zoning designations to provide a transition between districts of varying intensities. The bufferyard width and number of plantings required will vary depending on the degree of difference between the zoning designations and shall be the responsibility of the property owner developing or changing the land use. 
a.  Bufferyard types. The amount of plant material required in a bufferyard area is measured per 100 linear feet and is based on the following table. 
Bufferyard Type 	Evergreen Trees 	Deciduous Trees (Large) 	Deciduous Trees (Small) 	Shrubs (Large) 	Shrubs (Small) 
A — 20' wide 	4 	3 	3 	10* 	10* 
B — 30' wide 	6 	5 	5 	15* 	15* 
 
* 50 percent of all shrubs must be evergreen. 
b.  Buffer determination. The type of buffer required is based on the following table. Table is to be read in one direction only starting from the proposed development site zoning column. 
	Adjacent Zoning & Required Buffer 
Proposed Development Site Zoning 	RS 	RM 
RS 	N/A 	N/A 
RM 	A 	N/A 
O, OII, NB 	A 	A 
OB, CB-I, CB-II, RES, INST, HB, RB, RIVER, CI, IND, LI 	B 	A 
UV, NCD, UR, UP 	B 	A 
Expansion Zoning Districts (except CBD EXP) 	B 	B 
 
c.  Buffer location. Buffers shall extend along the entire property line which is adjacent to the properties of dissimilar zoning designation. Buffers are to be located on the property of the person developing the new or changing land use, between the property line and any vehicular use areas, buildings, storage, service areas, or other area of activity. 
d.  Species composition. Plantings in buffer areas shall be an appropriate mix of native species or other species suitable to naturalizing in woodland settings. Buffers in the river district shall be composed of species appropriate to a river environment. Consult the City of Asheville Recommended Species List for a list of approved species. Species not identified in the list may be approved by the planning and development director. 
e.  Placement of buffer plantings. The exact placement of the required plants shall be the decision of the developer or designer, but shall be approved by the planning and development director. Plants should be placed in a manner to serve as an effective and attractive screen year-round when viewed from any area accessible to the public or from adjacent properties. Trees or shrubs should be planted at least five feet away from the property line to ensure maintenance access and to avoid encroaching upon neighboring property. 
f.  Setbacks. Wherein a setback and bufferyard are required along the same property line that with the greatest dimensional width shall be applicable. If the setback is greater than the bufferyard, the total number of required plant material shall be distributed throughout the wider setback. 
g.  Corner lots and through lots. No buffer will be required along the front property line of any lot; however, a lot with more than one street face will require a buffer along the secondary street face when it is adjacent to a dissimilar zoning district. Buffer requirements are waived in lieu of street trees and street buffers, as applicable, provided the building façade is that street frontage is pedestrian oriented with functioning pedestrian entrances that open onto public sidewalks. 
h.  Encroachments. The following site features may be permitted to penetrate or encroach into a required buffer area provided that the total number of required plantings is still met. 
• Approved driveway openings 
• Pedestrian or bicycle paths 
• Designated greenways 
• Utilities 
• Walls/fences 
i.  Prohibitions in a buffer. The following are specifically prohibited from encroaching into required buffer areas: 
• Loading areas 
• Storage areas 
• Parking areas 
• Driveways and drive aisles, other than approved openings 
• Dumpsters 
• Stormwater retention/detention structures 
j.  Buffer along the Blue Ridge Parkway. In order to preserve views and mitigate the impacts of adjacent development from the Blue Ridge Parkway or other scenic corridors officially designated by city council or the North Carolina Department of Transportation, new developments adjacent to these corridors shall provide a Type 'B' buffer as required by this subsection. 
k.  Grading activity in the bufferyard. When possible, grading should not occur within a required bufferyard. If grading within the required bufferyard proves necessary then the developer is required to plant trees and shrubs which are 50 percent larger than otherwise required in order to quickly re-establish a visual buffer. Grading in the required bufferyard shall not exceed a 3:1 slope. 
l.  Overlapping requirements. Fifty percent of buffer plants that are within 15 feet of a vehicular use area may also be counted towards the parking lot landscaping. 
(2)  Street buffers. Street buffers are designed to provide for a separation of activities and a more comfortable pedestrian environment. The street buffer is required in addition to the street trees planted in a ten-foot planting strip as required in subsection 7-11-2(d)(3)(c). 
a.  Street buffer determination. Vehicular use areas greater than 4,000 square fee that are located within 50 feet of the edge of a street must be buffered from the street. 
b.  Calculating the requirement. One evergreen or deciduous shrub planted for every five linear feet of buffer required. Species selected must achieve a minimum of three feet in height at maturity. 
 
street buffer 
(3)  Street trees. Street trees are required for all new developments except for single- or two-family homes. This requirement is designed to create or enhance an attractive streetscape pattern while contributing to Asheville's urban forest and a more comfortable pedestrian environment. 
a.  Street tree determination. Street trees are required along all street frontages. 
b.  Calculating the requirement. Street tree requirements are as follows: 
• Overhead utilities present — One small maturing tree (less than 35 feet in height at maturity) for every 30 linear feet of property abutting a street. 
• All other conditions — One large maturing tree (greater than 35 feet in height at maturity) for every 40 linear feet of property abutting a street. 
c.  Street tree spacing. Trees may be evenly spaced or staggered to accommodate other site features. In no case shall a required street tree be closer than 15 feet or farther than 65 feet from another required tree. No street tree shall be farther than 20 feet from the edge of pavement or, in cases of planned road widening, 20 feet from the proposed edge of pavement. Existing trees credited towards street tree requirements shall meet spacing requirements. 
 
tree spacing 
d.  Planting strip. Trees shall be placed in a planting strip the width of which may vary but shall maintain a minimum of not less than seven feet and an average width of ten feet. The planting area must be covered with living material, including groundcover and/or shrubs, except for mulched areas directly around the trees so that no soil is exposed. No stone much is permitted in the planting strip. Sidewalks may interrupt the planting strip provided the width on either side of the sidewalk totals ten feet. (See the City of Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual for detail(s)) 
e.  Street trees in Urban Zoning Districts . Street trees required within the Central Business, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential and Urban Place districts may utilize other urban forms and technologies such as tree pits with grates or trenches. New trees where sidewalk construction is required shall provide a minimum root zone area of 300 cubic feet of organically amended soil, or structural soil alternative, in one of the following forms: 
i.  A reinforced suspended sidewalk system around a tree grate; 
ii.  A continuous planting area between trees that is a minimum of four feet wide; 
iii.  A system of tree grates or previous paving that allows water infiltration and oxygen exchange for tree root systems; 
iv.  An on-street bulb-out which has been reviewed and approved by the traffic engineer for traffic safety. 
f.  Trees in public rights-of-way. Street trees may be located within the city's rights-of-way but must be of a species approved by the city arborist. Trees located in other public rights-of-way must provide an encroachment agreement from the regulating agency. 
(4)  Parking lot landscaping. Trees and shrubs are required in and around parking lots in order to provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties, provide shade to reduce the heat generated by impervious surfaces, reduce glare from parking lots, and to help filter exhaust from vehicles. 
a.  Parking lot determination. Parking lots with six or more spaces shall require parking lot landscaping. 
b.  Calculating the requirement. One deciduous tree and four shrubs for required for every 1,500 square feet of vehicular use area (VUA). At least 75 percent of the required deciduous parking lot trees must be large-maturing trees. Trees and shrubs must be planted within 15 feet of the vehicular use area to count as parking lot landscaping. 
c.  Interior rows of parking. When more than four trees are required in a parking lot with interior rows, 50 percent of the trees and shrubs must be planted in islands or medians located within the parking lot. 
d.  Multiple parking bays. When more than four bays of parking are proposed, an interior island with an average width of 20 feet and a length equivalent to the length of the average parking bay is required. This island must be planted and include a pedestrian walkway no less than five feet wide and placed in a location that enhances pedestrian circulation, preferably leading directly to a building entrance or sidewalk. 
 
parking bays 
e.  Perimeter parking spaces. All continuous runs of 15 or more parking spaces shall be interrupted by a tree island. 
 
perimeter parking 
f.  Minimum island size. The minimum island size shall be 200 square feet of pervious planting surface per tree. Islands must maintain an average width of ten feet with a minimum width no less than five feet. 
g.  Protection of trees. Curbing, bollards, or parking barriers shall protect trees and shrubs within five feet of the edge of the pavement. Trees and shrubs in islands should be set back at least three feet from the curb so as not to interfere with car doors opening. 
h.  Canopy coverage. Each parking space shall be located within 60 feet of a tree as measured from the trunk of the tree to the closest point of the parking space. 
i.  Parking decks. Exposed parking decks are required to plant a minimum of one tree and two shrubs for every 30 linear feet of the parking structure's perimeter. Trees shall be planted within 20 feet of the structure. This requirement shall be waived for any side of the structure where the property line buffer standards of subsection 7-11-2(d)(1) require a greater number of plantings. 
j.  Additional landscaping required for parking lots exceeding the maximum number of parking spaces. When the number of parking spaces exceeds the maximum city parking standards as set forth in section 7-11-1, one tree and two shrubs per 1,000 square feet of the additional vehicular use area shall be required in addition to the minimum requirements of this subsection. 
k.  Landscaping of parking areas and other uses by right, subject to special requirements and conditional uses. All parking areas required for specified uses outlined in article XVI shall be screened from adjacent properties with a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs to result in a vegetative screen that is 75 percent opaque year round. 
(5)  Building impact landscaping. Building impact landscaping shall be required for new or existing buildings in order to soften views from roads and adjacent properties, provide shade to reduce the heat generated by impervious surfaces, reduce glare, and to help enhance the urban landscape. 
a.  Building impact determination. All new developments with an existing or proposed building with a footprint greater than 3,000 square feet. Developments with more than one building shall combine the total footprint areas. 
b.  Calculating the requirement. One tree and two shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of building footprint. Trees and shrubs may be planted anywhere on site. 
(6)  Screening of dumpsters, loading docks, outdoor storage areas, and utility structures. All dumpsters, loading docks, mechanical equipment, residential garbage containers (over four), or utility structures visible from a public street or adjacent property line shall be screened unless already screened by an intervening building or bufferyard. All enclosed outdoor storage areas greater than 25 square feet shall also be screened from adjacent properties and streets. Screen types include: 
• A continuous hedge of evergreen trees and/or densely twigged deciduous trees planted in a seven-foot strip spaced no more than eight feet apart. 
• A fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet with the finished side of the fence facing the abutting property or street. Fences longer than 25 linear feet shall be landscaped with trees and/or shrubs planted in a minimum five-foot planting area, except around access areas, spaced no farther than eight feet apart in order to screen at least 50 percent of the fence or wall. Such wall landscaping planting area. 
(7)  Tree save areas. Residential projects shall preserve a portion of a site area dedicated to the preservation and/or establishment of natural woodland areas. These areas shall be delineated on the required site plan or final plat. 
a.  Tree save area determination. All new residential multi-family developments of eight or more units and major subdivisions of eight or more lots are required to have dedicated tree save areas. See subsection 7-11-3(b)(3) for exemptions. 
b.  Calculating the requirement. Thirty percent of the total site area must be delineated on an approved site plan or an approved preliminary and final plat as tree save area. Each acre of designated tree save area must be planted at the following rate; areas less than one acre will be required a pro-rated amount plants: 
Minimum Number of Trees/Shrubs 	Minimum Size 
14 Large Maturing Trees 	2 inch caliper 
7 Large Maturing Trees 	3 inch caliper 
5 Understory Trees 	1.5 inch caliper 
50 Shrubs 	18" high or 3 gal. container 
 
c.  Species composition. Trees and shrubs native to Western North Carolina must be used. No single tree species shall constitute more than 20 percent of the total requirement. No single species shall constitute more than 30 percent of the total shrub requirement; native rhododendron or mountain laurel may constitute 50 percent of the total shrub requirement. 
d.  Minimum tree save area size. Tree save areas may be divided into more than one pocket provided no single area is less than 5,000 square feet. 
e.  Qualifying areas. Open, common space areas and required property line buffers may be included in the required tree save areas. For major subdivisions, a minimum of 50 percent of the required open space area shall also be tree save area. 
(e)  Alternative compliance. The landscape requirements are intended to set minimum standards for quality development and environmental protection; site conditions or other reasons may justify the need to request an alternate method of compliance. The applicant must submit a plan of the area for which alternative compliance is requested to the planning and development director. The site plan shall show existing site features and any newly proposed features, if applicable. 
(1)  Alternative buffers. Buffer requirements may be adjusted through an alternative compliance determination if one or more of the following objective standards are met: 
a.  Vertical separation. When a topographical change greater than 15 feet exists, a buffer width may be reduced by 50 percent provided the balance of the buffer material is placed at the top of the bank. Plantings may be placed on the high side of the bank provided the bank does not exceed a 3:1 slope. A section drawing is required. 
 
vertical sep 
b.  Horizontal separation. When an undisturbed area is greater than twice the required buffer width, the number of required plant material in a buffer may be reduced by 50 percent. 
 
horizontal sep 
c.  Geologic features, drainage channels or streams. The placement of plant material may be adjusted to accommodate the natural features of a site provided the total amount of required plant material is provided. 
d.  Plant communities. The composition of a plant material in a buffer may be adjusted to accommodate a naturally occurring plant community or a documented historical pattern provided an equivalent number of plants are provided. 
e.  Site constraints. For all infill and/or adaptive re-use sites where existing utilities, structures, and/or other infrastructure creates a physical constraint to providing the required buffers; buffer widths and plantings may be reduced by 50 percent with the installation of a six-foot high, opaque privacy fence or wall (finished face out). Plantings must be located within a seven-foot side planting area located on the exterior of the fence facing the adjacent property. This alternative may not be used when existing parking infrastructure exceeds minimum parking requirements. 
(2)  Alternative buffering from the street. Buffering from the street requirements may be adjusted through an alternative compliance determination if the following objective standards are met: 
a.  A natural grade change or manmade berm creates a minimum three-foot vertical separation and is completely covered with trees, shrubs, perennials, and/or groundcover. 
(3)  Alternative parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping requirements may be adjusted through an alternative compliance determination if one or more of the following objective standards are met: 
i.  Island size. The minimum island size of 200 square feet of planting area per tree may be reduced to: 
• 100 square feet per tree provided that a minimum width of four feet is maintained and, when combined with a subsurface structure, provides a total aerated area greater than 300 square feet per tree. Construction detail must be provided. 
• 150 square feet per tree provided that a minimum width of five feet is maintained and, when combined with a pervious block paver, provides a total pervious surface area greater than 300 square feet. Construction detail must be provided. 
• 150 square feet per tree provided that the islands are existing and the trees are found to be in good health and are identified to be preserved on the landscape plan. 
ii.  Interior plantings (total number of plantings). The requirement for plantings in interior islands may be reduced by 30 percent if all interior islands and/or perimeter parking lot landscaping are designed to allow for water collection and retention. These islands shall be planted with water tolerant species and shall not be fenced. Construction detail(s) must be provided. 
iii.  Tree spacing and interior planting. The requirement for all parking spaces to be located within 60 feet of a tree may be waived for businesses whose parking fields double as outdoor display or storage areas, and the requirement for plantings in interior islands may be reduced by 50 percent, provided that the total interior island requirements are met with larger consolidated islands where a minimum of 50 percent (total square footage) of the islands are designed to allow for water collection and retention. The islands shall be focused towards the perimeter of the site or in a central area and designed so that stormwater runoff can be captured through bio-swales and or constructed wetlands installed in these areas. These islands shall be planted with water tolerant species and shall not be fenced. In no case shall this standard be applied to typical parking lots where the vehicles are not owned by a single entity. Construction detail(s) must be provided. This reduction for tree spacing and interior planting shall not be applied to other categories of landscaping required by this ordinance. 
(4)  Alternative street tree requirements. Street tree requirements may be adjusted through alternative compliance if one or more of the following objective standards are met: 
a.  Planting strip width. The required ten-foot wide planting strip for street trees may be reduced if one or more of the following objective standards apply: 
• An existing sidewalk, building(s) and/or other infrastructure prevents its installation. In no case shall the planting strip be less than five feet wide or planting area less than 200 square feet per large maturing tree, or 150 square feet per small maturing tree. 
• The predominant existing street tree pattern within 500 feet (both directions on both sides of the street) displays a different pattern. In no case shall the planting strip be less than five feet wide. 
• A subsurface structure is used to allow for an aerated area of 200 square feet per tree. Construction detail must be provided. 
• An adopted streetscape plan, corridor plan, and/or neighborhood plan calls for a different standard and the development complies with this standard. 
(5)  Other alternative compliance requests. All other alternative compliance requests not identified in this subsection may be reviewed by the Asheville Tree Commission who will act as an advisory board to the planning director. The applicant for such a request shall submit a list of all adjacent property owners to be notified by mail at least ten days in advance of the meeting of the tree commission where the request is to be considered. All notices shall be sent with delivery confirmation and shall state: 
• A general description of the request 
• The time and place of the meeting 
• Contact information 
• The requirements of this section (i—vii) with a description of how the request meets each of these standards. 
The commission, upon consideration of such a request may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the request. After receiving the recommendations of the tree commission, the planning director shall make the final decision on such requests, and shall provide a copy of that decision to any adjacent property owners who have requested one. In the event that the planning director rejects the tree commission's recommendation, all adjacent property owners will be notified in writing. Except as set forth in subsection 7-11-3(e)(5)b. below, the tree commission may not recommend, nor the planning director approve, an alternative that reduces the standard requirements by more than 50 percent. Applicants or other aggrieved parties may appeal a decision to the Asheville Board of Adjustment in the manner provided for appeals of administrative decisions in article VI of this chapter. 
a.  Alternative compliance standards. No request for alternative compliance under this section may be approved unless the information provided in support of the request shows the following: 
i.  The site in question is affected by physical conditions or constraints, not attributable to proposed site design or building design, that make compliance with the standard requirements practically impossible. 
ii.  The physical conditions or constraints are not a result of the applicant's own actions. 
iii.  The proposed alternative will not present a safety hazard. 
iv.  That proposed alternative will, upon maturity, provide landscaping that is equal to or better than the standards requirements. 
v.  The proposed alternative is designed to address plant health and vigor. 
vi.  The proposed alternative is reasonably compatible with the natural and topographic features of the site. 
vii.  The proposed alternative supports the purpose statement noted in 7-11-2(a). 
b.  Alternative compliance with existing structures and utilities. The Asheville Tree Commission may recommend (and the planning director may approve) landscape alternatives with a greater than 50 percent reduction where the location of existing structures or utilities creates a situation where an applicant wishing to reuse/rehabilitate a structure is unable to comply. In these situations, the tree commission may recommend any degree of reduction but shall also consider on-site alternatives to the landscape standards in order to mitigate the loss of the required landscaping. Mitigation measures should be considered by the commission in addition to the alternative compliance standards set forth in subsection a. above. 
(f)  Compliance and maintenance. Vegetation shall be planted and maintained to ensure the best chance of survival and to reduce the potential expense of replacing damaged plant materials 
(1)  Certificate of compliance. Landscaping must be installed and inspected by the City of Asheville prior to receiving a certificate of compliance. If the season or weather conditions prohibit planting the materials, the developer may provide a bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial surety in an amount equal to one and one-half times the estimated cost of installing the required landscaping to guarantee the completion of the required planting. Upon approval of the financial surety, the certificate of compliance shall be issued. The financial surety shall be for a period not to exceed 12 months; the planning and development director may grant a single extension of this time period for up to 12 months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension. The surety shall be canceled and/or returned upon completion of the required landscaping. 
If a developer provides satisfactory evidence that a bond or surety as required by this paragraph has been requested and that the developer and project otherwise qualify for said bond or surety, and that said request has been turned down by two or more financial institutions for reasons unrelated to the qualifications of the developer or project, the planning director may enter into an agreement with the developer for the delayed completion of the required work; provided, that said agreement may not apply to improvements or features that are required for safety purposes, or are prescribed by statute or state codes or regulations. By way of illustration and not limitation, said agreement (1) shall establish a schedule for the completion of improvements, (2) shall contain provisions relating to enforcement of its terms, and (3) shall specify penalties for breach, (4) shall be subject to approval of the city attorney, and (5) may be recorded in the office of the register of deeds wherein the property is located. 
(2)  Maintenance. The owner or lessee of the property where landscaping is required shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all required and preserved plant and screening material. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good condition and kept free of debris. 
(3)  Plant specifications. 
a.  Recommended plant species. Plants may be chosen from the recommended plant species list. (See Appendix 7-C.) Specific riparian species, as identified in the recommended species list, trees and shrubs for damp sites and river districts, shall be required for developments located within the 100-year flood plain. The list encourages the use of plant materials which are indigenous to this region and are readily available from local nurseries. Plant materials which are not on the list may also be used following approval from the planning and development director. 
b.  Minimum plant size requirements. All required vegetation shall meet the following minimum size requirements at planting. Additionally, all plants must meet the requirements of the most recent edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock, ANSI 260.1. Plants must be healthy, well-branched, and free of disease and insect infestation. 
i.  Large-maturing deciduous tree: Greater than 35 feet at maturity. Minimum size at planting shall be two inches caliper and 12 to 14-foot height. 
ii.  Small-maturing deciduous tree: Smaller than 35 feet at maturity. The minimum tree size shall be at least one and one-half inch caliper or eight to ten feet high at time of planting. 
iii.  Evergreen tree: Minimum height of six feet at time of planting. 
iv.  Large shrub: Minimum five gallon container or ten-inch root ball with a height of 24 inches at time of planting. 
v.  Small shrub: Minimum three gallon container or eight-inch root ball with a height of 18 inches at time of planting. 
(4)  Tree pruning standards. Trees located within the city's public right-of-way cannot be pruned or removed without a permit from the Asheville Public Works Department as required by chapter 20 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. All other required trees shall be pruned in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care operations A300 published by the American National Standards Institute. Tree owners and their agents are encouraged to hire businesses that employ certified arborists who can supervise the pruning work on site and ensure that proper pruning is being performed (See the City of Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual for details). In addition, the following standards shall apply to required trees: 
a.  Co-dominant stems less than four inches in diameter at the fork shall be pruned off and one main stem shall remain. 
b.  Pruning shall be done such that a tree's natural form is maintained by the greatest extent possible. 
c.  Tree topping or heading is not permitted. 
d.  Reasons for which tree pruning is not permitted include, but are not limited to: 
• Sign installation, clearance, or visibility; excluding traffic, directional, warning, or information signs owned by any public or semi-public agency. 
• Visibility of a structure and/or outdoor display area. 
• Clearance for equipment traffic or storage, the erection of temporary structures, or materials storage within the tree protection zone. 
(5)  Failure to maintain. Failure to maintain or replace dead, damaged, or diseased material or failure to maintain or repair a fence or wall installed as a buffer shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty provisions in section 7-18-2 if not corrected or replaced within 30 days of notification. If an act of God or other catastrophic event occurs which destroys a large quantity of vegetation, the owner or lessee shall have 120 days to replant. Replaced plant material must be in compliance with the minimum size, spacing, and quantity standards of this chapter. 
(6)  Un-approved removal or noncompliant pruning. Removing required landscaping or undertaking pruning actions that do not conform to the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties described in chapter 10, appendix B. Additionally, all affected areas must be replanted to current standards. 
(g)  Clearing of land time limit. In districts where speculative grading is prohibited and land is cleared through issuance of a grading permit; the owner shall be required to replant the cleared property to its original state based on tree counts and other information originally submitted to the City of Asheville if construction does not begin within six months from the date that the grading activity ceases. A single six-month extension of the above limit may be issued at the discretion of the planning and development director. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(8), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3479, § 1(a), 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1k, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3708, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3710, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3740, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3741, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3791, § 1b, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3929, § 1e, 11-23-10; Ord. No. 4305, § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 4560, § 1m, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(t), 8-22-17)  
Sec. 7-11-4. - Open space standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The open space standards contained herein are established to provide for the reservation of open spaces in both residential and non-residential developments located in the City of Asheville and its area of jurisdiction. Preservation of open space in developing areas serves a variety of purposes, including meeting the recreational needs of residents, improving the aesthetic character of the community, reducing stormwater runoff, and enhancing air quality. The standards set forth below provide for the protection of open space in both residential and non-residential developments. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms are defined. 
Active recreational facilities mean tot lots, tennis or basketball courts, playgrounds with equipment such as swing sets and climbing apparatus, swimming pools, pavilions or covered decks available for common recreational use, or similar facilities. 
Suburban open space amenities mean open water, wetlands, floodplains, woodlands, land which exceeds a 25 percent slope or is otherwise governed by the steep slope and ridgetop requirements, land used for stormwater retention, land available to residents or tenants for active or passive recreation, including clubhouses, parks, walking trails not used to meet sidewalk requirements, playgrounds, swimming pools, benches, picnic tables, and similar amenities. 
Urban open space amenities mean public sidewalks significantly in excess of standard sidewalk requirements, streetscape and hardscape areas accessible to the public including sidewalk cafe areas, areas containing public art, and similar amenities. 
(c)  Open space requirement. Open space shall be provided in accordance with the following table for: initial residential development containing eight or more units or redevelopment or additional development that adds eight or more units; for initial nonresidential or mixed use development of lots containing one acre or more in area; or for redevelopment or additional development that adds 25 percent more nonresidential or mixed use floor area on lots containing one acre or more in area. The CBD district and single-family residential subdivisions with a minimum lot size of one acre or more are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
ZONING DISTRICT 	REQUIRED OPEN SPACE 
All residential districts, except URD 
(NOTE: single-family residential subdivisions with a minimum lot size of one acre or more are exempt from the open space requirements) 	Single-family/duplex subdivisions: 20% of subdivision lot area. 
Other residential: 500 square feet of open space per unit or 15% of lot area, whichever is greater. In no case shall the amount of open space devoted to active recreational facilities constitute more than 10% of lot area. 
Nonresidential uses (e.g., churches, schools, etc.): 20% of lot area. 
All other districts, including URD 
(except as otherwise noted for the: CBD, Industrial, Commercial Industrial) 	5% of lot area for development that primarily includes urban open space amenities 
15% of lot area for development that primarily includes suburban open space amenities 
5% of lot area for industrial uses (as noted in the Table of Uses) in Commercial Industrial 
No open space requirements; CBD and Industrial 
All other districts, including URD (except as otherwise noted for: CBD, IND, CI, IND, CBD EXP and IND EXP) 	No open space requirements; CBD, IND, CBD EXP, IND EXP 
 
Regardless of the requirements and exemptions of this subsection, any portion of the site of the proposed development that is designated as future open space or greenway in the greenway master plan of the City of Asheville shall be reserved for open space. This area may be counted toward the total amount of open space required for the development. 
If the total amount of land required to comply with the greenway master plan is less than the total amount required for the development by the above table, then the developer shall provide additional open space to meet the requirement of the above table. If the total amount of land required to be reserved to comply with the greenway master plan exceeds the total amount required by the above table, then the developer must still provide the open space required by the greenway master plan. 
As compensation for any open space dedication associated with implementing the greenway master plan above that requirement listed in the above table, the developer is eligible for a density bonus of one dwelling unit per each 1,000 square feet of land area in excess of that required in the above table or 500 square feet of nonresidential gross floor area per each 1,000 square feet of land area in excess of that required in the above table, up to a maximum of a 25 percent increase above the maximum density or intensity allowed in the applicable zoning district, provided hillside, river resource yard, flood protection, and other environmental preservation regulations are complied with. Alternatively, upon approval by the parks and recreation director, open space fee-in-lieu funds may be used to purchase the additional requirement, or the additional requirement may be reduced by the parks and recreation director. 
Individual areas designated as open space areas shall not contain less than 500 square feet when developed with urban open space amenities and 2,000 square feet when developed with suburban open space amenities, although smaller areas may be approved by the planning and development director if the intent of this ordinance is determined to be met. 
(d)  Land acceptable for open space designation. The classes of land enumerated in the subparagraphs below may be utilized to meet the requirements of this section. For subdivisions, open space shall consist of land that is accessible from a public or approved private street either directly or via an easement of at least ten feet in width. For other developments, open space shall be land that is visible from public rights-of-way or otherwise visually-accessible to the public. Land that is burdened with easements may be used provided that the easements do not interfere with the use of the land for open space purposes. In no case shall the following land be used for open space; land that is contaminated with hazardous or toxic waste or materials as defined by state or federal regulations (except land covered by an approved mitigation plan and deemed acceptable to the city); land occupied by streets, drives, parking areas, required landscape buffers, or structures other than recreational structures; and land with a minimum width less than 24 feet unless part of a greenway system or specifically approved by the planning and development director. Urban-scale mixed use districts (NCD, UV, URD, UPD) are exempt from the minimum width requirement. Public use of the open space may be limited to residents of the development except for land used for public sidewalks as described in subsection (3) below. 
(1)  Open water, wetlands, and undisturbed floodplains (up to 50 percent of the requirement); River Resource Yard (up to 100 percent of the requirement). 
(2)  Land used for public sidewalks significantly in excess of standard sidewalk requirements, streetscape and hardscape areas accessible to the public including sidewalk cafe areas, areas containing public art, and similar urban open space amenities. 
(3)  Land on which locally or nationally designated historic structures are located and determined to be contributing to the designation. 
(4)  Land which exceeds a 25 percent slope or is otherwise governed by steep slope and ridgetop requirements may be used to provide up to 50 percent of the required open space if existing slopes and vegetation so designated remain undisturbed. 
(5)  Land used for stormwater retention, provided such land is natural in appearance and is not separately fenced, may be used for up to 50 percent of the required open space; green roofs are eligible to be counted as open space under this provision. Additionally, land used for stormwater retention, provided such land is natural in appearance and is not separately fenced, that is developed using best management practices (e.g., constructed wetlands, rain gardens, green roofs or similar features), and either exceeds the required amount of retention or treats off-site stormwater may be used for up to 100 percent of the required open space at the discretion of the planning and development director after consultation with the city engineer. 
(6)  Land available to residents or tenants for active or passive recreation, including clubhouses, parks, walking trails not used to meet sidewalk requirements, playgrounds, swimming pools, benches, picnic tables, and similar land uses or facilities. This land may include steep slope lands, floodplains, and land used for stormwater retention so long as the land is provided with active or passive recreational amenities. 
(e)  Reductions in required open space reservation. The amount of land required to be designated for open space may be reduced by the planning and development director in the following situations: 
(1)  If public parks or public recreational facilities are constructed on the land designated as the open space consistent with a plan approved by the parks and recreation director, the open space requirements may be reduced in proportion to the extent of the improvements made by the applicant as determined by the parks and recreation director. 
(2)  If the land proposed for designation as open space adjoins or is otherwise immediately accessible and connected to parkland or other existing public open space, the open space requirements may be reduced by up to a maximum of 25 percent of the total requirement, provided access to the parkland is provided via an easement or other connection acceptable to the parks and recreation director. 
(3)  If active recreational facilities are provided to serve the residents of the development, the open space requirements may be reduced in proportion to the value of the improvements made by the applicant up to a maximum of 25 percent of the total requirement as determined by the planning and development director. 
(f)  Maintenance. The owner or lessee of the property designated as the open space shall be responsible for the maintenance of the open space area. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good condition and the entire area shall be kept clear of debris. Failure to maintain the area shall constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of section 7-18-2 if not corrected within 30 days of notification. Alternatively, if acceptable to the parks and recreation director and/or public works director, as applicable, the land may be dedicated to the city for public use and thereafter maintained by the city. 
(g)  Fee-in-lieu. For open space requirements of 10,000 or less square feet in area and not involving property affected by the Greenway Master Plan, a property owner may elect to pay a fee-in-lieu of open space instead of providing the open space. For other required open space areas, a property owner may pay a fee-in-lieu of open space designation for all or a portion of the open space requirement if such fee-in-lieu is acceptable to both the parks and recreation director and planning director. This fee shall be calculated by using the pro rata value of the designated property relative to the value of the entire site to be developed using tax appraisal data; for properties covered by agricultural or other exemptions, the city may utilize a separate appraisal method in its sole discretion. Funds collected in this manner shall be maintained in a separate account and shall be used to purchase or to enhance recreational use of property necessary to implement features of the greenway master plan or the Parks and Recreation Master Plan of the City of Asheville provided such features are reasonably proximate to the site(s) from which the funds are collected. Where practical, the collected fees for each project shall be designated for specific parks and recreation acquisitions and/or enhancements by the parks and recreation director. For developments and subdivisions containing more than 50 residential units, the fee-in-lieu option may only be used for up to 50 percent of the open space requirements in order to ensure that these larger projects provide on-site open space for their residents; developments in urban-scale mixed use districts (NCD, UV, URD, UPD) are exempt from this requirement and up to 100 percent of the open space requirements may be accommodated through fee-in-lieu payments regardless of development size. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(l), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(d), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3492, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 4244, § 1, 10-22-13; Ord. No. 4560, § 1n, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 7-11-5. - Zoning vested right. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon the approval of a site specific development plan. 
(b)  Approving authority. The Asheville City Council shall be the approving authority for zoning vested rights. 
(c)  Establishment of a zoning vested right. 
(1)  A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, by the Asheville City Council of a site specific development plan, following notice and public hearing. 
(2)  The Asheville City Council may approve a site specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the Asheville City Council's action. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above information, approval of a site specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. 
(5)  The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land-use regulation by the City of Asheville, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes. Otherwise applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon the expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this section. 
(6)  A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such right while applicable. 
(d)  Approval procedures and approving authority. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the Asheville City Council for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or approval for which application is made. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions referenced above, if the authority to issue a particular zoning or land use permit or approval has been delegated by ordinance to a board, committee, or administrative official other than the Asheville City Council or the board of adjustment of the City of Asheville, in order to obtain a zoning vested right, the applicant must request in writing at the time of application that the application be considered and acted on by the Asheville City Council, following notice and public hearing as provided in N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-364. 
(3)  In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the City of Asheville, that a zoning vested right is being sought. 
(4)  Each map, plat, site plan, or other document evidencing a site specific development plan shall contain the following notation: "Approval of this plan establishes a zoning vested right under N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1. Unless terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until (date)." 
(5)  Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan, nothing in this section shall exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and conditions of the approval or this chapter. 
(e)  Duration. 
(1)  A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this section shall remain vested for a period of two years. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site specific development plan unless expressly provided by the Asheville City Council at the time the amendment or modification is approved. 
(2)  Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding. 
(3)  A zoning permit, conditional use permit, or approval of a preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding. 
(f)  Termination. A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this section shall terminate: 
(1)  At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed; 
(2)  With the written consent of the affected landowner; 
(3)  Upon findings by the Asheville City Council, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing, that natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan; 
(4)  Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval by the city, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action; 
(5)  Upon findings by the Asheville City Council, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the landowner or his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the Asheville City Council of the site specific development plan; or 
(6)  Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific development plan, in which case the Asheville City Council may, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, modify the affected provisions upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan. 
(g)  Voluntary annexation. A petition for annexation filed with the City of Asheville under N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-31 or N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has been established under N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1 or N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 153A-344.1. A statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been established under N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1 or N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign a statement declaring whether or not a zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding on the landowner and any such zoning vested right shall be terminated. 
(h)  Limitations. Nothing in this section is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested right other than those established pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1. 
(i)  Repeal. In the event that N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-385.1 is repealed, this section shall be deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(j)  Building permit vested right. Amendments, modifications, supplements, repeal, or other changes in zoning regulations and restrictions and zone boundaries shall not be applicable or enforceable without consent of the owner with regard to lots for which building permits have been issued pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-417 prior to the enactment of the ordinance making the change or changes so long as the permits remain valid and unexpired pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-418 and unrevoked pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-422. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(d), 11-28-06)  
Sec. 7-11-6. - Traffic impact analysis. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that applicants for new construction, additions and/or expansions to existing structures, and/or changes of use consider and mitigate the impact of the development on the existing and/or proposed roadway system. While the city and the State of North Carolina recognize their responsibility to build and maintain a public transportation system, the project applicants may need to assist in improving transportation facilities in order to maintain the existing level of service by accommodating additional traffic generated by the development. These transportation facilities involve pedestrian, non-motorized vehicular traffic and motorized vehicular traffic. The city's traffic engineering division will provide any necessary assistance in the preliminary review of these requirements. 
(b)  Traffic impact analysis required. All proposals for new construction, additions and/or expansions to existing structures, and/or changes of use which will result in total peak hour trips equal to or greater than 100 peak hour trips using trip generation rates from the most recent edition of the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers shall include an analysis of the traffic to be generated. The traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with the project application and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Introduction and summary. 
a.  Purpose of report and study objectives. 
b.  Executive summary. 
1.  Site location and study area. 
2.  Development description. 
3.  Principal findings. 
4.  Conclusions. 
5.  Recommendations. 
(2)  Proposed development (site and nearby) 
a.  Off-site development - provide map (the city's traffic engineer will identify). 
b.  Description of on-site development. 
1.  Land use and intensity. 
2.  Location - provide vicinity map. 
3.  Site plan. 
4.  Zoning. 
5.  Phasing and timing. 
(3)  Area conditions. 
a.  Study area (includes the project area and extends to any intersection where the volume of peak hour traffic on any approach leg will be increased by ten percent or more as a result of the additional traffic generated by the proposed use). 
1.  Area of influence - provide map. 
2.  Area of significant traffic impact - provide map. (signalized/unsignalized intersections and driveways) 
b.  Study area land use. 
1.  Existing land uses. 
2.  Existing zoning. 
3.  Anticipated future development. 
c.  Site accessibility. 
1.  Area roadway system. 
a.  Existing. 
b.  Planned completion by horizon year (shall be the year in which the project is to be completed). 
c.  Future (the city's traffic engineer will identify) proposed roadway improvements must be under construction and proposed for completion at the time of the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for the development in order for the improvement to be considered in the impact analysis. 
2.  Traffic volumes and conditions. 
a.  Provide a figure showing existing daily traffic volumes and peak hour turning movements for identified study intersections. 
b.  Provide all documentation in an appendix to the report. 
3.  Transit service. 
a.  Review existing transit routes serving the proposed site. 
b.  Review proposed transit routes serving the proposed site. 
c.  Provide adequate transit facilities for the proposed site. 
4.  Pedestrian access and circulation. 
a.  Review proposed pedestrian access and circulation amenities. 
b.  Provide adequate pedestrian facilities. 
5.  Other modes as applicable. 
(4)  Projected traffic. 
a.  Site traffic - existing and proposed zoning. 
1.  Trip generation* - provide tables. 
a.  Daily. 
b.  Peak hour - in/out and total - a.m./p.m. 
2.  Pass-by trips - to be determined by traffic engineer. 
3.  Trip distribution - provide figures. 
4.  Modal split - if applicable. 
5.  Trip assignment - provide figures. 
b.  Background traffic (horizon year shall be the year in which the project is to be completed). 
1.  Method of projection (the city's traffic engineer will provide factor). 
2.  Non-site traffic for anticipated development in study area. 
a.  Trip generation. 
b.  Trip distribution. 
c.  Modal split - if applicable. 
d.  Trip assignment. 
3.  Background traffic. 
c.  Total traffic (horizon year - provide two figures). 
1.  Background + (non-site) + (site-existing zoning) = total for each traffic movement. 
2.  Background + (non-site) + (site-proposed zoning) = total for each traffic movement. 
(5)  Traffic analysis - highway capacity manual/software. 
a.  Site access (review all access points). 
b.  Capacity and level of service - provide summary/worksheets in Appendix - include a copy on diskette. 
1.  Driveways (site). 
2.  Internal street intersections - if applicable. 
3.  External signalized/unsignalized intersections and driveways in study area as identified by the city's traffic engineer. 
Provide comparative table for existing conditions, horizon year with existing zoning/non-site development, and horizon year with proposed zoning/development. 
c.  Review impact of cut-through traffic. 
d.  Traffic safety. 
Analyze accident history including adjacent roadway system at signalized and unsignalized intersections as per city traffic engineer. 
e.  Traffic signals. 
The City of Asheville reserves the right to install traffic signals at the time the development is completed. The developer may be desirous of placement and operation of a traffic signal to promote easier and safer ingress and egress to the development both on-site and off-site at an earlier date than the city would normally schedule and fund installation. The developer can purchase and install the traffic control signal hardware, meeting the specifications of the City of Asheville, including pre-emption hardware to expedite emergency vehicle response. The developer shall release, give or donate the traffic signal to the City of Asheville and shall retain no rights or ownership of personal property therein. Warrants (MUTCD) for any proposed traffic signals are to be provided in the appendix to the report. 
NCDOT may require developer to fund any warranted traffic signal modifications on state system streets in Asheville. 
f.  Other traffic impact reviews. Review to include, but not limited to, parking analysis, internal circulation analysis, traffic calming measures and techniques, and traffic demand management requirements. 
(6)  Improvements analysis. 
a.  Improvements to accommodate site traffic. 
b.  Alternative improvements. 
c.  Status of improvements already funded, programmed or planned. 
d.  Evaluation. 
* Institute of Transportation Engineers (I.T.E.) Trip Generation Handbook, latest edition. 
(c)  Improvements required. In those cases where the City of Asheville or the North Carolina Department of Transportation requires certain improvements to be constructed in order to accommodate additional traffic generated by the proposed developments, the improvements shall be funded and/or constructed by the project developer in accordance with the standards and direction provided by the City of Asheville or by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The improvements shall be in place or under construction prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion required for any phase or portion of the project. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, § 15, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2446, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(d), 11-28-06)  
Sec. 7-11-7. - Flexible development standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide the planning and development director, design review boards, and city council, as applicable, with the authority to allow deviations from the development standards for setbacks, front and corner side setbacks, lot area and dimension, number of parking spaces, signage, open space, landscaping, height, and building floor area set forth in this chapter provided that certain conditions exist. The intent of this section is to promote the orderly and efficient development of property. 
(b)  Approval of flexible development standards. Regardless of the minimum development standards otherwise required in this Code, the planning and development director shall administer the following flexible development standards for the purpose of facilitating the orderly development and redevelopment of property within the City of Asheville. Determination of the applicability of flexible development standards shall be made by the planning and development director, design review boards, and city council, as applicable and as provided in this section. The planning and development director, design review boards, and city council may place conditions on an approval to assure that the circumstances which warranted the application of the flexible development standards are maintained. Decisions by the planning and development director shall be in writing and may be appealed to the board of adjustment by following the procedures for such appeals provided in section 7-6-2 of this chapter. 
(c)  Flexible development standards permitted. The cumulative total of any flexible development standard applied to a property by category or location shall not exceed the maximums set forth in this section. The planning and development director shall maintain appropriate records to insure compliance with this provision. 
(1)  Setbacks. The planning and development director is authorized to approve requests that deviate from required setbacks set forth in article VIII of this chapter by up to ten percent of the required setbacks or 24 inches, whichever is greater, upon determination that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  There are site or structural conditions that preclude strict adherence to the setback requirements, such as, but not limited to: the lot does not meet the dimensional standards established for the zoning district in which it is located; the lot has topographic limitations that require placement of the structure into the required setback area; or the structure is physically in line with an existing, legally established wall or walls of a principal structure already within the minimum setback area. 
b.  The part of the proposed structure that would encroach into the minimum setback area is less than 50 percent of the width of the affected building façade(s), provided the part of the structure that would encroach into a front setback shall either be open (such as a porch or screen room) or not subject to occupancy (such as a chimney). 
c.  The part of the proposed structure that encroaches into the minimum setback area is necessitated by a life-safety code, flood hazard reduction, Americans with Disabilities Act standard, or other public safety code requirements. 
d.  The proposed structure will allow the preservation of significant existing vegetation. 
(2)  Parking garages and parking lots. Except for parking required for residential development of less than five units, the planning and development director is authorized to approve parking garages and parking lots in connection with a permitted use that has up to 25 percent less than the required number of spaces set forth in article XI of this chapter upon determination that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The applicant has presented a written parking needs analysis for the proposed use that demonstrates that a lower parking requirement adequately serves the parking needs of the use. This parking needs analysis shall be prepared by a North Carolina registered engineer or architect or by a certified planner or other professional qualified to do such analysis. 
b.  The applicant is proposing an adaptive reuse of an existing structure with a permitted use and there is insufficient space on site to accommodate the required parking. 
c.  The applicant is constructing an addition to an existing structure or site and sufficient new parking will be provided to accommodate the additional square footage without reducing the amount of parking serving the existing structure or site prior to the addition. 
d.  The proposed parking lot or garage will allow the preservation of significant existing vegetation. 
(3)  Lot area and lot dimension. The planning and development director is authorized to approve requests to permit a reduction of up to ten percent in the lot area or lot dimensional standards set forth in article VIII of this chapter, upon finding that the following conditions exist: 
a.  The reduced lot area and/or lot dimensions are in keeping with the historic pattern of development in the area; and 
b.  The reduced lot area and/or lot dimensions will not inhibit the reasonable use of the lot. 
(4)  Structures undergoing design review. Structures or lots subject to design review pursuant to this chapter by any official design review board established in this chapter which are found to comply with the applicable design guidelines shall be exempt from the signage, open space, landscaping, off-street parking, setback, building height and building floor area, lot width, and lot area requirements of the underlying zoning district to the extent that those requirements conflict with the applicable design guidelines. 
(5)  Front and corner side setbacks. Front and corner side setbacks establish the basic street orientation for buildings in a subdivision. In some circumstances, the front and corner side setbacks established for particular zoning districts require modification in order to create a more practical use of land in response to environmental or topographic considerations or to promote consistency with existing or proposed patterns of development. The intent of this section is to provide for an administrative reduction in required front and corner side setbacks for entire residential subdivisions and in portions of residential subdivisions in routine circumstances where conditions warrant and a variance would be justified. Such conditions include, but are not limited to: The protection of significant existing vegetation; accommodation of trails and greenways; provision of a more usable lot arrangement due to topographical circumstances; and maintenance of consistent appearance within the subdivision or with similarly situated property in the vicinity of the subdivision. It is not the intent of this section to simply provide a means to increase the buildable portion of a lot or lots. Consequently, the planning and development director and/or city council, as applicable, may impose those conditions reasonably necessary to ensure that the intent of this provision is carried out; such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the establishment of: additional required setbacks to the side or rear of properties, build-to lines, trail or greenway easements, and conservation easements. Due consideration shall be given to the existing development pattern of the surrounding area and no approval of flexible development standards shall be approved that would result in a substantial inconsistency with that pattern of development. 
a.  Front and corner side setbacks for entire residential subdivisions. This section applies to lots in all residential zoning districts. The planning and development director is authorized to approve requests to permit a reduction of up to ten feet in the required front and/or corner side setbacks for entire subdivisions as part of the plat approval process. For subdivision plats requiring approval by the city council, the city council is authorized to approve a reduction of up to ten feet in the required front and/or corner side setbacks for the entire subdivision. In no case shall these approvals reduce the required front and/or corner side setbacks to less than ten feet. The applicant shall record a note regarding required front and/or corner side setback reduction on the final plat of the subdivision, along with any conditions that may be imposed. 
b.  Front and/or corner side setbacks in portions of residential subdivisions. For lots in all residential zoning districts except the RS-2 zoning district, the planning and development director is authorized to approve requests to permit a reduction of up to ten feet in the required front and/or corner side setbacks for up to tenpercent of the lots in all subdivisions. For lots in the RS-2 zoning district, the planning and development director is authorized to approve requests to permit a reduction of up to 20 feet in the required front and/or corner side setbacks for up to ten percent of the lots in all subdivisions. In no case shall these approvals reduce the front and/or corner side setbacks to less than ten feet. In either case, the applicant shall record a note regarding front and/or corner side setback reduction on the final plat of the subdivision, along with any conditions that may be imposed. 
(6)  Variances. No variances shall be allowed under article VI of this chapter with regard to deviations from development standards that have been approved pursuant to this section of the city Code nor shall any deviations from these development standards make void or otherwise modify any variance decision by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2637, § 1(a), 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2777, § 1(j), 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2896, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2912, §§ 1(a)—1(c), 4-9-02; Ord. No. 3118, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(d), 11-28-06)  
Sec. 7-11-8. - Sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of this section are to insure that adequate provision of transportation and other public requirements, the promotion of health, safety and the general welfare and the coordination of streets and other public facilities are considered in the development and use of property and that development and use of property are done in accordance with an adopted City of Asheville (herein "city"), transportation or corridor plan, including but not limited to such plans as the Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), greenway, neighborhood, small area, and pedestrian thoroughfare plans. The city council hereby incorporates by reference as if set forth in full herein the findings of the city's pedestrian thoroughfare plan and further finds and declares that the construction of sidewalks advances those interests of the city and, in order to accomplish those purposes, this section sets out requirements for the construction of sidewalks and, where a developer requests it and certain conditions exist, for the payment of a fee in lieu of the requirement for construction of sidewalks. 
(b)  Guidelines for requiring sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required for all new construction and for renovations, additions and/or expansions to existing structures which fall into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  All new single-family residential development which consists of 20 or more single-family homes (see "new development" explication below); 
(2)  AH new multi-family residential development, except for the construction of less than ten units (see "new development" explication below); 
(3)  All new office, institutional, commercial, and industrial development (see "new development" explication below); 
(4)  All existing office, institutional, commercial, and industrial development additions or expansions to structures where the expansion results in an increase of more than 75 percent value of the structure as defined in section 7-11-1 of this chapter. 
(5)  All new streets, improved streets or extension to streets. 
"New development" shall be interpreted to include all new construction in addition to the use of a building or property where the use has, ceased for a period of more than 180 days. See also subsections 7-17-5(c) and 7-17-5(d) concerning "overcoming presumption of cessation of use". This does not include minor additions or expansions that do not meet the city's threshold standards identified in subsection (3) above. 
(c)  Additional conditions for requiring sidewalks. Notwithstanding (b) above, the following findings must be made prior to the city engineer/designee requiring the construction of a new sidewalk or a "fee in lieu of constructing a sidewalk for an applicable project. One or more of the following conditions must be met, as determined by the city engineer/designee. 
(1)  The applicable project area, including the street frontage, is identified as a needed pedestrian linkage within an adopted city transportation or corridor plan, including but not limited to such plans as the Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), greenway, neighborhood, small area, and pedestrian thoroughfare plans. 
(2)  The current or projected (within five years) average daily traffic count (ADT) for the street is 300 vehicles per day or more as determined by the city traffic engineer. Traffic generated from the applicable project or any additions to the applicable project will be included in calculating the ADT for this condition. 
In the event that the sidewalk is not required, the developer must provide a recorded easement, if necessary, for the future development of the sidewalk. The developer wherever practical shall grade for the future development of a sidewalk. 
(d)  Public and private streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all public and private street frontages that meet the requirements of section 7-11-8(c) of the lot for which the development is proposed. 
All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the city's Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
(e)  Fee in lieu of construction. Where a new sidewalk is required to be constructed, the city engineer/designee may waive the requirement that a sidewalk be constructed provided that the applicant make a written request to the city engineer/designee for a waiver. The waiver will be granted under the conditions that the city engineer/designee determine that one or more of the following conditions exists and that the applicant pay a fee in lieu of constructing the sidewalk as described in the Fees and Charges Manual. 
(1)  The pedestrian facility is not identified in the current Pedestrian Thoroughfare Plan as a needed pedestrian linkage. 
(2)  The sidewalk is proposed to be constructed within an existing right-of-way where sufficient right-of-way or easement width does not exist or cannot be dedicated to build the sidewalk. 
(3)  The pedestrian facility is identified on the Pedestrian Thoroughfare Plan but is a part of a NCDOT or city-funded project that includes sidewalks. 
(4)  The pedestrian facility is identified in the current Pedestrian Thoroughfare Plan as a needed linkage but the cost of the construction of the sidewalk would exceed 15 percent of the total cost of the approved project. In this case, the developer would only be required to pay 15 percent of the construction costs of the proposed project. 
If a developer is eligible for the fee in lieu of construction as described in subsection 7-11-8(e) and the Standard Specifications and Details Manual does not require that a sidewalk be placed on both sides of the street, the developer may pay no more than 50 percent of the fee in lieu of construction amount as defined in the Fees and Charges Manual. 
In no case shall the fee in lieu of constructing the sidewalk exceed 15 percent of the total cost of the approved project. The total cost of the project shall include all construction costs associated with the improvement as approved by the city. 
In the event that a fee in lieu of constructing a sidewalk is approved, the developer must provide a recorded easement if necessary for the future development of the sidewalk. 
The developer wherever practical shall grade for the future development of a sidewalk. 
The fee in lieu of construction will not apply to Level III projects unless specifically approved by the city engineer/designee. The fee in lieu of construction will not apply to new or reconstructed streets unless condition (e)(2) above applies. 
(f)  Appeals. In the event that a developer wishes to appeal the ruling of the city engineer/designee, the developer must provide a letter to the city manager/designee within ten working days of receiving written notice of the ruling from the city engineer/designee. 
(g)  Appeal committee. There is hereby created a three-member sidewalk appeals committee for the city. The committee shall consist of the city manager or his/her designee and two other city department directors appointed by the city manager. The city manager/designee shall serve as the chair and have overall responsibility for the proper functioning of the committee. The committee's jurisdiction shall be limited to hearing appeals from the city engineer/designee regarding this section 711-8 of the UDO pertaining to sidewalks. 
(h)  Powers of the committee. The committee may affirm, reverse, modify or amend the rulings of the city engineer/designee by a majority vote. In reviewing the decision of the city engineer/designee, the committee shall determine whether the city engineer/designee's decision is consistent with the purpose and intent of the code requiring sidewalks. In order to reverse a decision of the city engineer/designee, the committee must first find that the city engineer/designee's interpretation of the pertinent section of 7-11-8 is wrong. The committee's decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment on the record, in accordance with the Board's Rules and section 7-6-2 of the UDO. 
(i)  Use of fees. All fees collected by the city pursuant to these provisions shall be accounted for separately from other monies, shall be expended only for the construction or rehabilitation of sidewalks or other pedestrian improvements in the city and shall be expended within a reasonable amount of time after completion of the development (not to exceed five years) or returned to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2664, § 1(a), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(a), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3417, § 1(e), 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3791, §§ 1c, d, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3816, § 1, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 4424, § 1a, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 7-11-9. - Emergency wireless communications. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that buildings and structures shall not interfere with the city's communication network. Developments shall be modified to accommodate the needs of the city's communications network, to eliminate any interference a development would create or otherwise accommodate the needs of the city's communication network within the development proposal. Adequate provisions shall be made for a radio signal booster system which will correct for a reduction in the radio signal to a level below that required to assure the 95 percent area coverage reliability needed for public safety communications. 
(b)  Radio signal booster system required. Except as otherwise provided no person shall maintain, own, erect, or construct, any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for public safety entities, including, but not limited to, firefighters, emergency medical services and police officers. The following structures are exempt from these requirements: 
(1)  Single-family residential buildings; any building constructed of wood frame; any building 25 feet high or less; as long as none of the aforementioned buildings make primary use of metal on concrete construction or contain below grade storage or parking areas. For purposes of this section, parking structures are included in the definition of buildings, and stair shafts are included in the definition of all parts of a building, but elevators may be excluded. 
(2)  Buildings constructed prior to the effective date of this section (February 12, 2008) shall be required to comply with public safety radio coverage provisions of this section. However, should exempted structures undergo renovation or modification where the cost of the renovation or modification exceeds 75 percent of the appraised value of the structure this exemption shall not apply. 
(c)  Easements. The city may require an easement to utilize the roof for communications infrastructure components to support current and future public safety communication needs. This includes, but is not limited to a 12 feet × 25 feet rooftop area for; antennas, base stations, UPS power supplies, and microwave dish antennas. The building owners shall provide a secure climate controlled environment, no less than ten feet × 20 feet × ten feet, suitable for sensitive electronic equipment. This room shall be located within the top floor of roof area to allow for less than 100-foot cable runs to the antenna locations. Power for the equipment in this room shall be fed from the building emergency generator. Additional construction specifications will be made available as required. 
(d)  Specifications. All emergency wireless communications shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the City of Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual. 
(e)  Alternative standards. Based on sound telecommunication engineering practices, the information technology director or his designee may approve alternative standards that are equal to or better than those set forth in this chapter and in the City of Asheville Standards and Specifications Manual. 
(Ord. No. 3583, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3791, § 1e, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 7-11-10. - Outdoor lighting standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, security, and the nighttime use and enjoyment of property, including: 
• To protect and improve safe travel for all modes of transportation; 
• To reduce light pollution, light trespass, glare, and unnecessary high light levels and intensity; 
• To promote energy efficient lighting practices and systems; and 
• To maintain and improve nighttime aesthetics of Asheville, including preservation of the night sky. 
This ordinance provides basic outdoor lighting requirements based on industry standards. Creative use of outdoor lighting to supplement building architecture, enhance outdoor enjoyment and other uses of lighting are encouraged within the framework of ordinance requirements. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined. 
Cutoff Classifications: 
Full cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90° above nadir. Additionally the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (ten percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80° above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
 
Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not exceed 25 (2.5 percent) at or above an angle of 90° above nadir, and 100 (ten percent) at or above a vertical angle 80° above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
 
Semicutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not exceed 50 (five percent) at or above an angle of 90° above nadir, and 200 (20 percent) at or above a vertical angle 80° above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
 
Noncutoff. A luminaire light distribution where there is no candela limitation in the zone above maximum candela. 
 
Other Definitions: 
Backlight, uplight, and glare (BUG) rating. A luminaire classification system that classifies backlight (B), uplight (U), and glare (G) ratings to evaluate luminaire optical performance related to light trespass, sky glow, and high angle brightness control. 
Ballast. A device used with an electric-discharge lamp to obtain the necessary circuit conditions (voltage, current, and waveform) for starting and operating. 
Candela. The metric unit luminous intensity (that is, power emitted by a light source in a particular direction, with wavelengths weighted by the luminosity function, a standardized model of the sensitivity of the human eye). 
Direct glare. Glare resulting from high luminances or insufficiently shielded light sources in the field of view. It is usually associated with bright areas, such as luminaires, ceilings, and windows that are outside the visual task or region being viewed. A direct glare source can also affect performance by distracting attention. 
Directional lighting. Lighting provided on the workplane or on an object. Light that is predominantly from a preferred direction. 
Fixture. See luminaire. 
Flood lamp. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a specific direction with a reflector formed from the glass envelope of the lamp itself. Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically used in residential outdoor area lighting. 
 
Flood light. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting elements located external to the lamp. These lights are prohibited in the City of Asheville. 
 
Footcandle (FC). A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light (illumination) falling onto a given point. One footcandle equals one lumen per square foot. 
Fully shielded. A light fixture constructed, installed and maintained in such a manner that all light emitted from the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane through the fixtures lowest light emitting part. 
Glare. The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and ability. 
Horizontal footcandles. A quantity of illumination (footcandle(s)) at a given point that is measured or calculated at a specified height in a plane parallel to the line of sight when looking at the brightest light source in the field of view. 
IESNA. The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a non-profit professional organization of lighting specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. 
Illuminance. The amount of light (luminous flux incident) at a point on a surface (measured in lux or footcandles). 
Internal refractive lens. A glass or plastic lens installed between the lamp and the sections of the outer fixture globe or enclosure. Refractive refers to the redirection (bending) of the light as it goes through the lens, softening and spreading the light being distributed from the light source thereby reducing direct glare. 
Lamp. The device in a lighting fixture that provides illumination, typically a bulb, florescent tube, or light emitting diode (LED). 
Light source. The element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture. 
Light trespass. Unwanted light spilling onto an adjacent property and/or an excessive brightness (i. e. glare) is occurring in the normal field of vision. 
Low luminosity lighting. Lighting fixtures whose lumen output does not exceed 1,000 lumens. See also Very low luminosity lighting. 
Low level decorative lighting. Lighting fixtures whose lumen output does not exceed 60 lumens. 
Low voltage lighting. Lighting equipment powered through a transformer such as a cable conductor that lowers the voltage supplied to the luminaires to 25v or less. 
Lumen. A quantitative unit used to identify the amount of light emitted by a light source. A lamp is generally rated in lumens. 
Luminaire (light fixture). A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and ballast(s) (when applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Lux. A unit of illuminance. One lux equals one lumen per square meter. One footcandle equals 10.76 lux (often rounded to 10 lux for ease of use). 
Maintained footcandles. Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for a maintenance factor accounting for dirt build-up and lamp output depreciation. The maintenance factor used in the design process to account for this depreciation cannot be lower than 0.72 for high-pressure sodium and 0.64 for metal halide and mercury vapor. 
Medium base. The size of lamp socket designed to accept a medium or Edison base lamp (typical size used in the home). 
Nadir. The point directly below the luminaire. 
Outdoor display area. Areas used to show products, merchandize, or other items for evaluation (i.e. cars, RVs, boats, etc.). 
Outdoor performance area. An area permanently dedicated to the public presentation of music, dance, theater, media arts, storytelling, oratory, or other performing arts, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to amphitheaters and similar open or semi-enclosed structures. 
Post mounted decorative fixtures. Luminaires/fixtures that are mounted on a post (typically a 20-foot mounting height or less) and are decorative in style and appearance. 
Right-of-way. An interest in land to the city which provides for the perpetual right and privilege of the city, its agents, franchise holders, successors, and assigns to construct, install, improve, reconstruct, remove, replace, inspect, repair, maintain, and use a public street, including related and customary uses of street rights-of-way such as sidewalks, bike paths, landscaping, mass transit facilities, traffic control, traffic control devices and signage, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage, water supply, cable television, electric power, gas, and telephone transmission and related purposes in, upon, over, below, and across the rights-of-way. 
Seasonal lighting. Holiday/temporary lighting displays to be utilized less than 30 days in any one year. 
Shield. A device that is attached onto or inserted into a luminaire to alter the direction of light being emitted. A luminaire that has a shield attached or inserted is considered to be "shielded". 
Street light. A luminaire that is used to light a street or roadway. 
Top shield. A shield that is attached onto the top part of the luminaire or inserted into a luminaire to reduce/prevent uplight. 
Uplight. The portion of luminous flux (light) from a luminaire emitted at angles above the horizontal. 
Vehicular canopy. A roofed, open, drive-through structure designed to provide temporary shelter for vehicles and their occupants while making use of a business' services. 
Vertical footcandles. A quantity of illumination (footcandle(s)) at a given point that is measured or calculated at a specified height in a plane perpendicular to the line of sight when looking at the brightest light source in the field of view. 
Very low luminosity lighting. Temporary, seasonal, or permanent lighting fixtures whose luminosity does not exceed 15 lumens. See also low luminosity lighting. 
Wall-mounted fixture. A luminaire/fixture that is typically mounted on or attached to a wall, column or building surface. 
Wall pack. A type of light luminaire/fixture typically flush-mounted on a vertical wall surface. 
 
Wide-body refractive globe. A translucent lamp enclosure used with some outdoor fixtures to provide a decorative look (including but not limited to acorn- and carriage light-style fixtures). "Wide-body" refers to a wider than average size globe (greater than 15.75 inches in diameter). "Refractive" refers to the redirection (bending) of the light as it goes through the lens, rendering the light fixture more effective. Wide-body refractive globes are intended to soften and spread the light being distributed from the light source thereby reducing direct glare. 
(c)  Light measurement technique. Light level measurements shall be made at the property line of the property upon which light to be measured is being generated. If measurement on private property is not possible or practical, light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right-of-way that adjoins the property of the complainant or at any other location on the property of the complainant. Measurements shall be made at finished grade (ground level), with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground pointing up. The meter shall have cosine and color correction and have an accuracy tolerance of no greater than plus or minus five percent. Measurements shall be taken with a light meter that has been calibrated within two years. Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in footcandles. All footcandle values below are maintained footcandles. 
 
(d)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all outdoor lighting fixtures and land uses established after the effective date of this ordinance [November 25, 2008] in all of the following conditions: 
(1)  New development requiring Level I, II, or III site plan review pursuant to section 7-5-9 of this chapter; 
(2)  New residential lighting for one- and two-family dwelling units; 
(3)  All new street lighting for all private and publicly maintained streets within the City of Asheville and all streets that are subject to City of Asheville construction standards and subdivision review pursuant to section 7-5-8. 
(4)  New outdoor lighting systems as part of an existing commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential lighting installation even if the original lighting installation was purchased and/or installed before the effective date of this ordinance, unless part of an expansion not greater than ten percent of the original outdoor fixture count. 
(e)  Exemptions to outdoor lighting standards. The following conditions are exempted from the standards set forth in this subsection, provided that they do not constitute a public safety concern or create a nuisance, and are maintained in a safe condition. 
(1)  All lighting required by state and federal agencies. 
(2)  Seasonal lighting displays or very low luminosity lighting displays using multiple lamps. 
(3)  Temporary lighting for emergency, repair, construction, special events or similar activities. 
(4)  Ornamental gas lights that meet the definition of low level decorative lights. 
(5)  Historic landmark structures. 
(6)  Lighting fixtures located in a local Historic District when compliance with these standards conflicts with the district's guidelines. 
(7)  Low voltage landscape lighting, but such lighting should be shielded in such a way as to eliminate glare and light trespass. 
(8)  A suspended string of lights when found in one of the following conditions: 
a.  On properties supporting one- and two-family dwelling units, when located outside of required setbacks, or 
b.  Around, in, or over the permitted dining area(s), belonging to a lawful eating and drinking establishment, when the following output limits are met: 
i.  Incandescent lights—no more than 25 lumens per bulb; or 
ii.  LED lights—no more than 50 lumens per bulb. 
Lights must be turned off when the outdoor dining area is not in use. 
(9)  All lighting required by the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(f)  Lighting prohibitions. The following types of outdoor lighting are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Lighting that could be confused for a traffic control device. 
(2)  Lighting that is oriented upward, except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
(3)  Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high intensity lights unless otherwise exempt. 
(4)  Blinking, flashing, moving, flickering, changing intensity, changing color lights not otherwise permitted in this ordinance. 
(5)  Any exposed lamp or bulb visible from the property boundary of the parcel on which the light is located, unless otherwise exempted. 
(6)  A suspended string of lights with individual lamps larger than 15 lumens, unless otherwise exempted. 
(7)  Any lighting fixture or device that is operated in such manner as to constitute a hazard or danger to persons, or to safe vehicular operation. 
(8)  Unshielded accent building mounted luminous tube (such as neon, LED, fluorescent or other similar technology). 
(9)  Flood lights. 
(10)  Internally illuminated wall panels. 
(11)  Lighting of any angled building surface (i.e. roof pitch). 
(g)  General standards for new outdoor lighting. Unless otherwise exempted or allowed by this ordinance, the following standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting. 
(1)  All exterior light fixtures shall be classified as providing full cutoff light distribution. 
(2)  The maximum light level at any property line shall be 0.5 footcandle maintained. 
(3)  Directional lighting allowed by the ordinance shall be directed downward. 
(4)  All flood lamps shall not exceed 1,250 fixture lumens and must be shielded and aimed down 60 degrees from horizontal. Lamps shall be aimed such that the main beam from the light source is not visible from adjacent properties or the public street right-of-way. 
 
(5)  All pole mounted lights shall not exceed 37-foot mounting height above grade. 
(6)  All new dusk-to-dawn security lights shall be full cutoff fixtures with a maximum rating of not to exceed 9,500 fixture lumens (6,000 fixture lumens in residential zoning districts) or comply with subsection (n) (Non-conformities) with a mounting height not to exceed 25 feet. 
a.  All new dusk-to-dawn utility type fixtures must be equipped with a reflector shield that provides a full cutoff light distribution as defined in subsection (b) of this article. An approved alternative is to install a different type of fixture that has a full cutoff light distribution with a maximum rating of not to exceed 9,500 lumens. 
b.  All new LED dusk-to-dawn utility type fixtures shall comply with the LED standards listed in subsection (8) below. 
 
(7)  Where land elevations to be lighted are higher or lower than a nearby street, residential dwelling or other type of facility and the lighting installation causes offensive light trespass and/or glare, the city planning director may require shields to be installed on the fixtures at the time of the installation or afterwards. If shields do not correct the problem sufficiently, the planning director may require that one or more of the following measures may be implemented in order to mitigate the conflict to the maximum extent possible: 
a.  Change the aiming of offending fixtures, 
b.  Change the location and/or mounting height or the offending poles, 
c.  Change the light distribution pattern of the offending fixtures, or 
d.  Remove the offending poles and fixtures from the site. 
(8)  All LED lighting shall meet the B-U-G ratings noted in the applicable subsections and comply with all other applicable requirements, and shall also meet the following standards: 
a.  The LED correlated color temperature (CCT) shall not be higher than 4,300 K (Kelvin degrees). 
b.  The maximum number of fixture lumens shall not exceed 6,500 in residential districts and no more than 20,000 lumens in non-residential districts or for legal non-residential uses in residential districts, unless otherwise allowed or exempted. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(h)  Street lighting. 
(1)  The director of public works shall be responsible for executing the street lighting program and policies. 
(2)  The director of public works or his designee shall evaluate requests for additions, removals or other changes to street lighting and respond to the requestor within 30 days. 
(3)  These standards shall not apply to residential subdivisions lawfully established prior to the effective date of this ordinance (November 25, 2008) or extend to those properties acquired as part of such communities prior to November 25, 2008, provided it can be demonstrated that these properties were included in a documented community master plan. 
(3a)  Existing non-LED street lights may be replaced with similar non-LED fixtures where warranted by NCDOT and approved by the director of public works. 
(4)  General design standards. 
a.  Spacing. Newly installed standard pole mounted street lights shall be placed at the following intervals as measured along the street centerline: 
i.  In residential areas street lights shall be placed at intervals of 125 feet to 150 feet. The public works director may approve wider spacing for low density residential subdivisions provided the overall density is less than two units per acre and both the streets and light fixtures are privately maintained. 
ii.  On major arterial roadways, street lights shall be placed at intervals of 75 feet to 100 feet. 
iii.  In business districts, street lights shall be placed at intervals of 55 feet to 80 feet. 
iv.  Preference in placement shall be given to street intersections and street curves. 
v.  Alleys are excluded from the spacing and placing requirements of this policy but are encouraged to be illuminated using private security lights, wall packs, or other fixture utilizing a full-cutoff design. 
vi.  In areas where post-mounted fixtures (18-foot mounting height or less) are installed, the spacing of posts should be adjusted to the particular fixtures used and as approved by the director of public works or his/her designee. IESNA Recommended Practice 8 (Roadway Lighting) should be used as a guide for street lighting design. 
b.  Alignment. Street lighting on newly constructed streets shall be alternately staggered on each side of the street wherever possible. 
c.  Luminance. Newly installed street lighting fixtures shall utilize the city's standard and meet the following lumen ratings: 
i.  In residential districts — no greater than 6,500 fixture lumens, with exceptions noted in subsection (5) below. 
ii.  In commercial districts — no greater than 20,000 fixture lumens, with exceptions noted in subsection (5) below. 
d.  Mounting support. It is preferred that existing poles and associated mounting hardware be used to mount street lights. However, decorative poles and associated mounting hardware may be used upon agreement between the requestor, Progress Energy and the City of Asheville. 
e.  Historic district. Full cut-off fixtures are required, however, semi-cutoff and cutoff decorative post-mounted fixtures (18-foot mounting height or less) may be used in historic districts when compliance with the district's design guidelines require it. All fixtures should limit glare, light trespass and light pollution. 
f.  Interstate highway lighting. The installation of lighting on existing or future interstate highways within the City of Asheville shall require a municipal agreement between the city and the NC Department of Transportation. 
g.  Assumption of private street lighting. The City of Asheville may also, upon approval of the governing body, assume responsibility for streetlights that at the time of construction of private roadways, providing the following conditions are met: 
• The street lights are installed in accordance with this policy. 
• The private roadway(s) served by the streetlights are accepted into the City of Asheville or NCDOT road system. 
h.  Variations in land elevations. Where land elevations vary and cause the street lighting poles to be installed higher or lower than adjacent roads or property, thus causing offensive light trespass and/or glare, the standards set forth in subsection (g)(7) may also be applied to street lighting. 
(5)  All LED street lighting shall comply with the standards in subsection (g)(8) and shall have a maximum BUG rating of B3, U3, G3 on commercial streets and major arterial DOT and City of Asheville roads, and a maximum of B2, U1, G2 on residential streets. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Use of LED street lights in residential areas over 6,500 and up to 8,200 fixture lumens are allowed at intersections and safety sensitive locations, as deemed necessary by the director of public works. 
b.  Use of LED street lights on commercial and major arterial roads over 20,000 fixture lumens are allowed to ensure public safety as deemed necessary by NCDOT and by the director of public works. 
(6)  The director of public works may grant exceptions to these standards when, based on the director's determination, conditions (including but not limited to topography, road geometry, heavy foliage, and criminal activity, etc.) are adversely impacting public safety and welfare. 
(i)  Site lighting. All ground mounted light fixtures shall comply with the general standards listed in subsection (g) above as well as the standards listed here. 
(1)  Pedestrian lighting on posts with a mounting height of 18 feet or less shall be directed to paths and sidewalks. Lighting should be placed to provide good uniformity, to limit glare, light trespass, light pollution and the casting of shadows on sidewalks. All pedestrian lighting fixtures shall comply with the other sections of this ordinance. 
(2)  Outdoor display areas, as defined in article 2 of this chapter, shall have a maximum average of illuminance of 20 maintained footcandles. 
(3)  The mounting height of all outdoor lighting, except outdoor sports field lighting and outdoor performance area lighting, shall not exceed 37 feet above finished grade. 
(4)  Illumination of all open or surface parking and outdoor commercial areas shall comply with the following light levels limits, uniformity ratios and other criteria listed below: 
a.  Open parking facilities - For lighted parking lots the recommended minimum light level shall be no less than 0.2 footcandles. All light levels are measured at ground level. The minimum light level requirements vary depending on the activity classification. The specified minimum FC value above 0.2 FC as outlined in the following table means that the lowest light level point or location in the parking lot must not exceed the minimum stated FC value in the table (i.e. 0.9 FC for large shopping centers). An average to minimum uniformity ratio of 4:1 means that the average FC to minimum FC ratio cannot be worse (higher) than 4:1. See the following table: 
Light Levels for Open Outdoor Parking Facilities* 
Use/Task 	Maintained Footcandles 	Uniformity Avg./Min. 
(a) Parking, residential, multi-family 		
• Low to medium vehicular/pedestrian activity 	Range from 0.2 Min. to 0.7 Min. 	4:1 
(b) Parking, industrial/commercial/Institutional/municipal 		
• High activity, i.e. large shopping centers/fast food facilities, major athletic/civic cultural events 	0.9 Min. 	4:1 
• Medium/low activity, i.e. community shopping, office parks, hospitals, commuter lots, cultural/civic/recreational events, residential neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking, schools, church parking 	Range from 0.2 Min. to 0.7 	4:1 
 
* Source: IESNA 8th Edition Lighting Handbook; Modifications: Medium and Low Activity Level recommendations have been combined and modified. 
Notes: 
1.  Illumination levels are horizontal on the task, e.g. pavement or area surface. 
2.  Uniformity ratios dictate that average illuminance values shall not exceed minimum values by more than the product of the minimum value and the specified ratio. For example, for commercial parking medium/low activity, the average footcandles shall not be in excess of 2.8 (0.7 × 4). 
3.  The planning director or his/her designee shall be responsible for determining the activity level for a development. Any project that requests a light level that exceeds the footcandle values outlined above must demonstrate a need for a higher light level to the City of Asheville planning director or his/her designee. 
(5)  All LED site lighting shall comply with the standards in subsection (g)(8) and comply with the following. 
a.  Post-mounted decorative fixtures shall have a maximum BUG rating of B3, U1, G1 when 9,500 fixture lumens or less and not taller than 18-feet, unless otherwise exempted. 
b.  LED site lighting greater than 9,500 fixture lumens or taller than 18 feet shall have a maximum BUG rating of B3-U0-G3, unless otherwise excepted. 
(6)  Historic districts require the use of full cut-off fixtures; however, semi-cutoff and cutoff decorative post-mounted fixtures (18-foot mounting height or less) may be used in historic districts when compliance with the district's design guidelines requires it. All fixtures should limit glare, light trespass and light pollution. 
(7)  Post mounted lawn luminaires may be installed in residential applications provided the fixture delivers a maximum of 1,000 lumens output (equivalent to a 60 watt incandescent bulb) and utilizes a translucent lens covering the light source. The height of the post shall not exceed eight feet above the finished grade. 
(8)  All ornamental or aesthetic lighting of buildings and landscaping lighting not attached to a building shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the building façade, plantings, and other intended site feature and away from adjoining properties, the night sky, and the public street right-of-way. Additionally, these fixtures shall also meet the following standards: 
a.  Illumination on any vertical surface shall not exceed .5 FC average maintained and shall not spill over roof lines or building edges. Reflected glare bouncing off windows or other glazing that is visible from adjacent property is prohibited. 
b.  All ground mounted landscape and residential façade lighting systems not aimed downward shall utilize low level decorative lighting fixtures and shall be aimed no greater than 60 degrees from the horizontal ground level. The luminaires shall be shielded and aimed such that the light source cannot be seen from adjacent property or public areas or rights-of-way. 
(j)  Lighting attached to structures or buildings. All light fixtures attached or mounted against a building or structure shall comply with the general standards listed in subsection (g) above as well as the standards listed here. 
(1)  Covered parking facilities. Top levels of garages open to the sky shall comply with the requirements outlined in subsection (i)(4) for open parking facilities. The mounting height on the top level of a garage shall not be greater than 22 feet above the parking deck top floor including raised foundations and the light fixture classification shall be full cutoff. 
Additionally, all lighting within open parking garages shall be fully shielded so as not to create glare off-site. 
(2)  Lighting for vehicular canopies. Areas under a vehicular canopy shall have an average maximum horizontal illuminance of 20 maintained footcandles (FC). Areas outside the vehicular canopy shall be regulated by the standards of subsection (i) above. Lighting under vehicular canopies shall be designed so as not to create glare off-site. Acceptable methods include one or more of the following: 
a.  Recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the vehicular canopy that provides a full cutoff or fully shielded light distribution. 
b.  Surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that provides a full cutoff light distribution. 
(3)  Skylights. Buildings equipped with skylights or other horizontal daylighting openings must control the light trespass and light pollution that is projected upward from the interior lighting system through the daylight glazing into the outdoor night environment and shall also meet the following standards: 
a.  Skylight glazing shall specify a maximum light transmission of 20 percent. 
b.  Businesses operating on a 24-hour basis shall employ the use of shielding, louvers or other approved control devices installed to restrict light trespass, light pollution and glare. 
c.  Light fixtures shall not be located in or directly below light wells that are not utilizing shielding or louvers. 
Exception: This subsection does not apply to one- and two-family dwelling units. 
(4)  Ornamental and general use lighting. All ornamental and general use fixtures attached to buildings or structures shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the building façade or the ground immediately below the fixture. Additionally, these fixtures shall also meet the following standards: 
a.  All wall-mounted fixtures, wall packs, porch lights, ceiling mounted and pendant style fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures. 
Exception: The fixture delivers a maximum of 1,000 lumens output (equivalent to a 60 watt incandescent bulb) and utilizes a translucent lens covering the light source. 
b.  All recessed ceiling fixtures incorporating a lens cover shall be restricted to lenses that are either recessed or flush with the ceiling. 
c.  Lamps providing minimum exit discharge lighting as required by the NC Building Codes shall be shielded unless otherwise exempt. 
d.  Dual purpose fixtures (general use and exit discharge) fitted with battery back-up for emergency use shall be full cut-off. Those fixtures that come on only during an emergency or power outage are exempt. 
Comparison of efficacy by power 
(120 Volt incandescent lamps) 
Output 
(Lumens) 	Power (Watt) 
	Incan 	CFL 	LED 
500 	40 	8—10 	9 
850 	60 	13—18 	12—15 
1,200 	75 	18—22 	15 
1,700 	100 	23—28 	18 
 
(5)  All LED lighting attached to buildings or structures shall comply with the standards in subsection (g)(8) and shall have a maximum BUG rating of B2, U0, G2, unless otherwise exempted or excepted. 
(k)  Outdoor sports and outdoor performance area lighting. Outdoor lighting for all sports court, sports field, and outdoor performance areas, along with the associated seating, shall be subject to the following standards when such facilities are open to the public and are the primary use on the property. These standards do not apply when the facility is ancillary to other uses on the property in which case, general standards shall apply. 
(1)  The mounting height for outdoor sports field, stadium seating, and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed 90 feet from finished grade. The mounting height for outdoor sports courts shall not exceed 50 feet from finished grade. 
(2)  All outdoor sports and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with a glare control package (louvers, shields, or similar devices). The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area and not into adjacent property or road rights-of-way. 
(3)  The hours of operation for the lighting system for any game or event shall not exceed one hour after the end of the event. 
(4)  The maximum number of fixture lumens shall not exceed 38,600 lumens for sports courts and 121,000 lumens for sports fields and outdoor performance areas. 
(5)  The maximum correlated color temperature (CCT) shall not be higher than 4,300 K (Kelvin degrees) for sports courts and 5,700 K for sports fields and outdoor performance areas. 
(l)  Signs. 
(1)  Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign façade and glare is significantly reduced. Lighting fixtures shall not be aimed toward adjacent streets, roads, or properties. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs are permitted so long as the sign is not too bright from the surroundings and does not create a nuisance or hazard to motorists. 
(3)  Lighting fixtures shall be directed downward rather than upward. 
(4)  This ordinance does not regulate signs. See the City of Asheville sign ordinance for this information. 
(m)  Permits. The applicant for any permit required for work involving outdoor lighting shall submit documentation at time of site plan or plot plan approval that the proposed lighting plan complies with the provisions of this Code. The submission shall contain, but not be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part of or in addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code: 
(1)  For all Level III projects, a point-by-point footcandle array in a printout format indicating the location and aiming of illuminating devices must be furnished. For lower level projects, a point by point array must be furnished upon request. The printout shall indicate compliance with the maintained footcandle limit required by the appropriate section of this Code. 
(2)  For all Level III projects, a description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, poles, raised foundations and other devices including but not limited to manufacturers or electric utility catalog specification sheets and/or drawings, and photometric report indication fixture classification (cutoff fixture, wallpack, flood light, etc) must be furnished. For lower level projects, this same information will be required upon request. 
(3)  All Level III projects, conditional use permit projects and conditional zoning projects will be evaluated on a case specific basis and may be held to a standard that exceeds those minimum standards set forth in this ordinance. Council may modify these standards per subsection 7-9-9(c)3. 
(4)  Inspection or plan review personnel may waive any or all of the above permit requirements, provided the applicant can otherwise demonstrate compliance with this Code. 
(n)  Non-conformities. 
(1)  Any lighting fixture lawfully in place or approved by the city prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from these requirements. Routine maintenance, including changing the lamp, starter, photo control, lens, and other required components is permitted for all existing fixtures. 
(2)  All dusk to dawn utility type lights installed prior to November 25, 2008, will be exempted from full cutoff requirements for five years from this date. After five years, all such lights shall be discontinued, removed or made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  All utility owned flood lights installed prior to [insert effective date here] will be exempted from the prohibition on flood lights for five years from this adoption date. After five years, all such lights shall be discontinued, removed or replaced with conforming fixtures. Existing floodlights that are privately owned my continue to be used provided the light fixture is angled down and/or shielded so that it produces a full cutoff distribution. 
(4)  Should the property owner fail to bring the lighting system into compliance, the owner shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth in subsection 7-18-2(b). 
(o)  Appeals. Appeals regarding the interpretation or application of this ordinance may be taken to the board of adjustment in the manner provided in article VI. 
(Ord. No. 3676, § 1, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 4148, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4275, § 1, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 4686, § 1a—e, 7-24-18)  
ARTICLE XII. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-12-1. - Flood protection. 
(a)  Authority, purpose, objectives, findings. 
(1)  Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(2)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities; 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation and restrain of floodwaters; 
d.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
e.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(3)  Objectives: The objectives of this section are to: 
a.  Protect human life, safety, and health; minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in floodprone areas; 
b.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
c.  Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions; ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special flood hazard area; 
d.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood damage. 
(4)  Findings: 
a.  The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Asheville (city) are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
b.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Applicability: This section shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the city's territorial and extra-territorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this section; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Special flood hazard areas: The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) Agreement between the State of North Carolina, FEMA, its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Buncombe County dated January 6, 2010, all of which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. For purpose of grandfathering, the initial FIRMs for the Buncombe County unincorporated area are dated August 1, 1980 and for the City of Asheville are dated July 16, 1980. 
(4)  Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this section and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(6)  Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: (a) considered as minimum requirements; (b) liberally construed in favor of the city; and (c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(7)  Warning and disclaimers of liability: The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  Floodplain administrator: The public works director is hereby designated to administer and implement the provisions of this section. Except as specifically stated, any act authorized by this section to be carried out by the floodplain administrator may be carried out by his/her designee. 
(2)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator: In addition to all other customary and incidental powers of the floodplain administrator as well as the powers and duties that may be conferred by other ordinances of the city and other applicable laws, statutes, rules and regulations, the floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties: 
a.  Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been received. 
c.  Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
d.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse as referenced in the preceding paragraph, so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. 
e.  Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(5) are met. 
f.  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(d)(3); and obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(d)(3). 
g.  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been flood-proofed, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(d)(3). 
h.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(d)(3) and subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)b. 
i.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. 
j.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to subsection 7-12-1(e)(3)b.2, in order to administer the provisions of this section. 
k.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this section. 
l.  Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this section and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended. 
m.  Make on-site inspections of work in progress and make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community; issue stop-work orders, revoke floodplain development permits, serve notice of violations and issue civil penalty assessments. 
n.  Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with subsection (b)(2), including any revisions thereto, letters of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs; coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR). 
o.  Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests; and apply and enforce any and all provisions of this section. 
(d)  Floodplain development application, permit and certification requirements. 
(1)  Application requirements: Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development activities located within special flood hazard areas. Along with the application, the applicant must submit the following additional information for a floodplain development permit: 
a.  A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development: 
(i)  The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development; 
(ii)  The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area; 
(iii)  Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3); 
(iv)  The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as determined in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3); 
(v)  The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3); subsection 7-12-2(c)(2); or subsection 7-12-1(e)(3); 
(vi)  The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(vii)  The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect, or professional engineer. 
b.  Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including but not limited to: 
(i)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures; 
(ii)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in zones referenced on the FIRM as AE, A or AO will be flood-proofed; and 
(iii)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or flood-proofed; 
c.  If flood-proofing, a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of flood-proofing measures. 
d.  A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this section are met. These details include but are not limited to: 
(i)  The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); 
(ii)  Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)d.3 when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in the zones referenced on the FIRM as A, AO, AE, and A1-30; 
e.  Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor. 
f.  Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
g.  Certification that all other local, state and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received. 
h.  Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)f. and g. are met. 
i.  A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(2)  Permit requirement: A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this section prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas. The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit. 
b.  The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3). 
c.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities. 
d.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities. 
e.  All certification submittal requirements with timelines. 
f.  A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as applicable. 
g.  The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AO, AE or A1-30 as referenced on the FIRM. 
h.  Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable). (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only). 
(3)  Certification requirements: 
a.  Elevation certificates. 
(i)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31), which includes among other requirements, the highest adjacent grade, the lowest adjacent grade and top of bottom floor, is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. 
(ii)  A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
b.  Flood-proofing certificate. If non-residential flood-proofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the flood-proofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Flood-proofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
c.  Foundation certificate. If a manufactured home is placed within the zones as referenced on the FIRM as A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)c.2. 
d.  Certified report. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream, and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
e.  Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within the zones shown on the FIRM as A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/flood-proofing certification requirements specified in items (1) and (2) of this subsection: 
(i)  Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)f.1; 
(ii)  Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)g; and 
(iii)  Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)h. 
(e)  Flood hazard reduction. 
(1)  General standards: In all special flood hazard areas, the following shall apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
d.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches. 
e.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
f.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
g.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
h.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. 
i.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this section and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this section. 
j.  New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection 7-12-1(f)(5). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or flood-proofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(d)(3). 
k.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
l.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
m.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
n.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
o.  When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements. 
p.  When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation shall apply. 
(2)  Specific standards: In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), or subsection 7-12-1(e)(3), the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(1), are required: 
a.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation as defined in section 7-2-5. 
b.  Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation as defined in section 7-2-5. Structures located in zones referenced on the FIRM as A, AE, AO, and A1-30, may be flood-proofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO zones, as reference on the FIRM, the flood-proofing elevation shall be in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(e)(6)b. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in subsection 7-12-1(d)(3), along with the operational and maintenance plans. 
c.  Manufactured homes. 
1.  New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation as defined in section 7-2-5. 
2.  Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 
3.  All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)d. 
4.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the local emergency management coordinator. 
d.  Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas of new construction and substantially improved structures which are below the lowest floor: 
1.  Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas; 
2.  Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
3.  Shall include, in zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, as referenced on the FIRM, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(iii)  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit; 
(iv)  The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade; 
(v)  Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and 
(vi)  Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above. 
e.  Additions/improvements. 
1.  Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvement is in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
(i)  Not a substantial improvement: the addition and/or improvement must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure. 
(ii)  A substantial improvement: Both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvement must comply with the standards for new construction. 
2.  Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
3.  Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvement is in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
(i)  Not a substantial improvement: the addition and/or improvement must only comply with the standards for new construction. 
(ii)  A substantial improvement: Both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvement must comply with the standards for new construction. 
f.  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either: 
1.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
2.  Meet all the requirements for new construction. 
g.  Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator for review and written approval: 
1.  A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one year; 
2.  The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
3.  The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification); 
4.  A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and 
5.  Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
h.  Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas); 
2.  Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled; 
3.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
4.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
5.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(1)a; 
6.  All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(1)d; and 
7.  Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)d.3. 
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or flood-proofing certificate. Elevation or flood-proofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(d)(3). 
(3)  Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations: Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate zone A as referenced on the FIRM and established in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e)(1), shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  The base flood elevation (BFE) used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria: 
1.  When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this section and shall be elevated or flood-proofed in accordance with standards in subsection 7-12-1(e)(1) and (2). 
2.  When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas shall also comply with the requirements of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2) and (5). 
3.  All subdivision, manufactured home parks and other development proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(b)(3) and utilized in implementing this chapter. 
4.  When BFE data is not available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above the reference level shall be elevated or flood-proofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All other applicable provisions of subsection 7-12-1(e) shall also apply. 
(4)  Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established floodways or non-encroachment areas: Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas: 
a.  Standards of subsection 7-12-1(e)(1) and (2); and 
b.  Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation during the occurrence of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(5)  Floodways and non-encroachment areas: Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3). The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in subsection 7-12-1(e)(1) and (2), shall apply to all development within such areas: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
1.  It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment will not increase the water surface elevations during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a registered professional engineer in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or 
2.  A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 
b.  If subsection 7-12-1(e)(5)a. is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
c.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the following provisions are met: 
1.  The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)c; and 
2.  The no encroachment standard of subsection 7-12-1(e)(5)a. 
d.  No new habitable structures or substantial improvements to habitable structures shall be permitted in floodways and non-encroachment areas, except this subsection shall not be applicable to structures that have substantial damage. 
(6)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (zone AO as referenced on the FIRM): Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 7-12-1(b)(3), are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to subsection 7-12-1(e)(1) and (2), all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
b.  Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be flood-proofed to the same level as required in subsection 7-12-1(e)(6)a. so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(d)(3) and subsection 7-12-1(e)(2)b. 
c.  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(7)  Nonconforming uses: A structure(s) or the use(s) of a structure or premises which are lawful before the effective date of this section, or before any amendment to this section after that date, but which is not in conformity with the provisions herein may be continued as a nonconforming use, or for the purposes of this section may be changed to another nonconforming use (changes in use shall be made in conformance with subsection 7-12-1(e)). Changes in ownership of any property under the jurisdiction of this section shall not affect the continued operation of the nonconforming use. All nonconforming uses shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any substantial improvement of a nonconforming structure shall be made in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
b.  If the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 180 or more consecutive days, and there are no substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use during this period, any future use of the building and/or premises shall conform to this section. Obtaining permits to maintain the existing use or significant continuous efforts to market the property for sale or lease for the existing use (e.g., MLS listing, realtor contract, etc.), shall be regarded as substantial good faith efforts. A nonconforming use shall be deemed discontinued after a period of more than two years regardless of any substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use and any future use of the building and/or premises shall conform to section. 
c.  If any nonconforming use or structure or substantial improvement is destroyed by any means, including floods, said use or structure may be replaced provided the replacement of said structure and/or substantial improvements thereto will not result in an increase in the level of the current regulatory flood level. In all instances, a registered professional engineer or architect shall provide the floodplain administrator with an acceptable certification demonstrating that said replacement would not result in an increase in the current regulatory flood levels. 
d.  Any use which has been permitted as a restricted use and is in full compliance with this section and attached standards shall be considered a conforming use. 
e.  Any change of a nonconforming use as specified herein shall be approved by the board of adjustment under the provisions of this section. Proposed changes in a nonconforming use to a residential use shall be expressly prohibited. 
(f)  Variances. 
(1)  Petition for a variance: Any aggrieved person may petition for a variance to the board adjustment for the following: 
a.  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
b.  Functionally dependent facilities provided the provisions of subsections 7-12-1(f)(3) and (f)(4) have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
c.  Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Prerequisites to considering a request for a variance: Prior to considering a request for a variance, the board of adjustment shall be provided with a written report from the floodplain administrator specifying whether all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in this section have been met. Additionally, a separate written report addressing each of the following factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance: 
a.  Whether there exists any danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Whether there is any danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(3)  Requirements for the granting of variances: The board of adjustment may only grant a variance if the applicant satisfies all of the following requirements: 
a.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  No development permit has been approved. 
c.  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
d.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
e.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
f.  The granting of the variances will not make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances; and 
g.  The granting of the variance is within the designated floodway or non-encroachment area and will not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
(4)  Conditions: The board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this section. 
(5)  Special facilities: Solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, auto salvage-wrecking yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas are prohibited unless, in addition to meeting all of the above mentioned variance requirements, the following additional requirements are met. 
a.  The use serves a critical need in the community. 
b.  No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area. 
c.  The reference level of any structure is elevated or flood-proofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
d.  The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
e.  The city has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of an application for the issuance of a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to the consideration of the variance request. 
(6)  Notice: The floodplain administrator shall provide written notice to any applicant to whom a variance is granted specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
(7)  Records: The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request. 
(g)  Entry upon public/private property. 
(1)  City inspections: The floodplain administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall perform routine, random, complaint based, systematic inspections or a combination hereof to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section. The city may also conduct joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Notice of the right to inspect shall be included in the approval of each permit application. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, compliance checks of the approved permit, reviewing for compliance according to the provisions of this section and to carry out enforcement duties. 
(2)  City investigations: The city shall have the power to conduct an investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section and, for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any activity regulated in this section. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, who requests such entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, willfully resist, delay or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
(3)  Administrative inspection warrant: If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit a city inspection, the floodplain administrator shall proceed to obtain an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to N.C.G.S. 15-27.2. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the office of the floodplain administrator while carrying out the official duties of this section. 
(h)  Violations and notices. 
(1)  General violations: It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person to fail to obtain a permit prior to any development located in special flood hazard areas, fail to comply with an approved permit or fail to comply with any other requirements set forth in this section. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(2)  Notice of violation: If through inspection, it is determined that a person has violated this section, the office of the floodplain administrator shall immediately serve a notice of violation upon that person. The notice may be served by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice of violation shall be served upon the violating party, if known and the property owner. The violation notice shall contain the following: 
a.  That the building or property is in violation of this section, the measures needed to comply, the time within such measures must be completed and warn that failure to correct the violation within the time period shall subject the violator and/or property owner to civil and/or other enforcement action. 
b.  In determining the measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the office of the floodplain administrator shall take into consideration the economic feasibility, technology, the quantity of work required, and shall set reasonable and attainable time limits of compliance. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action: If the violator and/or property owner should fail to take prompt corrective action to remedy the violation, then the floodplain administrator shall proceed in accordance with subsection 7-12-1(i) of this section. 
(i)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Civil penalty: Any person who violates the flood protection regulations of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $25,000.00. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. The floodplain administrator is hereby charged with the responsibility of preparing a table of civil penalties, setting forth the per day and maximum penalties that maybe assessed for violations of this section taking into consideration the guidelines for penalty assessment as outlined herein, so as to be in compliance with the $25,000.00 maximum civil penalty involving the same subject matter within a six-month period of time. 
(2)  Civil penalty assessment: Upon the failure to comply within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, the floodplain administrator shall give notice of assessment of a civil penalty by providing notice of the civil penalty amount and the basis for assessment to the person assessed. The assessment of a penalty shall be served personally or by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure and shall direct the violator to either pay the assessment or contest the assessment in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the notice of assessment. The office of the floodplain administrator shall initially assess the civil penalty. 
(3)  Guidelines for penalty assessment: In determining the amount of the penalty to assess, the floodplain administrator shall be guided by the degree and extent of harm to the natural resources of the city, to the public health, or to private property resulting from the violation; the duration and gravity of the violation; the effect on water quality; the cost of rectifying the damage; the amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance, whether the violation was committed willfully and the prior record of the violation in complying or failing to comply with this ordinance. 
(4)  Criminal penalties: A violation of this section subjects the offender to a civil penalty pursuant to the authority granted by N.C.G.S. 160A-175 and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty provisions of N.C.G.S. 14-4 and section 1-5 of Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(5)  Stop work order: If, through inspection, it is determined that a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this section, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. The stop work order shall be served by the sheriff of Buncombe County or some other person duly authorized by law to serve process as provided by Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(6)  Revocation: The floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may also be revoked. The notice may be served by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the NC Rules of Civil Procedure. A new permit application and approved plan including all permit fees must be submitted prior to reinstatement of the revoked permit. For permit reinstatement, the site must be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this section and all penalties have been paid in full or penalty appeal has been filed within the given time frame. 
(7)  Order to abate: If, subsequent to an appeal hearing, the floodplain administrator find that the building or development is in violation of this section, a written order shall be issued to the property owner requiring the owner to remedy the violation and such remedial action may consist of an order to alter, vacate, remove, or demolish the building, as long as the notice of violation provided prior notice that such an order may be entered and such order may require that such remedial action be taken not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, the order may require that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. An appeal maybe taken from the order as set forth herein. 
(8)  Action for failure to comply and failure to appeal and/or pay: If violations are not cured or corrected within the time specified in the notice of violation and/or the violator fails to give timely notice of appeal or fails to pay the civil penalty assessed within the prescribed time period, then the matter may be referred to the city's debt set-off program and/or referred to the city attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. In addition to, or in lieu of, the other remedies set forth in this section, the city attorney may institute an injunctive action, mandamus action, or other appropriate proceeding. Upon determining that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, a court hearing an appeal for relief shall enter such orders and/or judgments as are necessary to abate or prevent the violation. The institution of an action for injunctive or other relief under this section shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil penalty prescribed by this section for violations of this section. 
(j)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals: Any aggrieved party may file an appeal for or from the issuance of a variance, or from a penalty assessment, notice of violation, permit disapproval, order, requirement, determination or interpretation rendered under the provisions of this section. The appeals process shall be as follows: 
a.  To the floodplain administrator: With the exception of appealing for the issuance of a variance, all appeals must initially be heard by the floodplain administrator. The appeal must be submitted in writing within 30 days of receipt of an adverse action and shall specify the specific grounds for relief and what relief is requested. The floodplain administrator shall schedule a hearing no later than 30 days from receipt of the written notice of appeal. The owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter. Further appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment as set forth below. in the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. 
b.  To the Asheville Board of Adjustment: Further appeal may be taken to the Asheville Board of Adjustment in accordance with and pursuant to the written requirements of the board and section 7-6-2 of the UDO. 
c.  To the Buncombe County Superior Court: Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board is filed in the office of the board or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every person who has filed a written request for such copy with the board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The appeal shall be limited to the record before the board. Provided however, nothing herein shall modify, abrogate or amend the requirements set forth in N.C.G.S. 143-215.57 and to the extent of conflict, the language of the statute shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1(k)—1(s), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3381, § 1(c), 7-25-06; Ord. No. 3730, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 7-12-2. - Stormwater, soil erosion and sedimentation control, illicit discharge and connection ordinance. 
(a)  Authority, purpose, objective, findings, jurisdiction, applicability, exemptions. 
(1)  Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to NCGS 143-214.7 and applicable rules promulgated by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission (NCEMC) thereunder; Session Law 2006-246; Chapter 160A (Cities and Towns), Article 14 and Article 19 (Planning and Regulation of Development); Section 5 of the North Carolina Constitution; Chapter 113A, Article 4 (Sedimentation Pollution Control); Article 21, Part 6 (Floodway Regulations). 
(2)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to comply with the federal and corresponding state stormwater discharge National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) regulations; to protect, maintain and enhance the environment of the City of Asheville (City), by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the potential adverse effects of increased stormwater runoff associated with both future development and existing developed land and non-point and point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment as well as illicit discharges into municipal stormwater systems; to regulate the clearing, grading, excavation, filling and manipulation of the earth and the moving and storing of waters in order to control and prevent accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation; and to establish decision-making processes for development that protect the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources. 
(3)  Objectives: To assure the city of the authority to take any action required by it to obtain and comply with its NPDES permit for stormwater discharges. Among other things, these regulations require the city to establish legal authority which authorizes or enables the city at a minimum to: 
a.  Control the contribution of pollutants to the city's MS4 and receiving waters by stormwater discharges associated with residential, commercial, industrial, and related facility activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of residential, commercial, industrial, and related facility activity; and 
b.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illicit connections to the city's MS4 and receiving waters; and control the discharge to the city's MS4 and receiving waters, of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and 
c.  Control through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of pollutants from one municipal stormwater system to another; and 
d.  Control accelerated erosion and sedimentation; and 
e.  Require compliance with conditions in ordinances, permits, contracts or orders as follows: 
1.  To establish and implement all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions including the prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections to the city's MS4 and receiving waters; 
2.  To require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable for the applicable design storm in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats for biological/ecological function and drainage; 
3.  To encourage the use of better management and site design practices, such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of green space and other conservation areas to the maximum extent practicable (MEP); 
4.  To establish provisions for the short-term and long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural and non-structural stormwater BMPs to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no threat to public safety; and to minimize public and private property damage resulting from erosion, sedimentation and flooding; and to regulate developments that create demand for public investment in flood control works. 
(4)  Findings: 
a.  Stormwater runoff can have a significant adverse impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the city and on the quality of life of its citizens. These impacts can be in the form of pollution to our water bodies, erosion and sedimentation, flooding and other degrading impacts. 
b.  The sedimentation of streams, lakes, wetlands and other waters of this State constitute a major pollution problem. Sedimentation occurs from the erosion or depositing of soil and other materials into the waters. Control of erosion and sedimentation is deemed vital to the public interest and necessary to public health and welfare, and expenditures of funds for erosion and sedimentation control programs shall be deemed for a public purpose. 
c.  Changes in land use can create adverse impacts. The city has been designated a Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Community under the NPDES and is required to obtain a permit pursuant to the 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended in 1987 as well as the applicable and statutory laws promulgated thereunder. In response to these requirements this jurisdiction is compelled to adopt minimum stormwater controls such as those included in this section. 
d.  The city is in a unique geographic area with steep slopes, erodible soils, extreme rainfall patterns and other unique factors that require special attention and specifically different requirements from other jurisdictions. 
(5)  Jurisdiction: With the exception of applying subsection 7-12-2(k), pertaining to the prohibition, detection and elimination of illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper disposal to the stormwater system in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, this section shall apply to the territorial and extraterritorial jurisdictions of the city as well as to all properties owned by the city within Buncombe County to include the areas designated on the map entitled "Phase II Stormwater Map of the City of Asheville, North Carolina" ("the Stormwater Map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith along with all explanatory matters contained thereon and made a part of this section. 
(6)  Applicability: Unless exempted pursuant to subsection 7-12-2(a)(7) below, beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this section shall be applicable as follows: 
a.  All development and redevelopment, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and land disturbing applications. 
b.  The provisions of subsection 7-12-2(k), pertaining to prohibition, detection and elimination of illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper disposal to the stormwater system shall apply to all properties, lands, city's MS4 and waters of the state within the territorial jurisdiction of the city as well as to all properties owned by the city within Buncombe County. 
(7)  Exemptions: 
a.  The following activities for land disturbance shall be exempt from the provisions of the erosion prevention and sediment control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(e): 
1.  An activity, including breeding and grazing of livestock, undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and animals useful to man, including, but not limited to: forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and peanuts, dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, and goats, bees and apiary products, and fur producing animals. 
2.  An activity undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in accordance with best management practices set out in Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality and the Forestry Best Management Practices Manual, as adopted by the North Carolina Division of Forest Resources. If land disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not conducted in accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality and the Forestry Best Management Practices Manual, the provisions of this section shall apply to such activity and any related land disturbing activity on the site. 
3.  An activity for which a permit is required under the Mining Act of 1971, Article 7 of Chapter 74 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
4.  Land disturbing activities over which the State of North Carolina has exclusive regulatory jurisdiction as set forth in NCGS 113A-56(a). 
5.  An activity which is essential to protect human life during an emergency and those done for the purpose of fighting fires; 
6.  The stock-piling of fill dirt, raw or processed sand, stone, or gravel in material processing plants and storage yards, provided that sediment control measures have been utilized to protect against off-site damage; 
7.  Individual gravesites; 
8.  Maintenance of existing lawns where there is no change in contours; 
9.  Gardens, similar horticultural activities that disturb less than one acre; and 
10.  Land disturbing activities totaling 500 square feet or less and located 50 feet or greater from a perennial or intermittent stream. 
b.  The following activities for land disturbance shall be exempt from provisions of the post-construction stormwater control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(f)(1) and (2): 
1.  Development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and will have a proposed impervious surface area on completion of development of 50 percent or less of the total acreage of the development site; provided however, such is not exempt if part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at different times on different schedules. 
2.  Redevelopment that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and will have a proposed impervious surface area on completion of development of 50 percent or less of the total acreage of the development site; provided however, such is not exempt if part of a larger common plan of redevelopment or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at different times on different schedules. 
3.  Development and/or redevelopment of a single one- or two-family dwelling that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
c.  The following activities for land disturbance shall be exempt from all provisions of the post-construction stormwater control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(f): 
1.  Redevelopment that results in no net increase in built-upon area and that provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development on the site. 
2.  Activities that are exempt from the permit requirements of Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), as specified in 40 CFR 302 (primarily, ongoing farming and forestry activities). 
(b)  Administration. 
(1)  Stormwater administrator: The city manager shall appoint a stormwater administrator to administer and enforce all provisions of this section. Except as specifically stated, any act authorized by this section to be carried out by the stormwater administrator may be carried out by his/her designee. 
(2)  Powers of the stormwater administrator: In addition to all other customary and incidental powers of the office of stormwater administrator as well as the powers and duties that may be conferred by other ordinances of the city and other applicable laws, statutes, rules and regulations, the stormwater administrator shall have the following powers: 
a.  Day to day coordination, implementation and enforcement of this section and the Stormwater Management Program (SWMP), to include, but not limited to: monitoring construction site runoff, illicit discharges and improper disposal. 
b.  The coordination and enforcement of the city's NPDES permit and the coordination of the city's activities with other federal, state, and local agencies, which manage and perform functions relating to the protection of receiving waters. 
c.  To render interpretations, perform reviews, make recommendations including permit fees and revisions to fees and charges manual, approve or disapprove permit applications with or without conditions, establish timelines for the submittal and appeals of application decisions and to establish policies to include refund of permit fees. 
d.  To enter into agreements with other governmental and private entities to carry out the purposes of this section upon approval of the city manager. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement, resolution of disputes, cooperative monitoring, cooperative management of stormwater systems and cooperative implementation of stormwater management programs. 
e.  To designate what programs and activities represent the promotion of improving water quality to receive funding from the city's civil penalty mitigation fund. 
f.  To exercise powers not expressly reserved for other agencies or restricted by statute for the protection and preservation of receiving waters. 
(3)  Duties of the stormwater administrator: The duties and responsibilities of the stormwater administrator include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Developing and maintaining a stormwater BMP manual in accordance with the approved SWMP. The stormwater BMP manual shall serve as guidance for permitting, design, construction, and maintenance of facilities which discharge stormwater both during construction and post-construction. 
b.  Providing information on how and where to obtain the stormwater BMP manual, which shall be made available to the public. 
c.  Providing an opportunity for comment by interested persons after making recommended revisions/amendments to the stormwater BMP manual and publishing the same. 
d.  Preparing and updating annually the stormwater map, consistent with the city's NPDES permit requirements. 
e.  Creating a civil penalty mitigation fund whereby all monies collected by the office of the stormwater administrator arising out of the enforcement of this section shall be used solely and directly for the purpose of promoting, providing and improving water quality. 
(c)  Requirements and process for compliance. 
(1)  General requirements: 
a.  Protection of property: In addition to the requirements contained in this section, persons conducting development or redevelopment and associated land disturbing activity shall take all reasonable measures to protect natural resources and all public and private property from damage caused by such activity. 
b.  Financial responsibility and ownership: A financial responsibility and ownership statement shall be required as a part of all completed permit applications. This financial responsibility and ownership statement shall be signed by the person financially responsible for the land disturbing activity or his/her attorney in fact. The statement shall include the mailing and street addresses of the principal place of business of (1) the person financially responsible, (2) the owner of the property, and (3) any registered agents. If the person financially responsible is not a resident of North Carolina, a North Carolina agent must be designated in the statement for the purpose of receiving notice of compliance or non-compliance with this section. If the applicant is not the owner of the property to be disturbed, the permit application must include the owner's written consent for the applicant to submit a permit application and to conduct the proposed development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity. 
c.  Flood protection: No grading and stormwater permit shall be issued for development or redevelopment and associated land disturbing activity in the regulated floodplain prior to meeting the requirements of the floodplain regulations of section 7-12-1 of the UDO. 
d.  Release of building permits: The director of building safety shall not issue any building permits for projects on sites where a grading and stormwater permit is required unless and until the grading and stormwater permit has been issued. 
(2)  Permit application requirements: 
a.  Plan and permit: An approved plan along with a grading and stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and construction of erosion and sediment control and stormwater management, control practices and measures on the site for both during construction and post-construction. 
b.  Permit application: A permit application, intended to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and inspection of the practices and measures for erosion, sediment and stormwater management and control, is required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to this section. 
c.  Contents of permit application package: At a minimum, the permit application package shall include: an application form, a design plan, appropriate fees and a statement of financial responsibility and ownership. 
d.  Additional permit application requests: Depending on the scope of the development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity, additional items may include, but are not limited to, design calculations, certificate of inspection agreements, approved encroachment agreements, easements, and approved permits from other local, state or federal agencies. 
e.  Prerequisites to issuance of a permit: Prior to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this section, all of the following requirements must be met: 
1.  A pre-construction conference, if required by the stormwater administrator, along with the submittal and review of a permit application. 
2.  Submittal of an authorized statement of financial responsibility and ownership. 
3.  Notification to the stormwater administrator of the date that land disturbing activity will begin. 
4.  Installation of the erosion control measures which are required for the initial stage of land disturbance per the approved plan and having the control measures inspected and a compliance report filed. 
5.  A certificate of inspection agreement, if applicable, as required by subsection 7-12-2(g)(5)d.1. 
6.  A security for re-vegetation, if applicable, as required by subsection 7-12-2(e)(2)h.3. 
f.  Duration of permit: The approved plan and permit remains valid for one year after the date of approval; provided however, for maintenance of facilities, such as golf courses and large institutional grounds keeping, the approved plan and permit remains valid for five years. Prior to the initiation of any land disturbing activity, the applicant shall comply with the notification requirement of subsection 7-12-2(c)(2)e.3 herein. 
g.  Extensions: Extensions of a plan approval may be granted once by the stormwater administrator, for a maximum of one-year duration, upon written request of the person responsible for the land disturbing activity. A written request for an extension must be submitted to the stormwater administrator no more than 60 days prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
(3)  Permit application process: The permit application process shall be as follows: 
a.  Application submittal: All permit applications shall be submitted to the development services center at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the proposed land disturbing activity. 
b.  Who can apply: All permit applications shall be complete and submitted by the property owner or the property owner's duly authorized agent. A permit application shall be considered complete only when it contains all required documents. 
c.  Incomplete application: If a permit application is incomplete, which may include the absence of an environmental document required by the North Carolina Environmental Policy Act (NCEPA) (NCGS 113A-1 et seq.), the applicant shall be notified of what documents are missing and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete application. 
d.  Consequences of submittal of an incomplete application: The submittal of an incomplete application shall not suffice to meet a deadline or start the time allotted for review nor shall the time limit for review begin until a complete permit application has been submitted. 
e.  Commencement: The land disturbing activity shall not commence until the permit application has been approved and an inspection has been performed by a North Carolina professional engineer or landscape architect or a city inspector to ensure that the protective measures shown on the approved plan have been installed in accordance with the approved plan and a permit is issued. 
f.  Notification to other agencies: Upon approval of a permit for proposed land disturbance of one acre or greater, the stormwater administrator will send a notification of the proposed project to the Regional Office of the North Carolina Department of Environmental and Natural Resources (NCDENR)—Division of Water Quality (DWQ) and to the Buncombe County Metropolitan Sewage District. The notification shall include the applicant's name and contact information and the proposed site location. 
(4)  Design plans: A design plan shall be submitted with the permit application for all land disturbing activity, unless exempt pursuant to this section. The following are the minimum design plan requirements: 
a.  Sketch plan: For proposed development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity with a proposed disturbance area of less than 10,000 square feet and which is exempt from the post-construction stormwater control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(f), a sketch plan must be submitted. At a minimum, the sketch plan shall include the information on the form entitled "Requirements for Non Formal Sketch Plans," available upon request from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
b.  Formal plan exempt from post-construction stormwater regulations: For proposed development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity with a proposed disturbance area of 10,000 square feet or greater but which is exempt from the post-construction stormwater control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(f), a formal design plan shall be submitted. Design plans shall be submitted and at a minimum shall include the information on the form entitled "Requirements for Formal Grading/Erosion Plans," available upon request from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
c.  Formal plan not exempt from post-construction stormwater regulations: For proposed development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity that is required to meet the post-construction stormwater control regulations of subsection 7-12-2(f), a formal design plan shall be submitted. Design plans shall be submitted and at a minimum shall include the information required in the preceding paragraph b. above and the requirements on the form entitled "Requirements for Stormwater Plans," available upon request from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
d.  Certification of design plan: All formal plans shall be prepared by a qualified registered North Carolina professional engineer or landscape architect, and the professional shall perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the submittal requirements for complete permit applications, that the design and plans are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and that the design and plans ensure compliance with this section. 
e.  Approval of design plan: The design plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp with a signature and date on the design plan by the stormwater administrator. The stamp of approval on the design plan is solely acknowledgement of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this section and shall not serve as a warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness of effectiveness of any provision, or omission from the design plan. 
f.  Review of the design plan by other agencies: Upon approval of a permit for proposed land disturbance of one acre or greater, the stormwater administrator will forward, as required, one copy of the design plan to the Buncombe County Soil and Water Conservation District ("district") for its review. The district shall review the design plan and submit its comments and recommendations to the stormwater administrator within 20 days after the district received the design plan. Failure of the district to submit its comments and recommendations to the stormwater administrator within the prescribed time shall not delay final action on the permit application by the stormwater administrator. 
(5)  Review and approval: 
a.  Preconstruction conference: When deemed necessary by the stormwater administrator due to the complexity, risk or ingenuity of a project, a preconstruction conference may be required. 
b.  Timeline for review of permit applications: The stormwater administrator will review each complete permit application with formal plans within 30 days and for sketch plans within 15 days of receipt thereof and notify the person submitting the permit application that it has been approved, approved with conditions, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. 
c.  Approval: If the stormwater administrator finds that the permit application complies with the standards of this section, the stormwater administrator shall approve the application. The stormwater administrator may impose conditions of approval as needed to ensure compliance with this section, or other local, state or federal regulations. The conditions shall be included as part of the approval. 
d.  Disapproval for content: The stormwater administrator shall disapprove a permit application if it is found that the application fails to comply with the standards of this section, and shall notify the applicant of the reason(s) for the disapproval. The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit a revised application. 
e.  Other disapproval: The stormwater administrator shall disapprove a permit application if implementation of the permit application would result in a violation of the rules adopted by the NCEMC to protect riparian buffers along surface waters. In the event that a permit application is disapproved pursuant to this paragraph, the stormwater administrator shall notify the director of the Division of Land Resources (DLR) of NCDENR of such disapproval within ten days. The city shall advise the applicant and the director of the DLR in writing as to the specific reasons that the plan was disapproved. A permit application may also be disapproved upon finding that an applicant, or a parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate of the applicant is: 
1.  Conducting or has conducted development, redevelopment or land disturbing activity without an approved plan, or has received notice of violation of an approved plan and grading and stormwater permit previously approved by NCEMC or a local government pursuant to the Sedimentation Pollution Control Act (Act) and has not complied with the notice within the time specified in the notice. 
2.  Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to the Act or a local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act by the time the payment is due. 
3.  Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to NCGS 113A-64(b) or any criminal provision of a local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act; or (For purposes of this subsection, an applicant's record may be considered for only the two years prior to the application date). 
4.  Has failed to substantially comply with state rules or local ordinances and regulations adopted pursuant to the Act. 
f.  Failure to timely approve: Failure to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove a complete permit application with formal plans within 30 days of receipt shall be deemed approved. Failure to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove a permit application with a sketch plan within 15 days of receipt shall be deemed approved. 
g.  Review of revised permit application: The stormwater administrator will review each revised permit application submitted and within 15 days of receipt thereof, will notify the person submitting the permit application that it has been approved, approved with modifications, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. 
h.  Failure to recognize: Any failure of the stormwater administrator in administering this section to include but not limited to: recognizing hazardous conditions, failure to disapprove the permit application, failure to inspect, to issue a notice of violation, assess a civil penalty or file a civil action, shall not relieve the owner from responsibility for the conditions or damages resulting therefrom and shall not result in the city, its officers or employees, being responsible for the damages resulting therefrom. 
i.  Failure to timely submit revised application: If a revised permit application is not resubmitted within 180 days from the date the applicant was notified of the disapproval, the permit application shall be considered withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same project shall be required along with the appropriate fee. 
j.  Amendment to a plan: Applications for amendment of a permit application in written and/or graphic form may be made at any time under the same conditions as the original permit application. Until such time as said amendment is approved by the stormwater administrator, the land disturbing activity shall not proceed except in accordance with the permit application as originally approved. The review process for the amendment shall be the same as for a new permit application submittal. 
(6)  Other considerations of the review and approval process: 
a.  Display of approved plan and permit: The approved plan and grading and stormwater permit must be kept on file at the job site until the job is stabilized and completed. 
b.  Revised permit application after approval: The stormwater administrator may, after approving a permit application, require a revised application upon making the following findings: 
1.  Either upon review of such permit application or on inspection of the job site, determines that a significant risk of accelerated erosion, off-site sedimentation, or risk of damage due to stormwater flows exists. 
2.  Upon finding that the erosion and sedimentation control or the post-construction stormwater control measures presented in the permit application are inadequate to meet the requirements of this section. 
c.  Status of work: Pending the preparation of the revised permit application, work shall cease or may continue under conditions outlined by the stormwater administrator. 
(d)  Permit close out and release requirements. 
(1)  Permit close out: For all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity, which requires a grading and stormwater permit pursuant to the provisions of this section, no certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be issued by the city without a final release of the grading and stormwater permit by the stormwater administrator, except where multiple units are served by a single grading and stormwater permit, in which case the city may elect to withhold a percentage of permits or certificates of occupancy until a final release of any required performance securities. 
(2)  Final release requirements: 
a.  As-built record drawings: For all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity which require structural BMPs, stormwater management control facilities, conveyances and related improvements, an as-built record drawing must be submitted and approved by the stormwater administrator. The as-built record drawing shall be certified, signed and sealed by a North Carolina professional engineer or landscape architect. Requirements for the as-built record drawing and submittal can be found in the stormwater BMP manual. 
b.  Certificates of completion: For all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity which require structural BMPs, stormwater management control facilities, conveyances, and related improvements, a certificate of completion must be submitted by the professional engineer or landscape architect, the property owner, the developer and the contractor to the stormwater administrator. The certificate serves to certify that all facilities and improvements have been constructed and installed per the approved design plan, as-built record drawing and requirements set forth in the stormwater BMP manual. The certificate of completion form shall be available from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
c.  Operation and maintenance agreement: For all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity which require structural BMPs or stormwater management control facilities, an operation and maintenance agreement must be submitted and approved by the stormwater administrator, on a form available from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
d.  Slope stability certifications: For all development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity which require a slope stability certificate in accordance with the provisions of this section, the slope stability certificate must be submitted and approved by the stormwater administrator. The slope stability form shall be available from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
e.  Other requirements: Depending on the scope of the development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity, other items may be required for final approval. These may include, but are not limited to, easements and plats. 
(3)  Final inspection: The stormwater administrator shall perform a final inspection verifying that all disturbed areas have been stabilized, that all permanent erosion control measures and stormwater management BMPs, facilities and improvements have been installed per the approved design plan, as-built record drawing and compliance with all requirements set forth in the stormwater BMP manual. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until there is a final inspection signed by the stormwater administrator. 
(e)  Erosion prevention and sediment control. 
(1)  Basic control objectives: An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be disapproved if the plan fails to address the basic control objectives. The basic control objectives which are to be considered in developing and implementing an erosion and sedimentation control plan are: 
a.  Identify critical areas: On-site areas which are subject to severe erosion and off-site areas which are especially vulnerable to damage from erosion and/or sedimentation are to be identified and receive special attention; 
b.  Limit time of exposure: All land disturbing activities are to be planned and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest practicable time; 
c.  Limit exposed area: All land disturbing activities are to be planned and conducted to limit the size of the area to be exposed at any one time; 
d.  Control surface water: Surface water runoff originating upgrade of exposed areas shall be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during the period of exposure; 
e.  Control sedimentation: All land disturbing activities shall be planned and conducted so as to prevent off-site sedimentation damage; and 
f.  Manage stormwater runoff: When the increase in the velocity of stormwater runoff resulting from a land disturbing activity is sufficient to cause accelerated erosion of the receiving watercourse, plans must include measures to control the velocity to the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation in the stream. 
(2)  Mandatory standards for land disturbing activity: 
a.  Land disturbing activity subject to this section shall be undertaken in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Land disturbing activity shall not occur within a 30-foot undisturbed buffer around all perennial and intermittent surface waters. 
2.  Land disturbing activity described in subsection (a)(7)(c)(1) of this section shall observe a buffer zone around lakes and natural watercourses along the margin of the watercourse of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearest the land disturbing activity. 
3.  Land disturbing activity occurring pursuant to a decision rendered under subsection (j) of this section shall meet the buffer requirements established in that decision. 
4.  Measurement of aquatic buffer width: The width of the undisturbed buffer is measured horizontally from the top of bank to the landward side of the watercourse (i.e. moving perpendicularly away from the water toward uplands or disturbed areas. 
5.  Overgrowth of greenery: Removal of invasive species, undergrowth and selective thinning of trees smaller than four inches in diameter is allowed within the aquatic buffer provided notice is given to the office of the stormwater administrator. 
6.  Stabilization of riverbanks: Most land disturbing activities in and on the bank of perennial and intermittent waters are regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 4040 of the Federal CWA and the North Carolina Division of Water Quality under Section 401 of the Federal CWA. In addition, a grading permit is required unless the activity is exempt as described in subsection 7-12-2(a)(7). In all cases, and to the maximum extent practicable, riverbank stabilization activities must use bioengineering methods and principles of natural design rather than concrete walls and other hardened structures. 
7.  Trout buffers: No land disturbing activity shall be undertaken within an aquatic buffer adjacent to designated trout waters, as classified by the NCEMC that will cause adverse temperature fluctuations in the trout waters, as set forth in 15 NCAC 2B.0211 "Fresh Surface Water Classification and Standards." Exceptions and variances to buffers along designated trout streams may only be granted by DENR—Division of Land Resources. 
b.  Grading activity in a designated landscape buffer zone. When developing a site in a designated landscape buffer zone, the following shall apply: 
1.  Land disturbance is permitted in the designated landscape buffer zone and the developer is required to plant trees and shrubs which are 50 percent larger than normally required in order to reestablish quickly a visual buffer. 
2.  Utilities are to be installed along the edge of the designated landscape buffer zone and cross perpendicular to the designated landscape buffer zone. Land disturbance that occurs in a designated landscape buffer zone shall not result in a slope that exceeds 3:1. Developers will be encouraged to provide as gradual a slope as practicable in the buffer area to provide increased soil stability and a better planting environment for buffer trees and shrubs. 
3.  The land disturbing activity shall be conducted in accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
c.  Grading along property line: For land disturbing activities for which a formal erosion and sedimentation control plan is required by this section, no grading activity or land disturbance may be conducted within ten feet of any property line unless written notice of the grading activity or land disturbance has been provided to the adjacent property owner and approval of the stormwater administrator has been received. Grading for access point and utility extensions shall be exempt from this subsection. 
d.  Grading without an approved development plan: Land disturbance without an approved development plan, defined as the grading of a site for which no development plan has been approved, is permitted in all districts except the residential districts and the river district if the following conditions are met: 
1.  A landscape plan must be approved by the planning department and an erosion control plan must be approved by the stormwater administrator prior to initiation of the land disturbing activity. No grading and stormwater permits shall be issued prior to review and approval of the landscape plan by the planning department. 
2.  The landscape plan must show the location of existing trees to be preserved and the location and type of any required buffer yard trees and street trees which will remain. The determination of the type of buffer required shall be based upon the most intense development permitted in the zoning district in which the project being graded is located. 
3.  All required trees shall be planted within 30 days of completion of the land disturbance activity or within 12 months of the date the land disturbance activity was initiated, whichever is less. This time period may be extended through the posting of a financial guarantee as provided for in section 7-11-2 of the UDO. 
4.  An effective permanent ground cover shall be applied on the site within 14 days of completion of the land disturbing activity unless completion occurs outside a growing season, in which case an effective temporary ground cover shall be applied within 14 days. No ground cover shall be required for bare rock. 
e.  Graded slopes and fills: 
1.  Angle: The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the angle that can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes left exposed will, within 14 days of completion of any phase of grading, be planted or otherwise provided with temporary or permanent ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. The angle for graded slopes and fills must be demonstrated to be stable. Stable is the condition where the soil remains in its original configuration, with or without mechanical constraints. The use of gunite or similar materials is not allowed as a method for slope stabilization. 
2.  Benches: Terracing or slope breaks should be used on steep slopes to reduce the length of cut and fill slopes to prevent erosion and formation of gullies. Benches should be five feet wide, rounded at the edges, and spaced according to the following table: 
Slope 	Spacing 
50% (2:1) 	No more than 20 vertical feet 
33% (3:1) 	No more than 35 vertical feet 
25% (4:1) 	No more than 45 vertical feet 
 
3.  Compaction requirement: All fill slopes shall be compacted full depth to not less than 95 percent maximum density (Standard Proctor), shall be placed on a surface cleared of growth and debris, and be properly benched and drained. 
4.  Severe slopes: All constructed severe slopes greater than 2:1 shall be designed by a North Carolina registered professional engineer. Additionally, for constructed severe slopes greater than five feet in height, an inspection and a stability certificate are required by a North Carolina registered professional engineer with geotechnical expertise sufficient to perform the inspection and stability analysis. For all constructed severe slopes within proposed or existing public rights-of-way, periodic inspections and compaction reports are required by a North Carolina registered professional engineer with geotechnical expertise. 
5.  Slope setback requirements: Setback from existing adjacent property and rights-of-way lines is required for retaining walls and constructed moderate and severe slopes as indicated. For the purpose of this subsection, constructed moderate and severe slopes shall include those created for the construction of retaining walls. The setback shall be measured from and applied for both the head and the toe of the slope. 
a)  The setback shall be equal to the maximum height of the slope. 
b)  The required setback may be reduced if a subsurface exploration analysis of the area is completed by a North Carolina registered professional engineer with geotechnical expertise and the analysis indicates that the reduction in the setback will not cause greater risk of damage to adjacent public and private properties. 
6.  Stability certificate findings: At a minimum, the stability certificate must state that the slope is free of failures, including, but not limited to cracks, sloughs and slippages, that the compaction requirement as set forth above has been met, that soil should remain in its original configuration and that temporary or permanent ground cover is provided. The stability certificate must be submitted and approved before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
f.  Fill material: Unless a permit from NCDENR—Division of Waste Management to operate a landfill is on file for the official site, acceptable fill material shall be free of organic or other degradable materials, masonry, concrete and brick in sizes exceeding 12 inches, and any materials which would cause the site to be regulated as a landfill by the State of North Carolina. 
g.  Access and haul roads: Temporary access and haul roads, other than public roads, constructed or used in connection with any land disturbing activity shall be considered a part of such activity. 
h.  Allowable disturbances: 
1.  Maximum limits of disturbance at one time: Land disturbance in any area with a natural average slope in excess of 15 percent shall be limited to disturbing not more than five acres at a time. Any one disturbed area must be stabilized per the requirements of the soil erosion and sediment control standards as set forth in this section prior to beginning disturbance on any subsequent area. 
a)  The stormwater administrator may grant a waiver to the five-acre limitation but only if: (i) the disturbance does not exceed 20 acres; and (ii) the erosion and sediment controls in the formal plan are designed for a 50-year storm; and (iii) a North Carolina licensed registered professional is contracted with to perform all required inspections as required by subsection 7-12-2(g)(5); and (iv) the area of disturbance is located a minimum of 50 feet from a perennial or intermittent stream or down slope properties. 
b)  For the purposes of this provision, non-contiguous areas located within 1,500 feet of each other and owned and/or developed by the same person(s) shall be considered the same project. 
2.  Steep slope and others: For properties where steep slope and/or ridgetop protection regulations apply, as defined in section 7-12-4 of the UDO, limits on maximum allowable disturbance shall be as indicated by those applicable regulations. The as-built record drawing must be submitted and approved by the stormwater administrator prior to final inspection approval for any phase of land disturbing activity. 
3.  Security for re-vegetation: A security for re-vegetation is required for all land disturbances which exceeds five acres. The security shall be in the form of a construction bond, letter of credit, or certified check and must be provided prior to the issuance of the grading and stormwater permit. The security shall be sufficient to re-vegetate proposed disturbed areas and shall be valid for one year from the issuance of the permit and be updated throughout the process. 
i.  Borrow and waste area: 
1.  When the person conducting the land disturbing activity is also the person conducting the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is obtained and which are not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of 1971, and waste areas for surplus materials other than landfills regulated by NCDENR—Division of Waste Management, shall be considered as part of the land disturbing activity where the borrow material is being used or from which the waste material originated. When the person conducting the land disturbing activity is not the person obtaining the borrow and/or disposing of the waste, these areas shall be considered a separate land disturbing activity. 
2.  The formal plan shall include a soil volume balance calculation and state if there will be borrowed or waste fill material used. If borrowed or waste fill material is generated, an approved grading permit must be secured for the borrow or waste material site prior to initiation of any land disturbing activity, unless the site is not excluded by the mining or landfill act. 
(3)  Design and performance standards: 
a.  Design storm protection: Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices shall be planned, designed, and constructed to provide protection from the calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the ten-year storm. Runoff rates shall be calculated using the procedures in the USDA, Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices", or other acceptable calculation procedures. If an area has been listed on the watershed overlay zone inventory by the stormwater administrator, erosion control measures for such sites or specific measures on a site shall be designed for, at a minimum, the 25-year storm. The watershed overlay zone inventory is available from the office of the stormwater administrator. The watershed overlay zone inventory shall be subject to a bi-annual review, the process and method for such a review shall be established by policy of the stormwater administrator. 
b.  Innovative measures: Erosion and sedimentation measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if they are sufficient to prevent adverse secondary consequences. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used following approval by the stormwater administrator if it can be demonstrated that such techniques and ideas are likely to produce successful results. 
c.  Watershed overlay zone: In watershed overlay zones, the following design standards shall apply: 
1.  Uncovered areas in watershed overlay zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum total area of 20 acres within the boundaries of the site. Only the portion of the land disturbing activity within a watershed overlay zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the site with the written approval of the stormwater administrator. 
2.  Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices within watershed overlay zones shall be planned, designed and constructed to provide protection from the runoff of the 25-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or other calculations or procedures generally recognized in the field including those adopted by any other agency of this state or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association and approved by the stormwater administrator. 
3.  Sediment basins within watershed overlay zones shall be designed and constructed such that the basin will have an overall sediment removal efficiency of at least 85 percent and a settling efficiency of at least 70 percent for the 40 micron (0.04 millimeter) size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff of that two-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or other calculations or procedures generally recognized in the field including those adopted by any other agency of this state or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association and approved by the stormwater administrator. 
4.  Newly constructed open channels in watershed overlay zones shall be designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) if a vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices, structural devices or other acceptable ditch liners. In any event, the angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. 
5.  Ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be provided for any portion of a land disturbing activity in a watershed overlay zone within 14 days following completion of construction. When construction activity has ceased in a particular site of a larger development, effective permanent ground cover must be applied within 14 days from the date of the last land disturbing activity. 
6.  Any additional reasonable measures determined by the stormwater administrator to be required to bring the City of Asheville into compliance, or to maintain compliance with, provisions of the city's NPDES stormwater discharge permit, a total maximum daily load (TMDL) once approved by the State of North Carolina or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for one or more pollutants, a consent decree or other order issued under the provisions of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) or other federal or state law or regulation. 
(4)  Stormwater outlet protection: 
a.  Intent: Stream banks and channels downstream from any land disturbing activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land disturbing activity. 
b.  Performance standard: Persons engaged in land disturbing activity shall conduct such activity so that the post-construction velocity of the ten-year storm runoff in the receiving watercourse to the discharge point does not exceed the greater of: 
1.  The non-erosive velocities for the downstream channel conditions as specified in the North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, or 
2.  The velocity of the ten-year storm runoff in the receiving watercourse prior to development. 
c.  Acceptable management measures: Measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if there are no objectionable secondary consequences. The city recognizes that the management of stormwater runoff to minimize or control downstream channel and bank erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used when shown to have the potential to produce successful results. Some alternatives, while not exhaustive, are to: 
1.  Avoid increases in surface runoff volume and velocity by including measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff from areas rendered impervious; 
2.  Avoid increases in stormwater discharge velocities by using vegetated or roughened swales and waterways in place of closed drains and high velocity paved sections; 
3.  Provide energy dissipaters at outlets of storm drainage facilities to reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge; 
4.  Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining; and 
5.  Upgrade or replace the receiving device structure, or watercourse, such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is no longer subject to degradation from the increased rate of flow or increased velocity. 
d.  Non-applicability: This subsection pertaining to stormwater outlet protection shall not apply where the applicant can demonstrate through engineer analysis on the sealed plans that stormwater discharge volumes and velocities will not create an erosion problem in the receiving watercourse. 
(5)  Operations in lakes or natural watercourses: Land disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse falls within the jurisdiction of appropriate state and federal agencies, including but not limited to NCDENR—Division of Water Quality and the Army Corps of Engineers. Developers should consult with the appropriate state and/or federal agencies to obtain the necessary permits and requirements. In all cases and to the maximum extent practicable, operations in lakes and natural watercourses shall minimize the extent and duration of disruption of the stream channel. Where relocation of a stream forms an essential part of the proposed activity, the relocation shall minimize unnecessary changes in the stream flow characteristics. 
(6)  Uncovered areas: 
a.  Ground cover: Whenever land disturbing activity is undertaken on a site, the person conducting the land disturbing activity shall install erosion and sedimentation control devices and practices that are sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the land disturbing activity within the boundaries of the site during construction upon and development of said site, and shall plant or otherwise provide a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after completion of construction or development. Provisions for a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be accomplished within 14 days following completion of construction or development. To the maximum extent practicable, native or indigenous plant species shall be used for permanent ground cover. 
b.  Existing uncovered areas: All uncovered areas existing on the effective date of this section which resulted from land disturbing activities, and are subject to continued accelerated erosion, and are causing off-site damage from sedimentation, shall be provided with a ground cover or other protective measures, structures, or devices sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion and control off-site sedimentation. 
c.  Extensive control measures: The stormwater administrator reserves the right to require preparation and approval of an erosion control plan in any instance wherein extensive control measures are required. 
d.  Planned reservoir: This section shall not require ground cover on cleared land forming the future basin of a planned reservoir. 
e.  Fee: No fee shall apply to work required under this subsection except when the stormwater administrator exercises the right to require an erosion control plan. 
(7)  Responsibility for installation, operation, and maintenance of temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures: 
a.  During construction: During the development of a site, the person conducting the land disturbing activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan, by any provision of this section, by any order adopted pursuant to this section, or any provision of the North Carolina Sediment Pollution Control Act. 
b.  After construction: After site development, the property owner or person in possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, except those installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement accepted for maintenance by a government agency. 
c.  Clean up requirements: When sediment is transported onto a public road surface, the road shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day. Sediment shall be removed from the roads by shoveling or sweeping and transported to a sediment control disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner. 
d.  Cost of clean-up by city: If the city must clean-up off-site sedimentation or mitigate other erosion related public safety and environmental hazards, the person in violation will be charged for the cost of the cleanup in addition to the civil penalty. The cleanup cost shall include personnel wages, equipment usage, and related administrative overhead costs. If the violator does not pay for the cleanup cost, revoked permits shall not be re-issued. Additionally, the city shall proceed in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this section to collect the cost of the clean up. 
e.  Restoration of land and waters: The city may require a person who engaged in a land disturbing activity and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as required by NCGS 113A-57(3), to restore the waters and land affected by the failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil penalty or equitable relief. 
f.  Additional measures: Whenever the city determines that significant erosion and sedimentation is occurring as a result of land disturbing activity, despite application and maintenance of protective practices, the person conducting the land disturbing activity will be required to and shall take additional protective action. 
(f)  Post-construction stormwater control. 
(1)  Standards for stormwater quantity control: All development and redevelopment to which this subsection applies shall comply with the standards herein. The design of facilities to comply with these standards shall be based on procedures contained in the stormwater BMP manual or as approved by the stormwater administrator guided by the spirit, purpose and intent of this section. The minimum "post-construction" stormwater control requirements included in the stormwater management plan shall provide management measures necessary to accomplish the following: 
a.  Limit the two-year and ten-year developed peak discharge rates to pre-developed peak discharge rates using a duration of 24-hours with a SCS Type II design storm and pass the 50-year, 24-hour storm event. The stormwater administrator may require control to pre-development rates for the 25-year, 24-hour storm, if by using existing watershed master plan analysis it is found that that additional flow reduction is required to protect downstream properties, natural and built drainage facilities due to the additional peak flows from the 25-year 24-hour storm event. 
b.  Provide extended detention for the difference between the pre-development and post development volume of the 2-year 24-hour SCS Type II design storm. The increase in runoff volume must be detained between 24-hours to 72-hours. Provided that the stormwater administrator may require volume control for the difference between the pre-development and post development volume of the 25-year 24-hour storm if by using existing watershed master plan analysis it is found that that additional volume reduction is required to protect downstream properties, natural and built drainage facilities due to the additional runoff volumes from the 25-year 24-hour storm event. 
(2)  Standards for stormwater quality control: All development and redevelopment to which this subsection applies shall comply with the standards herein. The design of facilities to accomplish these standards shall be based on procedures contained in the stormwater BMP manual or approved by the stormwater administrator. The minimum "post-construction" stormwater control requirements included in the stormwater management plan shall provide management measures necessary to accomplish the following: 
a.  Control and treat the stormwater runoff leaving the site from the first one inch of rain. The volume of runoff from the first inch of rain must be detained between 48 hours to 120 hours. 
b.  All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet the requirements of the program shall be designed to have a minimum of 85 percent average annual removal for total suspended solids. 
c.  General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in accordance with 15A NCAC 2H.1008(c). 
d.  If the developer utilizes stormwater sheetflow measures across aquatic buffers, filtration, [bioretention], enhanced on-site infiltration, and/or other effective measures thereby managing both the stormwater quantity and quality, the post-construction stormwater control standards described in subsection 7-12-2(f)(1) and (2) above shall be altered or waived by the stormwater administrator to the extent that the measures provide the same level of treatment, discharge, and velocity control as would be accomplished under the post-construction stormwater control standards using the methods defined in the BMP manual. 
(3)  Aquatic buffers: Post construction: 
a.  Aquatic buffer: A 30-foot undisturbed aquatic buffer shall be required along perennial and intermittent waterbodies. Landowners may challenge the classification of a stream (i.e. perennial, intermittent, ephemeral), using the methods for delineating waters developed by the North Carolina Division of Water Quality. Property owners are responsible for the cost of having the necessary field investigations performed by competent persons. By approval of this ordinance, the North Carolina Division of Water Quality hereby authorizes appropriately trained city staff to make a field determination of the stream classification. 
b.  Reduction of excess aquatic buffer: Property owners may petition the stormwater administrator for reduction of the portion of any undisturbed aquatic buffer that exceeds state minimum requirements if the property owner agrees to establish and maintain: 
1.  Vegetation within the aquatic buffer to meet standards set forth in the best management practices manual or approved by the stormwater administrator as being in accord with such manual; and 
2.  A level-spreader outside of the aquatic buffer ensuring sheet flow entering the buffer or undertakes other mitigating stormwater management measures approved by the stormwater administrator as acceptable under industry standards. 
c.  Buffer width: The width of the undisturbed aquatic buffer is measured horizontally from the top of bank to the landward side of the watercourse. (i.e. moving perpendicularly away from the water toward uplands or disturbed areas). 
d.  Substantial improvements: For substantial improvements on parcels that have previously been developed, the aquatic buffer must be restored by removing built-upon areas from the aquatic buffer and by planting and landscaping the aquatic buffer per landscape requirements as set forth in the UDO where practicable. If complete restoration of the aquatic buffer is not practicable, other mitigating stormwater management measures that enhance the function of the available buffer or otherwise substantially replace the function of the aquatic buffer may be used for compliance with this section, as approved by the stormwater administrator. 
(4)  Additional standards for special situations: 
a.  Trout waters: In addition to the standards for stormwater handling set out in the stormwater BMP manual, development and redevelopment that drains in whole or in part to trout waters shall design and implement the best stormwater practices that do not result in a sustained increase in the receiving water temperature and allow on-site stormwater treatment devices such as infiltration areas, bio-retention areas, and level spreaders as added controls, while meeting the other requirements of this section. 
b.  Watershed overlay zones: In addition to the standards for stormwater handling set out in the stormwater BMP manual, development and redevelopment that is in whole or in part within a watershed overlay zone shall implement additional measures determined by the stormwater administrator to be required to bring the City of Asheville into compliance or to maintain compliance with provisions of the city's NPDES stormwater discharge permit, a total maximum daily load (TMDL) once approved by the State of North Carolina or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for one or more pollutants, a consent decree or other order issued under the provisions of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) or other federal or state law or regulation. 
(5)  On-site waste water: 
a.  Operation and maintenance requirements: New and replaced onsite systems for domestic wastewater installed after the effective date of this ordinance must be approved and permitted by the Buncombe County Health Department. Both the Buncombe County septic permit and documentation showing the operation and maintenance for the system are required before a permit may be issued. 
b.  Standards for operation and maintenance: Onsite systems for domestic wastewater covered by this section shall be operated and maintained so as to avoid adverse effects on surface water and groundwater, including eutrophication of surface water and microbial or nitrate contamination of groundwater. Septic tank residuals shall be pumped whenever necessary to assure the proper operation of the system to meet these standards, and the seepage shall be reused or disposed of in a manner that does not present significant risks to human health, surface water or groundwater. 
(6)  Standards for stormwater control measures: 
a.  Stormwater BMP manual: To assist in the design and evaluation of stormwater management facilities in the city, the stormwater administrator shall prepare and adopt a stormwater BMP manual. The stormwater BMP manual shall contain recommended design procedures and criteria presented for conducting evaluations of practices. The intention of the stormwater BMP manual is to establish uniform design practices; it neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to evaluate practices if approved by the stormwater administrator. 
1.  If the specifications or guidelines of the stormwater BMP manual are more restrictive or apply a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent application of the specifications or guidelines in the stormwater BMP manual. 
2.  If the standards, specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the stormwater BMP manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for approval pursuant to this section but prior to approval, the old information shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in implementing this section with regard to the application. 
3.  The stormwater BMP manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology and engineering, improved knowledge of local conditions, or local monitoring or maintenance experience. 
b.  Evaluation according to contents of the stormwater BMP manual: All stormwater control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred to as best management practices, or BMPs) required under this section shall be evaluated by the stormwater administrator according to the policies, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards and the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the stormwater BMP manual. The stormwater administrator shall determine whether they will be adequate to meet the requirements of this section. 
c.  Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives: Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the stormwater BMP manual will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards of this section. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the stormwater BMP manual, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards of this section. The stormwater administrator may require the applicant to provide such documentation, calculations, and examples as necessary to determine whether such an affirmative showing is made. 
(7)  Locations and dedication of BMPs, facilities and improvements: 
a.  Upon review and recommendation of the stormwater administrator and the director of public works, city council may approve BMPs being located within the city's public rights-of-way. In determining whether to allow a BMP within a city public right-of-way, the factors to consider shall consist of, but not be limited to, whether the BMP is a public benefit, the annual cost to the city to maintain the BMP, the potential liability the BMP exposes to the city, and any other related factors. 
b.  The city may accept dedication, subject to final approval from city council, of any existing or future BMPs and stormwater management facilities for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this section and any other policies of the city and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. The city may require as a condition of public acceptance, that the owner arrange for funding costs associated with future maintenance of the BMP or stormwater management facility. Nothing herein shall require the city to accept maintenance of any BMP or stormwater management facility. 
(8)  Operation and maintenance of structural BMPs: 
a.  Operation and maintenance agreement: The applicant or owner of a site that is required to have a structural BMP pursuant to this section must execute an operation and maintenance agreement prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for development or redevelopment. The form "Operation and Maintenance Agreement," shall be provided by the office of the stormwater administrator. 
b.  Content of operation and maintenance agreement: The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the property owner(s) to maintain, repair, and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the structural BMP, and the right of the city to abate a violation. Additionally, it shall grant the city a right of entry in the event the stormwater administrator has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural BMP. In no case, however, shall the right of entry confer an obligation on the city to assume responsibility for the structural BMP. Additionally, the agreement shall include language to bind the parties thereto and all subsequent owners, successors and assigns, of the site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the structural BMP. 
c.  Maintenance responsibility: The final responsibility for complying with the operation and maintenance agreement provided herein remains with the property owner. 
d.  Failure to maintain: If the owner fails to maintain the structural BMP in accordance with the operation and maintenance agreement, the city shall proceed in accordance with subsection 7-12-2(i). Any costs incurred by the city to abate such failure shall be recovered by the city at 120 percent of the actual cost. 
e.  Recordation: The operation and maintenance agreement shall be referenced on the final plat; and if there is no final plat, then the agreement shall be referenced on an as-built record drawing and also recorded in the Buncombe County Register of Deeds Office, so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching principles, at the expense of the owner/applicant prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
f.  Deed restrictions and protective covenants: Upon conveyance of real property that is subject to or should be subject to a recorded operation and maintenance agreement, the property owner shall include in the deed of conveyance, deed restrictions, and protective covenants, imposing upon the new owner the responsibility for maintenance of the structural BMPs. Failure to know of the existence of structural BMPs on property prior to purchase is not an excuse from the obligation to maintain the structural BMPs. A failure to include deed restrictions and protective covenants as required by this subsection constitutes negligence per se. 
(g)  Inspections and investigations. 
(1)  City inspections: 
a.  Inspections: The city shall perform routine, random, complaint based, systematic inspections or a combination hereof to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section. The city may also conduct joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws during or post construction. Notice of the right to inspect shall be included in the approval of each permit application. 
b.  Purpose of inspections: Inspections may include, but are not limited to, compliance checks of the approved plan and the grading and stormwater permit, reviewing for compliance with the standards of the stormwater BMP manual, reviewing land disturbing activity and plan effectiveness, reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs, and evaluating the condition of BMPs. 
(2)  City investigations: The city shall have the power to conduct an investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section and, for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any activity regulated in this section. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, who requests such entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, willfully resist, delay or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
(3)  Administrative inspection warrant: If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such inspection, the stormwater administrator shall proceed to obtain an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to NCGS 15-27.2. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the office of the stormwater administrator while carrying out the official duties of this section. 
(4)  Written statements/filing of reports: The city shall also have the power to require written statements, or filing of reports under oath, with respect to pertinent questions relating to activity under this section. 
(5)  Private inspections during construction: 
a.  Contract inspections: A contract is required between the person financially responsible and a licensed professional for all initial inspections required by subsection 7-12-2(g)5.d.2. below. 
b.  Contract requirements: The contract required by subsection a. above shall at a minimum provide that the licensed professional will be available for the duration of the construction of the project in order to design new stormwater measures and/or more effective or different erosion sedimentation control measures in the event that the initial controls are ineffective and provide effective and immediate alternatives for compliance with this section should a dispute arise between the parties. 
c.  Exemptions: The following lots or sites shall be exempt from the inspection requirements of this subsection: 
1.  Land disturbance of 25,000 square feet or less; provided however, steep slope lots with a perennial or intermittent stream located within 100 feet downhill of land disturbance are limited to the percentage of disturbed area on the lot as shown in the table of allowable disturbances set forth in section 7-12-4 of the steep slope regulations of the UDO. 
2.  For steep slope areas as set forth under section 7-12-4 of the steep slope regulations of the UDO, only those disturbances that fall within the table of allowable disturbances shall be exempt from the inspection requirement of this subsection. 
3.  Sites where land disturbance for construction of a single-family home or comparable structure such as a duplex that disturbs less than 40 percent of the lot and retains, at a minimum, a 30-foot aquatic buffer. Conveyance channels in the buffer area shall be protected in accordance with the field manual of the N.C. Department of Natural Resources. 
d.  Inspection requirements: 
1.  Certificate of inspection agreement: A notarized certificate of inspection agreement on a form available from the office of the stormwater administrator stating the existence of the contract required hereinabove must be received and approved by the Stormwater administrator before a grading and stormwater permit is issued. All stormwater management facilities and BMPs must be inspected. 
2.  Initial inspection: A licensed North Carolina registered professional such as an engineer or landscape architect must perform all initial inspections and must sign the initial inspection report. Initial inspections shall be conducted for the purpose of ensuring that installations required by the approved plan are in place and have been installed consistent with the approved plan. An initial inspection shall be performed as many times as necessary for the licensed registered professional to render a professional opinion as to whether the measures installed on site have been properly installed and are substantially sufficient to comply with the control regulations of this section. 
3.  Weekly inspections: A North Carolina registered professional engineer, landscape architect or an inspector holding certification from an erosion and sediment control inspection program acceptable to the stormwater administrator shall conduct weekly inspections for lots where steep slope and/or ridgetop protection regulations apply. 
4.  Bi-weekly inspections: A North Carolina registered professional engineer, landscape architect or an inspector holding certification from an erosion and sediment control inspection program acceptable to the stormwater administrator shall conduct bi-weekly inspections on all non-exempt sites of land disturbing activity after the initial inspection. 
5.  Additional inspections: If a determination is made by the office of the stormwater administrator that a site continues to violate the provisions of this section, meaning that the site has been issued a written notice of violation three or more times in a six-month time frame, the stormwater administrator shall require that all inspections, whether weekly or bi-weekly, be performed by a professional engineer or landscape architect only. 
6.  Inspection filings: The initial and signed inspection report must be filed with the stormwater administrator prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity. All weekly inspections and bi-weekly inspections must be kept on inspection logs and retained at the site. 
7.  Inspection violations: It shall constitute a violation of this section if inspection logs are not on site or made available to city inspectors upon request. 
e.  Falsification of reports. Falsification of reports shall constitute a violation of this section. 
f.  Forms. Standardized certificate of inspection agreements, reporting forms and reporting process are available upon request from the office of the stormwater administrator. 
(6)  Private inspections post-construction: 
a.  Due diligence: The owner of each structural BMP installed pursuant to this section shall continuously perform due diligence inspections to ensure that the structural BMP is continuing to function in controlling stormwater quality and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was designed. 
b.  Annual maintenance inspection and report by owner: The owner of any structural BMP installed pursuant to this section shall annually submit to the stormwater administrator an inspection report from a qualified registered North Carolina professional engineer or landscape architect performing services only in their area of competence. The inspection report shall contain all of the following: 
1.  The name and address of the property owner; 
2.  The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural BMP; 
3.  A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs; 
4.  The date the inspection was made; 
5.  A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved maintenance agreement required by this section; and 
6.  The original signature and seal of the engineer or landscape architect. 
(7)  Records of installation and maintenance activities: The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspection, maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the stormwater administrator. 
(h)  Violations and notices. 
(1)  General violations: Among other violations not specifically set forth herein, it shall constitute a violation of this section for any person to fail to comply with an approved plan, the grading and stormwater permit, applicable requirements including the failure to provide ground cover, standards, or limitations imposed by this section, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this section; to engage in land disturbing activity without the required approved plan and permit and to falsify reports required under this section. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(2)  Immediate violations: It shall constitute an immediate violation of this section if through inspection the office of the stormwater administrator determines that an immediate civil penalty is warranted based upon the table of penalties set forth hereinafter. 
(3)  Notice of violation: If through inspection, it is determined that a person has violated this section, the office of the stormwater administrator shall immediately serve a notice of violation upon that person. The notice may be served by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice of violation shall be served upon the financially responsible party. If the financially responsible party is not the property owner, the notice shall also be served upon the property owner and contain the following: 
a.  The measures needed to comply, the time within such measures must be completed and warn that failure to correct the violation within the time period shall subject the violator to civil and/or other enforcement action. 
b.  In determining the measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the office of the stormwater administrator shall take into consideration the economic feasibility, technology, the quantity of work required, and shall set reasonable and attainable time limits of compliance. 
(4)  Notice of compliance: Once the violation has been cured, the development, redevelopment and land disturbing activity is in compliance and any penalties assessed have been paid in full or the penalty appeal has been filed within the given time frame; a notice of compliance shall be sent to the financially responsible party. 
(i)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Civil penalty for soil erosion and sedimentation violations: Any person who violates any of the provisions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements of this section and/or who initiates a land disturbing activity for which an erosion control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, shall be subject to a civil penalty and in some cases, as set forth in the table of penalties below, an immediate civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $5,000.00. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(2)  Civil penalty for stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection violations: Any person who violates the stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection regulations of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty and in some cases, as set forth in the table of penalties below, an immediate civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $25,000.00; however; for a continuing violation the maximum per day per violation penalty shall be $10,000.00, unless a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the current violation. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(3)  Civil penalty assessment: Upon the failure to comply within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, the stormwater administrator shall give notice of assessment of a civil penalty by providing notice of the civil penalty amount and the basis for assessment to the person assessed. Provided however, the assessment of an immediate civil penalty shall be deemed compliant with the requirement for prior service of a notice of violation if served simultaneously with the notice of violation. The assessment of a penalty and an immediate civil penalty shall be served personally or by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure and shall direct the violator to either pay the assessment or contest the assessment in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the notice of assessment. The office of the stormwater administrator shall initially assess the civil penalty. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to assess, personnel of the office of the stormwater administrator shall be guided strictly by the table of penalties as set forth herein. 
Table of Penalties 
Erosion and Sediment Control 
	Grading without permit 	Site/Plan not in accordance with approved plan 	Failure to maintain erosion control measures 	Offsite Sedimentation (includes deposition into a stream) 	Buffer violation 	Graded slopes or fills not in compliance 	Lack of ground cover 	Improper fill material 	Failure to file/falsification of inspection report 	Other violations of Erosion and Sediment Laws 
Immediate Fine 	$100 per 2,000 SF disturbed max of $5,000 
NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	Slight - $0 - $500 
Moderate $501—$2,000 
Severe $2,001—$5,000 
NOV Issued 	$100 plus $2 per square foot disturbed, max of $5,000, 
NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	$2000 for falsification of report 	Possible $0-$5000 
On-Going Violation (Failure to Comply with NOV) 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty 	$500 per measure not installed correctly or $1,000 per measure not installed, max of $5,000 (every 100 L.F. of silt fence or diversion shall be counted as 1 measure) 	$500 per measure not maintained correctly, max of $5,000 (every 100 L.F. of silt fence or diversion shall be counted as 1 measure) 
or 
$500 plus $500 times the disturbed drainage acreage to the failed measure; whichever is greater 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty 
Failure to take immediate short-term measures and restore buffers to standards result in subsequent violations) 	$100 per 100 SF not compliant max of $5,000 	$100 per 100 SF not compliant max of $5,000 	$0—$5,000 (To be based on amount of improper fill and possible hazard for failure or leeching of pollutants) 	$200 per reporting period for each report not filed 	Possible $0—$5,000 
 
a.  Guidelines for penalty assessment: Upon appeal of the civil penalty assessment to the stormwater administrator, the stormwater administrator shall be guided by the following standards and guidelines in affirming in whole or in part, reversing in whole or in part or modifying the penalty imposed: 
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation penalty: 
a)  The severity of the violation: whether slight, moderate or severe; 
b)  The degree and harm caused by the violation along with the type of violation; 
c)  The duration, cause, extent of any off-site damage which may have resulted; 
d)  The effectiveness of action taken by the violator and adherence to the approved plan; 
e)  The cost of rectifying any damage, the amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance and the estimated cost of installing and/or maintaining corrective sediment control measures and staff investigative costs; 
f)  Whether the violation was committed willfully and the prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with referenced subsection. 
2.  Stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection penalty: 
a)  The degree and extent of harm to the natural resources and/or public roadways of the city; 
b)  The degree and extent of harm to the public health, or to private property resulting from the violation; 
c)  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
d)  The effect on ground or surface water quantity/quality or on air quality; 
e)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
f)  The amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance; 
g)  Whether the violation was committed willfully; 
h)  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with referenced subsection. 
(4)  Criminal penalties: A violation of this section subjects the offender to a civil penalty pursuant to the authority granted by NCGS 160A-175 and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty provisions of NCGS 14-4 and Section 1-5 of Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(5)  Stop inspections order: A stop inspection order may be issued for a site by the office of the stormwater administrator with all inspection approvals for and all other permitted activity suspended if the site is not brought into compliance within the time period for cure as set forth in the notice of violation issued under this section. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the office of the director of building safety and upon receipt, a stop inspection order shall be issued from said office. Once the violation has been brought into compliance, a notice shall be sent to the office of the director of building safety and the stop inspection order shall be removed. 
(6)  Suspension: The stormwater administrator may suspend any grading and/or stormwater permit for any violation of the provisions of this section if the site is not brought into compliance within the time period for cure as set forth in the notice of violation. To suspend a grading and/or stormwater permit, the stormwater administrator shall serve a notice of continuing violation and permit suspension which shall comply with the notice of violation requirements of subsection 7-12-2(h)(3), upon the financially responsible party. The notice may be served by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. Once the violation has been cured and all penalties have been paid in full or penalty appeal has been filed within the given time frame, the suspension shall be lifted and notice of such shall be sent to the financially responsible party. 
(7)  Revocation: The stormwater administrator may revoke any grading and/or stormwater permit if the site is not brought into compliance within the time period for cure as set forth in the notice of continuing violation and permit suspension. A notice of permit revocation shall comply with the notice of violation requirements of subsection 7-12-2(h)(3). The notice may be served by any means authorized under Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. A new permit application and approved plan including all permit fees must be submitted prior to reinstatement of the revoked permits. For permit reinstatement, the site must be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this section and all penalties have been paid in full or penalty appeal has been filed within the given time frame. 
(8)  Stop work order: If, through inspection, it is determined that a land disturbing activity is being conducted in violation of this section or of any rule adopted or order issued pursuant to this section, and that the violation is knowing and willful, and that either: (a) off-site sedimentation has eliminated or severely degraded a use in a lake or natural watercourse or that such degradation is imminent; or (b) off-site sedimentation has caused severe damage to adjacent land or that such damage is imminent; or (c) the land disturbing activity is being conducted without an approved plan, the stormwater administrator, upon compliance with all of the procedural requirements of NCGS 113A-65.1, may issue a stop work order, the duration of which is not to exceed five days. The stop work order shall be served by the sheriff of Buncombe County or some other person duly authorized by law to serve process as provided by Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(9)  Summary abatement: If through inspection, the stormwater administrator determines that a violation occurring under this section represents an imminent threat to life or property, the stormwater administrator shall take such action as may be necessary to protect the public and correct the violation. 
(10)  Abatement: If an order directing the correction of a violation representing a threat to life or property is not complied with within the applicable period of time, the city may, after notice to the owner, enter the land and perform all necessary work to abate the threat to life or property. Notice shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the financially responsible party by hand delivery; by certified mail, return receipt requested; or by any other means allowed by Rule 4 of the N.C. Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(11)  Cost of abatement lien against property: The city may assess the owner of the subject property with the cost of any work performed by the city pursuant to an abatement, which cost shall be a lien on such property and may be collected as provided in NCGS 160A-193. Notice shall be provided five days prior to entry and performance of necessary work by the city. For stormwater management facilities, the owners of all property served by the facility shall be jointly and severally responsible to the city for the maintenance of the facility and liable for any costs incurred by the city. All such properties are jointly and severally subject to the imposition of liens for said costs. 
(12)  Action for failure to comply and failure to pay civil penalty: If violations are not cured or corrected within the time specified in the notice of violation and/or the violator fails to give timely notice of appeal or fails to pay the civil penalty assessed within the prescribed time period, then the matter may be referred to the city's debt set-off program and/or referred to the city attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. In addition to, or in lieu of, the other remedies set forth in this section, the city attorney may institute an injunctive action, mandamus action, or other appropriate proceeding. Upon determining that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, a court hearing an appeal for relief shall enter such orders and/or judgments as are necessary to abate or prevent the violation. The institution of an action for injunctive or other relief under this section shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil penalty prescribed by this section for violations of this section. 
(j)  Variances, exceptions and appeals. 
(1)  Variances: Any aggrieved person may petition for a variance to the board of adjustment to use one's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section. Variances may also be requested from the aquatic buffer requirements, deed restrictions and protective covenants required herein. Reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards may be imposed on any variance granted. Merely providing that the variance would permit a greater profit from the property shall not be considered adequate justification for a variance. All of the procedural requirements of the entity charged with granting a variance shall be met by the applicant. Provided however, only the NCDENR—Division of Land Resources may grant a variance or exception as herein below set forth, to aquatic buffers along designated trout streams. The stormwater administrator may support an applicant's appeal for a variance if the applicant's application satisfies all of the following criteria: 
a.  Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this section. 
b.  The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property. 
c.  The hardships did not result from actions taken by the applicant. 
d.  The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of this section; will protect water quality; will secure public safety and welfare; and will preserve substantial justice. 
(2)  Exceptions: The stormwater administrator may approve plans that do not comply with the mandatory standards of subsection 7-12-2(e)(2) of this section if the land disturbing activity is for the construction of facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or natural water course or work done for the purposes of creating trails, walkways, river access areas, and similar facilities along the rivers, creeks or streams. Where one or more measures required under subsection 7-12-2(e)(2) are not practicable, the stormwater administrator may approve plans provided that additional measures are installed that provide the same level of treatment, discharge and velocity control. 
a.  Required exceptions: Notwithstanding the variance allowance herein, the stormwater administrator shall grant an exception from the aquatic buffer requirements, deed restrictions and protective covenants in any of the following instances: 
1.  When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing, railroad crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it is located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide pollutant removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of the BMPs. 
2.  When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater management facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as long as it is located 15 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent surface waters and as long as it is located designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide pollutant removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs. 
3.  A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating that, considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or density of the proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or result in less adverse impact to surface waters. 
b.  Limitation of aquatic buffer with a granted exception: Where a temporary and minimal disturbance has been permitted as an exception to the aquatic buffer, to the extent practicable, land disturbing activities in the aquatic buffer shall be limited to a maximum of ten percent of the total length of the aquatic buffer within the site to be disturbed such that there is not more than 100 linear feet of disturbance in each 1,000 linear feet of aquatic buffer. 
(3)  Appeals: Any aggrieved party may file an appeal for or from the issuance of a variance, or from the denial/grant of an exception, penalty assessment, notice of violation, permit disapproval/modification, order, requirement, determination or interpretation rendered under the provisions of this section. The appeals process shall be as follows: 
a.  To the stormwater administrator: With the exception of appealing for the issuance of a variance, all appeals must initially be heard by the stormwater administrator. The appeal must be submitted in writing within 30 days of receipt of an adverse action (for the disapproval or modification of a permit application for failing to meet the erosion prevention and sediment control provisions of this section, the appeal must be submitted within 15 days) and shall specify the specific grounds for relief and what relief is requested. The stormwater administrator shall render a decision no later than 30 days from receipt of the written appeal. Further appeal may be taken to the soil erosion/stormwater review committee as established herein, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the decision of the stormwater administrator. 
b.  To the soil erosion/stormwater review committee: A soil erosion/stormwater review committee (committee) is hereby created for the purpose of hearing appeals taken from the stormwater administrator. The committee shall be composed of five members as follows: two city department directors designated by the city manager, one member of the planning and zoning commission, and two members appointed by the Asheville City Council, one a resident of the City of Asheville and the other from either the City of Asheville or the extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city, at least one of whom shall have a professional accreditation in the practice of stormwater management, erosion and sediment control, or related areas of professional practice. A simple majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall hold an organizational meeting within a reasonable period of time after adoption of this section to appoint a chair and adopt rules of procedure to govern appeals as herein authorized. An appeal may be taken to the committee within 30 days of receipt of the written decision of the stormwater administrator. The appeal must be submitted in writing and shall specify why the stormwater administrator's decision is erroneous and what relief is requested. The committee shall take reasonable steps to ensure that written decisions are rendered within a reasonable period of time after the hearing. 
c.  To the Asheville Board of Adjustment: Further appeal may be taken to the Asheville Board of Adjustment in accordance with and pursuant to the written requirements of the board and section 7-6-2 of the UDO. Provided however, appeals regarding disapproval or modification of a permit application based upon failing to meet the erosion prevention and sediment control provision of this section, may not be taken to the Asheville Board of Adjustment and, if an appeal is desired, such appeal may be taken from inception, directly to the North Carolina Sedimentation Commission pursuant to NCGS 113A-61(c) and Title 15A, NCAC 4B.0118(d). 
d.  To the Buncombe County Superior Court: Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board is filed in the office of the board or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every person who has filed a written request for such copy with the board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The appeal shall be limited to the record before the board. 
(k)  Prohibition, detection and elimination of illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper disposal to the stormwater system. 
(1)  Connections: It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water, into the city's MS4 or receiving waters. Prohibited connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and waste water from septic tanks. 
(2)  Continuation of illicit connection: It is unlawful for any person to continue the operation of any such illicit connection regardless of whether the connection was permissible when constructed. Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected. 
(3)  Illicit discharge: It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run or otherwise discharge to any component of the city's MS4 or to the waters of the State of North Carolina or to cause, permit or allow to suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allowed to seep or otherwise discharge into such system or receiving water all matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein authorized. 
(4)  Exemptions: 
a.  The following activities are hereby deemed not to be a significant source of pollution and are hereby exempted from the prohibition provision above: 
1.  Discharges pursuant to an NPDES discharge permit (other than the NPDES permit for the City of Asheville MS4), provided that such discharges to the MS4 have been authorized by the stormwater administrator. 
2.  Discharges or flows resulting from fire fighting activities; 
3.  Water line flushing performed or required by a government agency; 
4.  Diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, unpolluted pumped ground waters and unpolluted ground water infiltration as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20); 
5.  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual and charity car washing, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
6.  Discharges of irrigation waters (does not include reclaimed water as described in 15A NCAC 2H. 0200); and/or 
7.  Discharges from flushing and cleaning stormwater conveyances with dechlorinated, uncontaminated water. 
b.  Provided however, the stormwater administrator retains the right to determine in writing that any exempted discharge as set forth above from any property, is no longer exempt if there is evidence of significant pollution from such discharge. 
(5)  Accidental discharge: In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city MS4 of any pollutant, the person concerned shall inform the city as soon as possible, but not to exceed 24 hours, of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to contain the waste, treat the waste or other actions to minimize affects of the discharge on the MS4 and receiving waters. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. 
(6)  Detection and elimination of illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper disposal to the stormwater system: 
a.  The stormwater administrator shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate illicit connections to the City of Asheville MS4, including the adoption of a program to screen illicit discharges and identify their source or sources. 
b.  The stormwater administrator shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate improper discharges, including a program to screen for disposal and programs to provide for public education, public information, and other appropriate activities to facilitate the proper management and disposal of used oil, toxic materials and household hazardous waste. 
c.  Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said connections were made prior to adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within one year following the effective date of this section. However, the one-year grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat. 
d.  Where it is determined that said connection: 
1.  May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat, or 
2.  Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, other than this section; the stormwater administrator shall designate the time within which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the stormwater administrator shall take into consideration: the quantity and complexity of the work; the consequence of delay; the potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to public and private property; and the cost of remedying the damage. 
(7)  Spills: Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or having the potential to be released or discharged to the stormwater conveyance system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and properly disposed. All affected areas shall be restored to their pre-existing condition. 
(8)  Notification of discharge: Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to their release or discharge, and persons owning the property on which the substances were released or discharged, shall immediately notify the fire chief of the release or discharge, as well as making any required notifications under state and federal law. Notification shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by state or other law. 
(9)  Nuisance: Illicit discharges and illicit connections which exist within the city's jurisdiction are hereby found, deemed, and declared to be dangerous or prejudiced to the public health or safety and are found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated. 
(10)  Monitoring and inspections related to illicit discharge program: 
a.  Water quality monitoring: The stormwater administrator shall monitor the quantity of, and the concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas and/or locations designated in the City of Asheville SWMP. 
b.  General inspection requirements: The stormwater administrator, bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect after duly notifying the owner of said property or the representative on site, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, monitoring, observation measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to effectuate the provisions of this section at reasonable times. The stormwater administrator shall maintain inspection reports in a permanent file located in the office of the stormwater administrator. 
c.  Administrative inspection warrant: Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to enter or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised. The inspector shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the stormwater administrator. The stormwater administrator shall promptly seek an administrative inspection warrant consistent with the laws of the State of North Carolina to complete the inspection. 
d.  Emergency inspections: In the event that the stormwater administrator reasonably believes that discharge from the property into the city's MS4 may cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may take place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a representative on site. The inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable request by the owner or representative. 
(l)  Acronyms. 
(1) 	BMP 	Best management practice 
(2) 	CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
(3) 	CWA 	Clean Water Act 
(4) 	DLR 	Division of Land Resources 
(5) 	DWQ 	Division of Water Quality 
(6) 	MEP 	Maximum extent practicable 
(7) 	MS4 	Municipal separate storm sewer system 
(8) 	NCAC 	North Carolina Administrative Code 
(9) 	NCDENR 	North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
(10) 	NCEMC 	North Carolina Environmental Management Commission 
(11) 	NCEPA 	North Carolina Environmental Policy Act 
(12) 	NCGS 	North Carolina General Statutes 
(13) 	NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(14) 	SWMP 	Stormwater Management Program 
(15) 	TMDL 	Total Maximum Daily Load 
(16) 	USDA 	United States Department of Agriculture 
(17) 	USGS 	United States Geological Survey 
 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 16—18, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2505, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(k), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 3520, § 1, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 3875, § 1, 6-8-10)  
Sec. 7-12-3. - Protected mountain ridges. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this provision is to expand the coverage of the Mountain Ridge Protection Act of 1983 (as amended) in the City of Asheville and the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction of the City of Asheville to further regulate the construction of tall buildings or structures on mountain ridges. This expanded regulation will insure that supplying water to, and disposing of sewage from, buildings at high elevations does not infringe on the groundwater rights and endanger the health of those persons living at lower elevations; that adequate fire protection will be available; that such buildings or structures will not be a hazard to air navigation; and that such tall buildings will not detract from the natural beauty of the mountains. 
(b)  Authority. This provision is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-208(a), as amended. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. This provision shall apply to the construction of tall buildings or structures as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-206(3), on protected mountain ridges as defined hereinafter within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, and within the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction of the City of Asheville in accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-208, as amended. 
(d)  Tall buildings or structures. "Tall buildings or structures" include any building, structure, or unit within a multi-unit building with a vertical height of more than 40 feet measured from the top of the foundation of said building, structure, or unit and the uppermost point of said building, structure, or unit; provided, however, that where such foundation measured from the natural finished grade of the crest or the natural finished grade of the high side of the slope of a ridge exceeds three feet, then such measurement in excess of three feet shall be included in the 40-foot limitation described herein; provided, further, that no such building, structure, or unit shall protrude at its uppermost point above the crest of the ridge by more than 35 feet. For the purposes of this section 7-12-3, "tall buildings or structures" do not include: 
• Water, radio, telephone or television towers or any equipment for the transmission of electricity or communications or both; 
• Structures of a relatively slender nature and minor vertical projections of a parent building, including chimneys, flagpoles, flues, spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, antennas, poles, wires, or windmills; or 
• Buildings and structures designated as National Historic Sites on the National Archives Registry. 
(e)  Protected mountain ridges defined. The City of Asheville, North Carolina, in accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-206(6) as amended, hereby eliminates the 3,000-elevation requirement in defining a protected mountain ridge for the purpose of applying the Mountain Ridge Protection Act in the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction. "Protected mountain ridges" are defined, therefore, in the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction, as all mountain ridges whose elevation is 500 or more feet above the elevation of an adjacent valley floor. 
(f)  Protected Mountain Ridge Act compliance. The provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-209 shall be applicable to protected mountain ridges as defined hereinbefore. 
(g)  Filing of maps. In accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 113A-212, a map or maps tentatively identifying the protected mountain crests as defined by this section has been filed by the North Carolina Secretary of Natural Resources and Community Development with the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners and the Asheville City Council. A map or maps identifying the protected mountain ridges (and) crests in the City of Asheville, North Carolina, has been filed with the Buncombe County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-12-4. - Steep slope and ridgetop development. 
(a)  Purpose. Asheville is in a unique geographic location where mountains, valleys, and hills constitute significant natural topographic features. The mountains and hillsides of Asheville are visible from many places in the city, adding to the quality of life for residents, and improving tourism opportunities for visitors. These areas are sensitive to development activities and measures must be taken to maintain slope stability and to control erosion and stormwater. In order to ensure the preservation of this character and the appropriate use of the hillsides, the regulations of this section are established to recognize that development of land in steep or mountainous areas involves special considerations and unique development standards. 
(b)  Goals and objectives. This section is intended to achieve the following goals and objectives: 
(1)  To promote public safety by ensuring that development on steep slope and ridgetop areas addresses slope stability issues in an effective manner; 
(2)  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the location of development and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce length and width of roads, utility runs, and the amount of grading and paving; 
(3)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing vegetation, and the minimization of development on steep slopes and ridgetops; 
(4)  To provide for the conservation and maintenance of steep slope and ridgetop areas within city jurisdiction to achieve the above-mentioned goals; 
(5)  To provide opportunities for developers to minimize impacts on steep slope and ridgetop areas; 
(6)  To provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and interests of individual landowners, and the individual characteristics of their properties; 
(7)  To preserve scenic views and vistas that are inherent to Asheville's character and to minimize perceived density by minimizing views of new development from within and outside of the development; and 
(8)  To provide mechanisms to effectively enforce the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Steep slopes and ridgetops designated. 
(1)  Steep slopes are designated as those areas at or above 2,220 feet in elevation above mean sea level and having an existing grade of 15 percent or more. For the purpose of applying specific development standards, steep slope areas have been separated into different zones: 
• Zone A - Areas between 2,220 and 2,349 feet in elevation and having an existing grade of 15 percent or more; 
• Zone B - Areas at or above 2,350 feet in elevation and having an existing grade of 15 percent or more; 
(2)  Ridgetops are designated on the official City of Asheville Ridgetops Map (which is hereby made a part of this section by reference). Designated ridgetops are: 
• Protected mountain ridges as defined in subsection 7-12-3(e) of this Code regardless of whether such ridges have been otherwise designated on maps filed in accordance with subsection 7-12-3(g) of this Code. 
• All land within 100 vertical feet of any ridgeline or ridgeline segment that is part of a designated watershed area containing a minimum of 100 acres and is located 500 or more feet above the adjacent valley floor. If any part of a ridgeline qualifies under this definition, any segments of the same ridgeline that are of higher elevation than the qualifying ridgeline shall also be considered ridgetops for the purposes of this section. 
(3)  For the purpose of applying the geotechnical analysis of this section, all areas having an existing grade of 36 percent or more, regardless of elevation, or are located in areas designated as High Hazard or Moderate Hazard on the Buncombe County Slope Stability Index Map prepared by the North Carolina Geological Survey are subject to the standards set forth in subsection 7-12-4(l). 
(d)  Application. The provisions of this section apply in the following circumstances. Any portion of a lot, parcel, or tract of land which has been approved for development or subdivision prior to the date of adoption of this section {July 10, 2007} shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this section if no further development or change to the approved subdivision or development plan is proposed within that portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of land. For the purpose of applying this provision, approval of a subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of a development plan for the individual lots in the subdivision. 
(1)  Where new development is proposed for a one or two family dwelling, or for a development requiring Level I, II or III site plan review pursuant to section 7-5-9 of this chapter or subdivision review pursuant to section 7-5-8 of this chapter. 
(2)  Additions to structures greater than 1,000 square feet or new site disturbances encompassing more than 1,000 square feet of disturbed area. These additions and site disturbances shall include smaller additions or disturbances over a three-year period that accumulate to exceed the above limitations. 
(3)  Substantive amendments to an approved subdivision or development plan shall require full compliance with the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this section, "substantive amendments" shall include increases in the number of lots or density or intensity of development by more than ten percent over that previously approved, location of a structure or structures in areas of steeper slopes than originally approved, and similar amendments that substantively increase the extent of development impact. 
(4)  Regardless of the provisions of this section, lawfully-established lots in existence on {July 10, 2007} may be developed with a single-family home provided that the requirements of subsections (f), (g), (h) and (l) are met, except that subsection (f) shall not apply to such lots where extent of grading has been previously designated and approved on a preliminary plat or approved development plan. 
(5)  For areas located in zone A, the development standards set forth in subsections (g), (h) and (k) shall not apply except that the front setback reduction specified in subsection (h) is available to properties located in zone A. 
(e)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning as ascribed to them below: 
Artificial slope shall mean any land-disturbing activity that creates or changes any slope or attempts to do so. 
Cut slope shall mean the exposed ground surface resulting from excavation of material. 
Existing grade shall mean the vertical elevation of the land as it exists on {July 10, 2007}. 
Fill slope shall mean the exposed ground surface resulting from deposition of material. 
Slope shall mean the extent to which a land form deviates from the perfectly horizontal as expressed in percent, degree or ratio. To ensure consistent conversion between these separate methods of expressing the extent of slope, the following explanatory table is provided as part of this definition. 
 
Trees and other specified vegetation shall mean all native trees of six or more inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) and any mature grouping of rhododendron or mountain laurel of 250 square feet or more in area. Invasive non-native species shall not be included in this definition. 
(f)  Grading. The following requirements regulate the extent and technique of grading in steep slope and ridgetop areas based on the existing grade. Existing grade is determined as follows. 
Calculation of existing grade. The applicant may submit calculations of the existing grade; these calculations shall be sealed by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or landscape architect. If no calculations are provided, the City of Asheville will calculate the existing grade of any property using the following formula: 
  
S 	= 	.0023 (I)(L) 
		A 
 
Where: 
S = Existing grade of parcel in percent 
I = Contour interval of map in feet, with said contour intervals to be five feet or less 
L = Total length of the contour lines within the parcel in feet 
A = Area of the parcel in acres 
0.0023 = Product of two constants, one of which converts feet into acres and one of which converts a decimal fraction into a percentage 
Once "S" is calculated, it shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
If existing grade cannot be calculated using the above methods, it shall be estimated using best available resources by the planning and development director whose determination shall be final. 
(1)  Grading extent. The extent of grading on a property located in a steep slope or ridgetop area is governed by the following tables. 
  
MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF SITE GRADING BY EXISTING GRADE 
ZONE A 
FOR PROPERTIES AT ELEVATIONS 2220' - 2349' 
Existing Grade 	Maximum Percent of Site Graded 
15% - 19% 	80% 
20% - 24% 	70% 
25% - 29% 	60% 
30% - 34% 	45% 
35% - 39% 	35% 
40% + 	20% 
 
ZONE B 
FOR PROPERTIES AT ELEVATIONS 2350' and ABOVE 
Existing Grade 	Maximum Percent of Site Graded 
15% - 19% 	45% 
20% - 24% 	40% 
25% - 29% 	35% 
30% - 34% 	30% 
35% - 39% 	25% 
40% + 	15% 
 
Note: This table shall be interpreted in the following manner: "15%-19%" will include all slopes of 15 percetnt up to any slope less than 20 percent, etc. 
(2)  Road construction. Roads constructed on any lot, parcel, or tract of land designated as a steep slope or ridgetop area shall be contained within a corridor that shall not exceed 90 feet in width along 80 percent of its total length; up to 20 percent of the length of the road corridor may be graded to a maximum width of 135 feet to accommodate grading operations approved by the city engineer. Road rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 32 feet and a maximum of 40 feet and shall have a cross-section design as illustrated below. Cul-de-sac circles, T-turnarounds and other road terminus features approved by the city shall be exempt from these width requirements. Sidewalks are not required to be constructed in steep slope or ridgetop areas but shall be subject to fee-in-lieu requirements if not provided. Unless approved by the city engineer based on an assessment of best engineering practices for the specific site, retaining walls greater than four feet in height erected to comply with these corridor requirements shall be located at least 10 feet outside of public rights-of-way or edge of slope shoulder, whichever is greater, and shall be privately maintained. 
 
(3)  Artificial slopes. Artificial slopes shall be designed and landscaped to create natural appearing slopes and hillsides. The replacement of trees and other significant vegetation is imperative for maintaining the natural appearance of artificial slopes. Artificial slopes shall not exceed the steepness and height parameters listed in the following table except in circumstances where stable exposed rock is the intended end result of the artificial slope, in which circumstance the cut and/or fill slopes may be increased at the discretion of the city engineer. Reforestation of artificial slopes ten feet or greater in height, other than stable exposed rock, shall consist of the placement of any of the tree or shrub species and size as specified in a list prepared and maintained by the tree commission provided not more than 20 percent of any one tree or shrub species is used except that reforestation using entirely mountain laurel or rhododendron is acceptable. The following table describes the planting design and amount of required plant material for reforestation. A maintenance plan shall be required for reforested areas and such plan shall include provisions for replacement of dead vegetation when greater than a 50 percent mortality rate occurs. 
ARTIFICIAL SLOPES 
Slope Type 	Maximum Slope 	Maximum Height 	Required Reforestation 
Cut Slope 	 1.5:1 	30 feet 	Reforestation shall consist of rows of plantings spaced 10 feet apart (on center) in checkerboard 
pattern. 
	  2:1 	40 feet 	
	<2.5:1 	30 feet 	
Fill Slope 	  2:1 	40 feet 	
	<2.5:1 	30 feet 	
 
Note: The maximum height of a combined cut and fill slope shall not exceed 60 feet. 
(g)  Structure height and depth. The maximum height of principal structures in steep slope and ridgetop areas shall be limited to two stories (maximum 30 feet) on the uphill side of the structure and three stories (maximum 40 feet) on the downhill side of the structure, regardless of height allowances elsewhere in this Code. For ridgetop development where structures are not located so as to have a distinct uphill or a downhill side, the maximum height of principal structures shall be limited to two stories (maximum 30 feet). Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet in height on any side. For the purpose of this section, height shall be calculated as the vertical distance from existing grade to the midpoint of the peak and eave for structures with pitched roofs and from the top of the parapet or roof surface, whichever is greater, for flat-roofed structures. An additional 12 feet in height may be allowed on the uphill side and 20 feet in height on the downhill side of the principal structure if any downhill-facing façade and the entire roof structure are installed and maintained with materials or paint having an average light reflectivity value (LRV) of 25 or less and a 50-foot deep area measured from the rear property line is designated in a vegetation preservation easement and existing vegetation in this area is maintained. This provision is not available for ridgetop development. A LRV of 25 or less is strongly encouraged for all structures built on steep slope and ridgetop areas regardless of their height. The maximum depth through any one cross-section of a structure in steep slope and ridgetop areas having a slope of 40 percent or more shall be 50 feet in order to promote construction that is less intrusive on a slope (see illustration below). 
 
(h)  Tree and other specified vegetation preservation. All trees and other specified vegetation shall be preserved in steep slope and ridgetop areas except in areas approved for grading in subsection (f) above or within ten feet of building footprints. Non-native invasive species may be removed. For new development or additions, these preservation areas shall be designated on plans submitted for development approval. For existing development, aerial photographs or other methods of determining the extent of tree cover shall be utilized to enforce this requirement. 
During construction, these preservation areas shall be clearly designated using tree protection fencing to protect them from disturbance. 
Fines for removal of trees and other specified vegetation required to be preserved, unless such trees and vegetation are determined to be dead, dying or represent a threat to property by the city arborist or other person(s) designated to enforce these requirements and said removal is thereby authorized, shall be as established in article XVIII. In the event that a violator chooses to remedy the violation through the planting of replacement trees, such trees shall be selected from the city's list of large maturing trees and shall be of a minimum of two inches diameter at breast height. 
The planning and development director may approve reductions of front setbacks from 35 feet to 20 feet in RS-2 zones and from 25 feet to 15 feet in RS-4 zones such that the setback reduction results in reducing site grading and enhances protection or existing trees and other vegetation. 
(i)  Alternative landscape plan. In the event a property owner desires to remove trees and other protected vegetation required to be preserved in subsection (h) above, he or she may submit an alternative landscape plan for consideration by the tree commission. This alternative landscape plan must contain: a tree survey of the property showing which trees and other protected vegetation will be removed and which will remain; the location of any structures, driveways and other impervious surfaces; and an explanation of the reason(s) for removal of required trees and other protected vegetation, including a statement of how the removal of the required trees and other protected vegetation supports the purposes of this section or how such removal can be mitigated consistent with the purposes of this section. The tree commission, in its sole discretion, may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the alternative landscape plan. If conditions are established, they shall be enforceable in accordance with the provisions of article XVIII. If the tree commission denies the alternative landscape plan, it shall set out its reasons in writing. Appeals of tree commission decisions shall follow the process for appeals of decisions by the planning director as established in section 7-6-2. 
(j)  Density. Densities of residential development shall be reduced in steep slope and ridgetop areas to support the goals and objectives of this section. 
(1)  The allowable density shall be as follows for the listed underlying zoning districts. The fractional requirements provisions of subsection 7-2-3(b) shall not apply for density calculations in the steep slope and ridgetop areas. 
  
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF UNITS PER ACRE BY EXISTING GRADE 
ZONE A 
FOR PROPERTIES AT ELEVATIONS 2220' - 2349' 
Existing Grade 	RS-2 	RS-4 	RM-6 	RS-8 
RM-8 	RM-16 & other districts allowing residential development 
15%—19% 	1.7 	3.3 	5.1 	6.8 	13.5 
20%—24% 	1.4 	2.9 	4.3 	5.7 	11.1 
25%—29% 	1.2 	2.3 	3.5 	4.7 	9.3 
30%—34% 	0.8 	1.8 	2.7 	3.6 	7.2 
35%—39% 	.6 	1.7 	1.9 	2.5 	5.0 
40% or > 	.3 	0.6 	1.0 	1.3 	2.6 
 
ZONE B 
FOR PROPERTIES AT ELEVATIONS 2350' and ABOVE 
Existing Grade 	RS-2 	RS-4 	RM-6 	RS-8 
RM-8 	RM-16 & other districts allowing residential development 
15%—19% 	1.2 	1.8 	2.7 	3.6 	7.2 
20%—24% 	1.0 	1.4 	2.4 	3.2 	5.6 
25%—29% 	0.7 	1.0 	1.7 	2.8 	4.2 
30%—34% 	0.6 	0.8 	1.2 	2.0 	3.8 
35%—39% 	0.4 	0.6 	0.8 	1.2 	3.0 
40% or > 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.8 
 
** NOTE: The above table shall be interpreted in the following manner: 
• "15%-19%" will include all slopes of 15 percent up to any slope less than 20 percent, etc. 
• 0-0.99 = no unit, 1.0 - 1.99 = 1 unit, etc. 
(2)  Existing lots or parcels. Construction of a single-family residence shall be permitted on any lawfully established lot or parcel existing as of the date of adoption of this ordinance, even if the parcel does not meet the maximum density requirements listed in the table above. In such cases, however, the requirements of subsections (f), (g), (h) and (i) shall still apply, except that subsection (f) shall not apply to such lots where extent of grading has been previously designated and approved on a preliminary plat or approved development plan. 
(3)  Density bonus. For areas located in Zone B, a density bonus may be granted for each of the following items. A total density bonus of up to 60 percent of the allowable density may be achieved under this provision through accumulation. Bonus applications may result in administratively-approved reductions in minimum setback requirements and minimum lot size if necessary to achieve site preservation, screening or grading objectives. Such reductions shall be indicated on the development plans submitted to obtain the density bonus and the rationale behind the reductions shall be clearly demonstrated on the plans or other application materials. 
a.  Buildings, parking, and other improvements are clustered on less steep and sensitive areas of the site to reduce the amount of grading and the steeper, more sensitive areas are preserved through a conservation easement that safeguards the property from future development; bonus of up to 60 percent based on the following table. Less sensitive areas may not exceed a 40 percent average natural slope and may include previously cleared areas, such as logging roads and pastures, provided such clearing predates January 1, 2007. Clustering in single-family residential districts and the RM-6 district may include multi-family construction up to eight units per building if necessary to achieve site preservation objectives. Conservation areas may not be located on individually owned home lots and may remain as privately owned property. 
PERCENT OF SITE PRESERVED 	DENSITY BONUS 
30—40% 	30% 
<40—50% 	40% 
<50—60% 	50% 
<60% 	60% 
 
b.  Grading is limited to ten percent or more under the maximum allowed under subsection (e) above; bonus of 20 percent. 
c.  Buildings and parking areas are screened by vegetation to minimize the visual impact from key viewing areas, which include the downtown central business district, the Blue Ridge Parkway, public parkland and recreational areas, and major streets and highways; bonus of 20 percent. 
d.  Grading of roads and access drives is located outside of slopes exceeding 20 percent and/or is predominately located on existing cleared roadbeds; bonus of 20 percent. 
e.  Grading for the principal structure(s) is located completely outside of slopes exceeding 20 percent; bonus of 20 percent. 
f.  The city engineer determines that substantial stormwater management best management practices are met in the proposed development; bonus of 20 percent. 
(k)  Nonresidential development intensity. Intensity of nonresidential development shall be limited as follows in the Steep Slope Overlay District to support the goals and objectives of the district. For the purpose of this section, "floor area ratio" shall mean the total gross floor area of the building or buildings on a lot divided by the gross area of the lot or site. 
(1)  The allowable intensity shall be as follows for the listed below: 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO BY EXISTING GRADE OR RIDGETOP 
Existing Grade 	Maximum Allowable Floor Area Ratio, Not To 
Exceed Structure Size Limits of the Underlying 
Zoning District 
15%—19% 	0.20 
20%—24% 	0.15 
25%—29% 	0.10 
30%—34% 	0.05 
35%—39% 	0.025 
40% 	0.01 
Ridgetop 	0.10 
 
** Note: The above table shall be interpreted in the following manner. "15%-19%" will include all slopes of 15 percent up to any slope less than 20 percent, etc. 
(2)  Intensity bonus. An intensity bonus may be granted for each of the following items. A total intensity bonus of up to 60 percent of the allowable intensity may be achieved under this provision through accumulation. No intensity bonus shall allow a structure of greater size than allowed under the underlying zoning district. 
a.  Buildings, parking, and other improvements are clustered on less steep and sensitive areas of the site to reduce the amount of grading and the steeper, more sensitive areas are preserved through an easement; bonus of up to 60 percent based on the following table. Less sensitive areas may include previously cleared areas, such as logging roads and pasture, provided such clearing predates January 1, 2007. Clustering in single-family residential districts and the RM-6 district may include multi-family construction up to eight units per building if necessary to achieve site preservation objectives. 
PERCENT OF SITE PRESERVED 	INTENSITY BONUS 
30—40% 	30% 
>40—50% 	40% 
>50—60% 	50% 
>60% 	60% 
 
b.  Grading is limited to ten percent or more under the maximum allowed under subsection (e) above; bonus of 20 percent. 
c.  Buildings and parking areas are screened by vegetation to minimize the visual impact from key viewing areas, which include the downtown central business district, the Blue Ridge Parkway, public parkland and recreational areas, and major streets and highways; bonus of 20 percent. 
d.  Grading of roads and access drives is located outside of slopes exceeding 20 percent and/or is predominately located on existing cleared roadbeds; bonus of 20 percent. 
e.  Grading for the principal structure(s) is located completely outside of slopes exceeding 20 percent; bonus of 20 percent. 
f.  The city engineer determines that substantial stormwater management best management practices are met in the proposed development; bonus of 20 percent. 
(l)  Geotechnical analysis required. Development in steep slope areas having an existing grade of 36 percent or greater or on properties located in areas designated as High Hazard or Moderate Hazard on the Buncombe County Slope Stability Index Map prepared by the North Carolina Geological Survey shall be required to undergo geotechnical analysis by a NC registered professional engineer to determine the stability of the underlying geology and soils to support the proposed development. The geotechnical analysis report shall be required to be submitted prior to the issuance of a building permit. If a geotechnical analysis has been performed for subdivision approval that includes building pad analysis for the individual lots, it is unnecessary to submit a new analysis for each lot, provided the location of structures on each lot does not change by more than 20 feet in any one direction. 
(m)  Sewer and water service required. Public sewer and water shall be required to serve new developments described in subsection (d)(1) above on steep slope and ridgetop areas. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2438, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 3117, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3328, §§ 1(m)—(p), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3490, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3503, § 1, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 3772, §§ 1a, b, 8-11-09)  
Sec. 7-12-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3520, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, repealed § 7-12-5 in its entirety. Former § 7-12-5 pertained to stormwater management and derived from Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 29, 1997; and Ord. No. 3381, §§ 1(d) and (e), adopted July 25, 2006.  
Sec. 7-12-6. - Stormwater services utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  Authority, purpose, jurisdiction, definitions. 
(1)  Authority: Pursuant to N.C.G.S. Article 16 of Chapter 160A, the City of Asheville is authorized to create a stormwater services utility and enterprise fund and in so doing establish a schedule of rents, rates, fees, charges, and penalties for the use of or the services furnished by such public enterprise. 
(2)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to establish a stormwater services utility as an identified fiscal and accounting fund for the purpose of comprehensively addressing the stormwater management needs of the city through programs designed to protect and manage water quality and quantity by controlling the level of pollutants in, stormwater runoff, and the quantity and rate of stormwater received and conveyed by structural and natural stormwater and drainage systems of all types. It provides a schedule of rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties necessary to assure that all aspects of the stormwater program are managed in accordance with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Jurisdiction: The boundaries and jurisdiction of the stormwater services utility shall extend to the corporate limits of the city, including all areas hereafter annexed thereto. 
(4)  Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the words, terms and phrases used herein shall have the meaning given to them in section 7-2-5 of chapter 7 of the UDO, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The stormwater administrator is authorized to interpret and to apply these definitions. If a property could be interpreted to fall into more than one category, the stormwater administrator shall, consistent with the purpose and intent of this section, determine the applicable category. 
(b)  Establishment of a stormwater services utility and enterprise fund. 
(1)  Utility: There is hereby established a stormwater services utility for the city. This utility shall provide for stormwater management programs including the protection, regulation, quantity, quality, control, use and enhancement of city owned and maintained stormwater and drainage systems. 
(2)  Enterprise fund: There is hereby established a stormwater services enterprise fund. The enterprise fund is established for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater services utility including but not limited to, rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties as may be established, after notice and a public hearing by the city council and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater services utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater services utility shall be placed in the stormwater services enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater services enterprise fund, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater services enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, and stormwater and drainage systems as deemed appropriate by city council. 
(c)  Impervious coverage and rate unit. 
(1)  Impervious surface area: Impervious surface area is a developed area of land that prevents or significantly impedes the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Typical impervious surface areas include, but are not limited to: roofs, sidewalks, walkways, patios, private driveways, parking lots, access extensions, alleys and other paved, engineered, compacted or gravel surfaces containing materials that prevent or significantly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil (provided however, swimming pools and wooden decks are not considered impervious surfaces for the purpose of this ordinance). 
(2)  Application of impervious surface area: The amount of imperious surface area of real property is a key factor in the peak rate of stormwater runoff and the pollutant loadings of stormwater runoff discharged to the structural and natural drainage systems and facilities. Therefore, the amount of impervious surface area shall be the primary parameter for establishing the rate structure to distribute the cost of systems and facilities through a schedule or rates, fees, charges and penalties related to the use and operation of the stormwater services utility and public enterprise as established above. 
(3)  Establishment and application of the equivalent rate unit (ERU): The ERU shall be based upon an analysis of impervious surface throughout the city. The ERU has been determined to be equivalent to 2,442 square feet of impervious surface based on a statistically significant sampling of detached single-family residential parcels in the City of Asheville. 
(d)  Schedule of rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties. 
(1)  Detached single-family residential : Each developed detached single-family residential parcel shall pay a utility fee based on the amount of impervious surface area on their property. 
(2)  Tiering for detached single-family residential: Single-family residential parcels will be charged a fee at the Tier I, Tier II and Tier III levels as set forth in the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual, based upon square footage of impervious area as more specifically set forth below: 
Tier 	Impervious Area (Square Footage) 
I 	225—2000 
II 	2001—4000 
III 	4001+ 
 
(3)  Other properties: All other developed properties having impervious surface area, including but not limited to multi-family residential properties with two or more living units, commercial properties, industrial properties, public, institutional and non-profit properties, church properties, public and private school properties, and publicly owned properties shall be billed for one ERU for each 2,442 square feet of impervious coverage on the subject property, with any fraction thereof rounded up to the next ERU. 
(4)  Common areas : Townhouse and condominium developments and other similar properties containing impervious surface in common ownership shall be charged for the total impervious surface of all commonly owned property within the development. 
(5)  Fees and charges manual: The schedule of rates, rents, charges, fees and penalties shall be set forth in the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
(e)  Exemptions and credits: 
(1)  Credits: Other properties as set forth above may apply for stormwater utility fee credits. Credits are reductions in stormwater utility fees applicable to the property in recognition of on-site or off-site systems, facilities, measures, and actions taken by customers that go above and beyond the minimum requirements of the prescribed ordinances. Credits shall be conditioned on the continuing performance of the systems, facilities, measures, or actions in reference to standards adopted by the utility upon which the credits are granted, and may be revised or rescinded. Credits expire at the end of one year from the date of award and may be renewed by the submittal of a renewal application. In no case shall credits exceed 60 percent of the stormwater utility fee. 
(2)  Credit policy : The city manager shall prepare a credit policy which shall set forth the appropriate process and documentation to obtain credits. The credit policy shall be incorporated as an appendix to the City of Asheville's Standards and Specifications Details Manual. The amount of credits will be set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(3)  Equality of services : There shall be no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges granted based upon age, race, tax status, economic status, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. 
(f)  Billing. 
(1)  Responsible party: As authorized by N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-314, stormwater utility fees, charges and penalties shall remain the responsibility and obligation of the property owner. 
(2)  Method of billing: Bills for stormwater service shall be sent at regular, periodic intervals. Billing and collection of stormwater service fees, rents, rates, charges and penalties shall be administered by the city manager/designee, who is hereby authorized to develop policies and procedures to effectuate the purpose and intent of this section. Stormwater service charges may be billed on a combined utility bill that also contains charges for water and/or sewer service. Stormwater service charges that are shown on a combined utility bill may be for a different service period than that used for water and/or sewer service. 
(3)  Billing options: The city shall have the following billing options for stormwater service charges: 
a.  Stormwater service charges for a property that receives combined sewer and water service will be sent to the customer receiving such service. However, where multiple water and sewer accounts exist for a single parcel, the bill for stormwater service charges may for good cause shown at the discretion of the city be sent to the property owner. Additional policies concerning billing will be developed by the stormwater administrator. 
b.  Owners of property may, with the consent of the city, designate each occupant of the property as the party to receive the bill for stormwater management service charge by completing and properly executing a form provided by the city. Such designation shall fairly allocate the impervious surfaces actually used by the billed party, and it shall be binding for the period of time specified by the city. Such transfer does not relieve either the owner or occupant from liability for stormwater service charges if they are not paid by the party billed. 
c.  The residents of townhouse, cluster unit, and condominium developments and other similar properties containing impervious surface in common ownership with a master water meter, the stormwater service bill shall be sent to the homeowners' association. 
d.  The residents of townhouse, cluster unit, and condominium developments and other similar properties containing impervious surface in common ownership with unit level meters, upon official request of the homeowners' association reflecting a vote in accordance with the association's bylaws, the stormwater service bill may be divided in equal shares among each unit within the development and sent to the owner or occupant of each unit. A request for per unit billing must contain all information required by the city and shall be binding for the period of time specified by the city. 
e.  The residents of townhouse, cluster unit, and condominium developments and other similar properties containing impervious surface in common ownership where there is no active homeowners' association, the stormwater service charge will be equally divided among each property with no fee being less than one ERU unless the property owners provide the city with an agreed upon division, acceptable to the city. 
(4)  No bill: Failure to receive a stormwater bill is not a basis for nonpayment. The owner of each parcel of land containing impervious surface shall be obligated to pay such fee. 
(5)  Minimum stormwater service charge: In no event will any property owner owning developed property pay less than the rate equivalent of one ERU except for zoning lots or tracts with 225 square feet or less of impervious surface area. 
(g)  Delinquencies and charges. 
(1)  Combined utility billing: Where stormwater service charges appear on a combined utility bill, and a customer does not pay the service charges for all the utilities on the bill, the partial payment will be prorated and applied to the respective utilities in the following order: delinquent stormwater management service charges, delinquent recycling service charges, delinquent combined sewer and water charges, current stormwater charges, current recycling service charges and current combined sewer and water charges. 
(2)  Non-combined and/or separate stormwater utility billing: A stormwater utility fee, charge or other billing for rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties associated with the stormwater utility shall be declared delinquent and subject to the delinquent fees and charges as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(3)  No criminal penalty: A violation of this section subjects the offender to a civil penalty pursuant to the authority granted by N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-175 and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty provisions of N.C.G.S., sec. 14-4 and section 1-5 of chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(4)  Back billing: If property is incorrectly billed, or not billed, or a bill is sent to the wrong party, the city may back bill a property for up to a three-year period. 
(h)  Appeals. 
(1)  Disputed bills: If a property owner disputes the stormwater utility charges assessed to that owner's property, that owner must first attempt to resolve the dispute with the city engineer's office. Using the information provided, the appropriate staff of the city's engineer office shall conduct a technical review pursuant to good engineering practices. Following such review, the city's stormwater administrator may adjust the stormwater service charge so long as the adjustment is in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this section. At the conclusion of the review, the stormwater administrator shall issue a written determination stating whether an adjustment to the stormwater service charge is appropriate, and if so, the percentage of such adjustment. Any approved adjustments must be communicated in writing to the city's water resources department billing staff. 
(2)  Filing of notice of appeal: If the owner is not satisfied with the resolution of the dispute, the owner may file a notice of appeal to the city's soil erosion review committee (herein "committee"), on a form provided by the office of the stormwater administrator. The notice of appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date of the service of the written decision of the stormwater administrator upon the owner. The appeal shall include a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be filed in the office of the stormwater administrator. The stormwater administrator shall transmit the written appeal along with all other documents constituting the record upon which the stormwater administrator's decision was made to the committee. 
(3)  Documents: At the discretion of the stormwater administrator, the written appeal may be required to include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and such other information that show the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to the stormwater events. 
(4)  Powers of the committee: The sole role of the committee is to review the stormwater administrator's decision for clear error. In the absence of clear error, the committee shall have no power to adjust, modify amend or reverse the decision of the stormwater administrator. 
(5)  Finality of committee's decision: The decision of the committee shall be final. This shall not prevent the owner from pursing all other remedies as by law provided, including appeal to the Asheville Board of Adjustment. 
(6)  Service: All decisions of the stormwater administrator and committee shall be served on the owner personally or by registered or certified mail. 
(7)  No suspension of due date: No provision of this subsection allowing for an appeal shall be deemed to suspend the due date of the service charge with payment in full. Any adjustment in the service charge for the person pursuing an appeal shall be made by refund of the amount due. 
(i)  Disposition of service charges and fees. Revenues generated from stormwater services utility fees, charges, rents, rates and penalties shall be assigned and dedicated solely to the stormwater services enterprise fund in the city's budget and accounting system, which shall be and remain separate from other funds, and shall be used only to fund stormwater management programs and structural and natural stormwater and drainage systems. The service charges and fees paid to and collected by virtue of the provision of this section shall not be used for general or other government or proprietary purposes of the city except to pay for costs incurred by the city in rendering services to the stormwater services utility. 
(j)  Limitations of responsibility. 
(1)  The city shall be responsible only for the portions of the drainage system which are in city maintained street rights-of-way and permanent storm drainage easements conveyed to and accepted by the city. 
(2)  The city's acquisition of storm drainage easements and/or the construction or repair by the city of drainage facilities does not constitute a warranty against stormwater hazards, including but not limited to flooding, erosion or standing water. 
(Ord. No. 3192, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 3946, § 1, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 8-26-14)  
ARTICLE XIII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-13-1. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose of sign regulations. The purpose of this article is to provide sign standards and restrictions which allow for the legitimate needs for identification of residential, office, commercial, industrial and other activities while at the same time promoting signs which do not unduly detract from the overall aesthetics of the community; which reduce intrusions and protect property values; which provide for improved public safety by minimizing undue distraction of the motoring public; which provide standards for the erection and maintenance of signs; which provide for the protection and enhancement of the tourist industry by promoting a more harmonious and pleasing community image; which provide equitably for the nature and scale of the activities to be identified; and which generally enhance and strengthen the economic stability of the City of Asheville. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to the erection and maintenance of all signs and sign structures within the jurisdiction of the City of Asheville as set forth in subsection 7-1-3(a), and it shall be unlawful following the effective date of this article to erect, maintain, or alter any sign or sign structure except in conformance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-13-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Administration. The planning and development department of the City of Asheville shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The director of planning and development shall appoint a sign administrator to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this article and all other provisions of laws relating to signs. The duties of the sign administrator shall include not only the issuance of permits as required in subsection 7-13-2(b), but also enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  General requirements. Except as otherwise provided in subsections 7-13-2(c) and 7-13-2(d) it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign or sign structure without first obtaining a sign permit. Further, no permit for a new sign may be issued on a property until any residual sign structure from a previous sign no longer in use has been removed. 
Application for the permit shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the sign administration and signed by the applicant or authorized agent. Furthermore, maintenance requirements covered under section 7-13-6 [hereinafter] shall also require a sign permit. The procedure to use to apply for a sign permit is found in section 7-5-16 of this chapter. Failure to secure a permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(2)  Licenses. 
a.  Sign contractor's license. No person shall engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued a sign contractor's license which has not expired at the time said work is done. This requirement shall be interpreted to exclude those persons who construct and erect a principal use identification sign when that sign is used at that person's place of business, provided all construction and installation is properly permitted and inspected for compliance with the applicable building codes of the City of Asheville and other provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Outdoor advertising license. No person shall erect or maintain off-premises advertising structures in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued an outdoor advertising license which has not expired at the time said work is done. In order to obtain an outdoor advertising license, the licensee must be a licensed sign contractor, as described in subsection 7-13-2(b)(2)a. above, and must submit annually upon renewal of this license a listing of all sign structures leased, owned or maintained by the licensee. Such list shall give the specific location of each sign by reference to lot number as indicated on the Buncombe County tax maps and by reference to the name of the property owner. 
(c)  Signs exempt from regulation. Unless otherwise prohibited hereinafter in subsection 7-13-3(a) or section 7-13-6, the following signs are exempt from regulation under this article: 
(1)  Signs which are not designed to be visible beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which they are located and/or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, except as such signs may be regulated hereinafter. 
(2)  Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties; governmental signs; and signs installed under governmental authority which note the donation of buildings, structures or streetscape materials (such as, but not limited to, benches, trash cans, lampposts and park facilities). 
(3)  Flags, with insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county or city, any religious, civic or fraternal organization, or any educational or cultural facility and/or any one corporate flag per lot. 
(3.1)  American flags flown in accordance with federal guidelines set forth in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the United States Code. 
(4)  Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday/celebration. 
(5)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices or signs providing directions around such conditions. 
(6)  Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services which are incorporated as an integral part of a window display. 
(7)  Unless such signs are used in a manner prohibited under section 7-13-3 hereinafter, signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers, or other vehicles which are being operated in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name of the owner or business and which are affixed or painted onto moving vans, delivery trucks, contractors' vehicles and equipment and the like, are exempt from regulation, provided that, when not being so operated, such vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles and in such a manner and location on the lot so as to minimize their visibility from any street to the greatest extent feasible. All such vehicles must have current and valid registration and inspection. 
(8)  Trademarks or product names which are displayed as part of vending machines, dispensing machines, machines and gasoline pumps. 
(9)  Signs required for or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. These signs may be of any type, number, area, height above grade, location or illumination authorized by law, statute or ordinance under which such signs are required or authorized. 
(10)  Signs that display information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general public with regard to a particular piece of property shall be located on the premises to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a sign. 
(11)  Signs attached to buildings existing as of August 28, 1990 which identify buildings and which are permanently integrated by etching, embossing and/or engraving or which are otherwise permanently made a part of building façades. These signs specifically include, but are not limited to, commemorative cornerstones. 
(12)  Signs designated to be historically significant and/or landmark signs by the city council provided the signs satisfy one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  The sign is significant to the history of the City of Asheville, including, but not limited to, the character of the city as a tourist attraction or cultural center. 
b.  The sign is unique, notably aesthetic, or creative so as to make a significant contribution as a work of art. 
c.  The sign merits recognition as an important example of technology, craftsmanship, materials or design of the period in which it was constructed and may no longer be economically feasible to produce or manufacture the sign today. 
(13)  Temporary signs providing directions or other information in conjunction with a community festival or event permitted under section 16-97 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(14)  Signs affixed to windows of vehicles displaying the terms of sale of said vehicles. 
(15)  Signs approved as part of the city's officially adopted Wayfinding program. 
(d)  Signs exempt from permit requirements. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below as well as to other applicable requirements of this article. 
(1)  Real estate signs. Temporary signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the property on which said signs are located are allowed, provided such signs are nonilluminated and do not exceed two signs per lot, do not exceed four feet in height and do not exceed four square feet per face for property zoned residential or do not exceed eight feet in height and do not exceed 32 square feet per face for property zoned other than residential. All such signs shall be removed within seven days after the closing of the sale, rental, or lease of the property. A minimum setback of ten feet is required for any real estate sign greater than ten square feet per face. There is no minimum setback requirement for real estate signs containing ten square feet or less. 
(2)  Commemorative signs. Commemorative signs which do not exceed eight square feet per face in area and eight feet in height. 
(3)  Directional signs. Directional signs shall be located on the premises to which directions are indicated. Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet per face, two faces per sign, and shall not exceed three feet in height if freestanding. Directional signs shall not be located on the roof of any structure. The maximum number of directional signs allowed per lot shall be four. These signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(4)  Incidental signs. Signs containing information necessary or convenient for persons coming on to a premises shall be located on the premises to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a sign and these signs shall be single-faced only and wholly attached to a building (including the windows or doors). If advertising (name or logo) is used on these signs it shall be computed as part of the total allowable signage for a lot. 
(5)  Copy changes and maintenance. No permit shall be required for copy changes made to a changeable copy sign, menu board, marquee sign or off-premises sign; provided any such changes do not change the classification of the sign under this article. 
(6)  Political signs. Signs for candidates or election for issues on a ballot shall be allowed in any zoning district providing such signs do not exceed equity square feet in area per display face and two faces per sign. All such signs may not be erected prior to 30 days before the first official day of polling for the appropriate primary, or 45 days before the appropriate general or run-off referendum and must be removed within five days after the primary, general or run-off election or referendum. Provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the use of off-premises signs for such candidates or issues according to the restrictions for such signs in zoning districts where they are permitted. Such off-premises signs shall not be subject to the time limits for erection prior to removal following any election. In all cases, the property owner and the political candidate shall be equally responsible for the removal of the signs. 
(7)  Construction signs. 
a.  Freestanding construction signs: Shall be allowed provided such signs do not exceed one sign per street frontage with a maximum of two signs per construction site. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per display face, two faces per sign for single-family or duplex residential construction or 32 square feet in area per display face for multi-family residential or non-residential construction, and a maximum of ten feet in height. A minimum setback of ten feet is required. 
b.  Construction signs attached to construction screening: When used in lieu of a freestanding construction sign, construction signage may be attached to construction screening materials. Signs may only show the following: 
i.  Images and/or renderings of the project as it is to be constructed; 
ii.  Approved site and/or landscaping plans; 
iii.  The name and contact information of developer(s), contractors and/or financiers engaged in work on the site. 
c.  Construction signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building grading permit and shall be removed within seven days of the issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
(8)  Automatic teller machine signs. Signs contained on automatic teller machines which do not exceed 15 square feet in area per machine. 
(9)  Push cart signs. Signs contained on vendor push carts which do not exceed 15 square feet in area per push cart. 
(10)  Umbrella signs. Umbrella signs are non-illuminated signs painted or printed on umbrellas. The umbrellas on which such signs are painted or printed shall be located only at lawfully permitted outdoor eating or drinking places. Umbrellas shall not be erected at an acute angle for the purpose of serving as signage. Umbrella signs shall be located on the umbrella itself and shall not be suspended from or otherwise hang from an umbrella. The signage contained on any one umbrella sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of the umbrella cloth. 
(11)  Noncommercial messages. Any sign, display, or device allowed under this article may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, and that complies with size, lighting, and spacing requirements of this article. 
(12)  Business signs on vehicles. Signs displaying a business name, trademark, or other identifier shall be allowed provided the vehicles are moved periodically during the normal course of business and maintain a current and valid registration and inspection. When not in use and parked on the business property, said vehicles are to be parked in properly striped parking spaces or loading zones and shall not obscure the visibility of any adjacent business sign(s). When parked off-site, said vehicles shall be parked in such a manner so as to minimize their visibility from the street and other public properties. 
(13)  Advertisements on city buses. Advertisements on city buses must be consistent with current city policy. 
(14)  Signs for temporary uses. Signs shall be allowed in conjunction with lawfully established temporary uses in all districts. Such signs must be located on the parcel on which the temporary use is occurring and may be attached or freestanding. Portable or moveable signs are not permitted. Temporary uses may be permitted up to two signs. These signs shall not exceed a cumulative total of 32 square feet in area in nonresidential districts or on property occupied by an institutional use in a residential district. In residential districts, signs for temporary uses, other than those on properties occupied by an institutional use, shall not exceed a cumulative total of four square feet in area. Signs for temporary uses are allowed for the duration of the temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2377, § 1, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2777, §§ 1(c)—1(e), 12-19-00; Ord. No. 3276, § 1(b), 8-9-05; Ord. No. 3571, § 1(b), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3642, §§ 1c—f, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3677, § 1b, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 3792, § 1c, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 4064, §§ 1a, b, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4208, § 1b, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 4416, § 1b, 5-26-15)  
Sec. 7-13-3. - Signs prohibited or requiring additional standards in all zoning districts. 
The following signs and/or sign features shall not be erected or maintained in any zoning district within the planning and regulation jurisdiction of the City of Asheville. The board of adjustment shall not have the authority to grant variances so as to allow prohibited signs to be installed. 
(1)  Signs on roadside appurtenances. On- or off-premises signs on roadside appurtenances, including, but not limited to roadside benches, bus stop shelters, planters, utility poles, trees, parking meter poles and refuse containers, with the exception of commemorative signs or governmental signs. 
(2)  Signs located in the city right-of-way. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, all signs whether temporary or permanent, within any street right-of-way are prohibited; provided, further, projecting signs and community identification signs, which are permitted under subsection (b) hereafter, are not prohibited. In addition, signs providing directions to places of worship, public auditoriums, or to properties designated as local or national historic properties are not prohibited provided they meet the following standards: they may be double-faced and no larger than two square feet per face, two faces per sign, and limited to nine feet in height, with the maximum height to be determined by city staff based on such factors as, but not limited to, topography and sight distance at or near to the sign location, and shall be allowed only by permit issued by the city planning and development department in conjunction with approval from the city's traffic engineer, and shall be limited to two signs permitted per church, public auditorium, or historic property. 
Additionally, written notification is required to the immediately adjacent property owner upon the city receiving an application for a sign in the right-of-way. 
Furthermore, marquee signs used for the purpose of advertising current and scheduled events and information for a theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or combination of the same and located in the right-of-way in front of and within 100 feet of the entrance to the theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or combination of the same for which the sign(s) provide(s) such advertising and/or information are not hereby prohibited if located in the right-of-way of the abutting road within 100 feet of the Vance Monument in the central business district. Said marquee signs shall meet all dimensional requirements for marquee signs as set forth in subsection 7-13-4(b). The location of said marquee signs shall be approved by the department of public works. 
Additionally, signs within any city street right-of-way which designate the right-of-way as being maintained by a certain person and/or in recognition of a certain person are not hereby prohibited and said signage shall be allowed only by permit issued by the city upon issuance of an encroachment agreement by the public works department, approval by the traffic engineer and the planning and development department. Said recognition signs shall not exceed six square feet per face, two faces per sign, nor be taller than four feet in height. 
Signs located in NCDOT right-of-way. No traffic control device or its support shall bear any advertising or commercial signage or any message that is not essential to traffic control. Any unauthorized sign placed within NCDOT rights-of-way by a private organization or individual constitutes a public nuisance and is strictly prohibited as outlined in the North Carolina Administrative Code 19A NCAC 2E.0415 (Advertising signs within right-of-way). Enforcement of this provision is primarily the responsibility of the NCDOT; provided, however, nothing herein shall preempt any right the city may have to enforce this provision or preclude the city from enforcing this provision. 
(3)  Signs or advertisements on vehicles. Signs or advertisements placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign are prohibited. 
(4)  Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited; provided, however, signs on the surfaces of a mansard roof and on parapets shall not be hereby prohibited provided the signs do not extend higher than the height restriction for on-premises freestanding signs in the zoning district in which the sign is located and provided that the signs do not extend above the mansard roof or parapet to which they are attached. The triangular portion of the wall enclosed by the sloping ends of a gable roof will be considered to be a part of the building wall. 
(5)  Wind signs. Wind signs as defined under section 7-2-5 of this chapter shall be prohibited except as allowed in subsections 7-13-4(a)(8) and (13) of this article. 
(6)  Off-premises signs—Some districts. Off-premises signs in all single-family residential zoning districts and in the Office, Office Business, Community Business I, Neighborhood Business, and Central Business Districts. 
(7)  Off-premises signs—Historic districts/properties. Off-premises signs in national and local historic districts or on national or local historic properties. 
(8)  Off-premises signs along scenic drives. Off-premises signs designed to be visible from streets designated by the Asheville City Council as "scenic drives" and/or "parkways." 
(9)  Off-premises signs along federal aid primary and interstate system. Off-premises signs which are within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way and visible from the maintained traveled way of the federal aid primary and interstate system, all as described in the Federal Highway Beautification Assistance Act of 1979, as amended, and which are constructed or erected on or after the effective date of this chapter. Provided, further, off-premises signs located specifically as described hereinbefore which were erected prior to the effective date of this chapter are not prohibited from continuing, not withstanding their nonconformance with regulations of this chapter, other than conformance with the maintenance provisions set forth in section 7-13-6 hereinafter. 
(10)  Signs of illusion. Signs with optical illusion of movement by means of a design which presents a pattern capable of reversible perspective, giving the illusion of motion. 
(11)  Signs resembling traffic signals. Signs displaying intermittent light resembling the flashing light customarily used in traffic signals, or used by police, fire ambulance, or other emergency vehicles, nor shall any sign use the word "stop," "danger," or any other words, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that might be misconstrued as a public safety warning or traffic sign. 
(12)  Animated signs and flashing signs. 
(13)  Abandoned signs or sign structures. 
(14)  Signs obstructing access. Signs which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a driveway or a required door, window, fire escape or other required exitway. 
(15)  Sandwich board signs. Except in the Central Business District as permitted under the standards for A-frame signs found in subsection 7-13-4(a)(8) of this chapter. 
(16)  Portable or moveable display signs. 
(17)  Flags, decorative or otherwise, may not be used in conjunction with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device, or as an integral part of a sign regulated under this article. Flags that comply with the provisions as set forth in section 7-13-2(c)(3) of this chapter are not subject to this subsection. 
(18)  Snipe signs. See section 10-101 of the City of Asheville Code of Ordinances. 
(19)  Non-conforming, off-premises signs - Digital. Digital, non-conforming, off-premises signs are prohibited within the City of Asheville's jurisdiction. Any existing digital, non-conforming, off-premises sign that was properly permitted may be maintained as a non-conforming sign but may not be replaced or relocated. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2377, § 2, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2407, § 3, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 2426, § 1, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2742, § 1(a), 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2777, §§ 1(f), 1(g), 12-19-00; Ord. No. 3043, § 1(a), 7-22-03; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(9), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3642, §§ 1g, h, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3677, § 1c, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 4064, § 1d, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4085, § 1a, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 4228, §§ 1a, b, 8-27-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4228, § 1a, adopted Aug. 27, 2013, changed the title of § 7-13-3 from "Signs prohibited in all zoning districts" to "Signs prohibited or requiring additional standards in all zoning districts."  
Sec. 7-13-4. - On-premises signs. 
(a)  General provisions for on-premises signs. Following the effective date of this chapter, on-premises signs shall not be erected or maintained in any zoning district except in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Computation of sign area. 
a.  The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest figure consisting of no more than eight contiguous rectilinear lines which encompass all lettering, wording design or symbols, together with any background on which the sign is located and any illuminated part of the sign, if such background or such illuminated part of the sign is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Any cutouts or extensions shall be included in the area of the sign, but supports and bracing which are not intended as part of the sign shall be excluded. In the case of a multi-faced sign, the area of the sign shall be considered to include all faces visible from one direction. 
b.  The space between one identification sign and one changeable copy sign on a signpost or structure or attached to a building shall not be included in the total square footage if both signs serve a single business located on the lot. The space between two or more changeable copy components of a sign or between two or more permanent copy components of a sign shall be included, however, in the total square footage of sign area allowed. 
c.  Where three-dimensional figures are used as signs, the area shall be the total of all sides made an integral part of the projected figure used in conveying the intended message. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Encroachment into right-of-way. No part of any sign shall be located on or extended into a public right-of-way except as projecting signs are allowed by this article. 
(4)  Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic resources commission shall be required prior to the issuance of a sign permit for all signs located in local historic districts and on historic landmark properties. 
(5)  Time/date/temperature signs. Time, date and temperature signs which do not exceed ten square feet per face shall not be included in the allowable sign area, provided, however, if an existing freestanding sign is located on the lot, then the time, date and temperature sign must be incorporated into the existing freestanding sign. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of such signs to maintain such signs and insure that they are kept accurate. If these conditions are not met, the sign shall be repaired or removed. 
(6)  Signs for nonconforming uses. Signs for nonconforming uses, where such uses may be continued, shall be allowed, but shall comply with all regulations for signs in the zoning district where such signs are located. 
(7)  Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any light used for illumination shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine into surrounding areas or on the public roadway. 
b.  Neither direct nor reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
(8)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts as follows: 
a.  Temporary signs which are affixed to the inside of a window and which do not exceed a cumulative total for all such signs of 16 square feet in area are allowed, without a permit, for each business. 
b.  Temporary signs affixed to the inside of windows and which exceed a cumulative total for all such signs of 16 square feet in area or, temporary signs which are freestanding or attached to a structure, other than at the inside of a window, shall be allowed twice a year per business shall be allowed for up to 60 days or may be divided into to a maximum of six separate ten-day occurrences, not to exceed 60 days in total. These signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall require a sign permit and shall be allowed for a time period of 30 days for each sign permitted. No time extensions shall be granted. 
c.  A-frame signs shall be permitted as temporary signs in the central business, neighborhood corridor, urban village, urban place, and urban residential zoning districts and the Biltmore Village Historic District provided that they comply with the following standards: 
1.  A-frame signs shall be a minimum of 28 inches tall and shall not exceed 48 inches in height. A-frame signs shall not exceed 24 inches in width. The A-frame structure shall be a minimum of 18 inches in width. 
2.  Businesses are permitted one A-frame sign per operable public entrance located on separate road frontages, in addition to all other signage permitted by this chapter provided all requirements for A-frame signs set forth in this section are met. 
3.  A-frame signs shall contain information and advertising for the business placing the sign only and shall not contain any endorsement or logos for any other business. 
4.  A-frame signs shall not block building entrances or exits and shall meet wind and safety standards. 
5.  A-frame signs shall have a locking arm or other device to stabilize the structure. 
6.  A-frame signs shall comply with requirements of Chapter 10 of the North Carolina Accessibility Code. 
7.  A-frame signs shall be displayed only during the hours of operation of the business being advertised. 
8.  A-frame signs shall be located abutting the building or the curb of the street. 
9.  A-frame signs shall not block access to parking spaces or block traffic lanes. 
10.  Prior to the placement of an A-frame sign, the business placing the sign shall provide verification of an insurance rider with the City of Asheville in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
11.  A minimum sidewalk clearance of six feet in width must be maintained. 
12.  A-frame signs shall comply with the sight visibility triangle requirements set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
13.  A temporary sign permit shall be required for A-frame signs in accordance with subsection 7-13-2(b) of this chapter. The temporary sign permit for A-frame signs shall be valid from time of issuance until the annual renewal of A-frame sign permits which occurs on July 1st of each year. 
14.  Businesses with street level public access shall place their A-frame sign(s) within the tenant frontage of the business. 
15.  Multi-tenant developments shall be permitted one A-frame sign per each common exterior public business entrance. 
16.  A-frame signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
17.  A-frame signs shall be spaced a minimum of 15 linear feet from all other permitted A-frame signs. 
18.  The City of Asheville may require the temporary removal of A-frame signs for special events. 
d.  Signs made of a temporary material may be permitted as a permanent sign for a period of up to six months, with a possible extension of up to an additional six months as approved by the planning director, provided all other applicable standards are met. 
(9)  Inflatable balloon sign. One inflatable balloon sign shall be allowed per commercial or industrial zoning district, limited to once a year per business. This limitation shall not apply, however, to community festivals or events permitted by the City of Asheville pursuant to section 16-97 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. Further, inflatable balloon signs shall not be internally illuminated; shall not be higher than 25 feet above grade; and shall not be erected or maintained on a building parapet or roof. The time allowed for these signs shall not exceed ten days. These signs shall be located on either an attached, tethered or freestanding structure. The sign and its structure shall not block or inhibit the visibility of vehicular traffic or in any way pose a danger to pedestrians or vehicular traffic or property. The sign may advertise a product, service, or sponsor affiliated with the event or the event itself. 
(10)  Visibility. No sign or structure shall be erected or maintained to impede safe and adequate visibility from vehicles or for pedestrians. 
(11)  Signs for tall buildings. Buildings which are seven stories or greater in height shall be allowed one wall sign per side, not to exceed four sides, which signs shall be located at the seventh story or above and shall not exceed 125 square feet per sign. These signs shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the attached signs permitted for the zoning district wherein the building is located; provided, however, individual tenants with building frontage at the first floor (or street level) only shall be allowed tenant identification signs as set forth in subsection 7-13-4(c) hereinafter. 
(12)  Additional freestanding sign. Any business which has street frontage of less than 50 feet along a street shall be allowed one additional freestanding sign on its lot provided that the additional freestanding sign was erected under a valid permit prior to August 28, 1990 and, provided further, that one of the freestanding signs is located more than 200 feet from the street and that both freestanding signs conform with the provisions of this article. 
(13)  Wind signs. Wind signs shall be permitted in the central business district, in local historic districts, and in Level II and Level III projects developments which are retail shopping centers subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Wind signs shall be limited to one sign per pole, mastarm or other device and maintained in good condition without fraying, tearing or fading. 
b.  Wind signs shall be constructed of nylon, canvas or plastic material. 
c.  Each wind sign must be at least eight square feet in area and less than 24 square feet in area and all banners on the same lot must be consistent in colors and materials. 
d.  No wind sign may contain a commercial advertising message, name, or logo. 
e.  Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. 
(14)  Light emitting diode (LED) signs. LED signs shall be permitted for all changeable copy, time and temperature, and marquee signs as defined in 7-2-5 of this chapter and are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  All digital LED signs must comply with all other applicable standards set forth in this article. 
b.  No sign may be placed within 100 feet of a residential zoning district. 
c.  The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any other sign. The image shall be static with all animation, streaming video, flashing, scrolling, fading, and other illusions of motion otherwise prohibited. 
d.  No sign shall be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility and shall not exceed a maximum of 5,000 nits during the day and 500 nits during nighttime hours. 
e.  No sign may display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of the driver or result in a nuisance to a driver. 
f.  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal. 
g.  All signs must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell that automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
h.  Prior to issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 5,000 nits and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method determined appropriate by the planning director. 
i.  No more than fifty percent of the allowable detached sign face may be devoted to a digital changeable copy sign. Theaters and other public event facilities may exceed this standard so that eighty percent of the sign may be devoted to the digital marquee sign. 
j.  All digital marquee signs located in the Central Business District (CBD) must be reviewed by the downtown commission for conformance with all applicable design guidelines prior to the issuance of a new sign permit. 
k.  The images and messages displayed on a digital marquee sign in the CBshall remain static for a minimum of six seconds. 
l.  Digital or LED changeable copy messages shall remain static for a minimum of four hours. 
m.  Any sign found to be out of compliance with any standard of this section must be stopped immediately. Failure to comply would constitute non-compliance and would be subject to enforcement action set forth in subsection 7-18-2(b)(1). 
(15)  Real estate signs on multi-story buildings. Any building with three or more stories may be permitted one real estate banner provided that they comply with the following standards: 
a.  Must be made of a lightweight, flexible, all-weather material. 
b.  Signs shall be displayed for a period of time no greater than 120 days. 
c.  The square footage of the sign shall be a maximum of ten percent of the square footage of the wall face from which it hangs. Wall face measurements shall exclude elevator and stairwell towers, maintenance rooms and structured parking. 
d.  Regardless of wall face measurements, no sign may exceed 400 square feet. 
e.  Sign shall not hang lower than twenty feet above grade. 
f.  Sign shall be attached to the building for which it is advertising available space. 
g.  Signs shall not block or cover windows, mechanical openings, or interfere with equipment. 
h.  Sign should reflect the proportions of the wall on which it is attached. For example, a wall that is taller than wide shall dictate a sign that is the same. 
i.  No more than 20 percent of the sign face may be used to advertise a real estate office or logo, excluding phone numbers. 
j.  Large banner signs will be reviewed and permitted as permanent signs and shall meet all applicable standards of the NC Building Code & Fire Code. 
(16)  Special event signage. Members of a business association or civic group may place a single temporary sign for a special event on their property subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The duration of the event shall not exceed three days. 
b.  The sign is located on-premises. 
c.  The sign may be an attached sign or a wind sign. 
d.  The size of the sign or wind sign is limited to 12 square feet per face with two faces permitted. 
e.  The permit may cover a single event or a recurring series of events for a period not to exceed 30 days on a yearly basis. 
f.  Wind signs placed over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over driveway areas shall be a minimum of 14 feet. 
(b)  On-premises signs: Single tenant development. The following sign regulations shall be applicable within the zoning districts indicated for single tenant development. Any sign not specifically allowed shall be deemed as prohibited. 
(1)  Signage for all residential zoning districts (RS-2, RS-4, RS-8, RM-6, RM-8, RM-16). 
a.  Signs allowed for nonresidential uses (excluding home occupations) within these zoning districts may be either: 
Freestanding: 
	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy 
Attached: 	
	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Suspended or transom 
	Awning/canopy 
	Changeable copy 
 
b.  One business or product identification sign is allowed per lot for nonresidential uses. For freestanding or attached signs, the total allowable area per face of selected signs (excluding home occupation signs) shall not exceed 15 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. Signs may be either internally or externally illuminated. Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected. 
1.  If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of six feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet. Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way and shall not be located within a sight visibility triangle. 
2.  If projecting: Sign (excluding awning/canopy signs) shall not project more than three feet from the façade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys, or driveways shall be at a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
3.  If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 7-13-4(a)8. hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of a building. 
4.  If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
5.  If suspended or transom: Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet. 
c.  Subdivision and multi-family development identification signs may contain the name of the development only and must either be freestanding ground signs or attached wall signs. If the signs are freestanding ground signs, the height shall be limited to six feet from grade and the minimum setback shall be ten feet. Only two entrances to the development may have a sign. The main entrance sign shall have no more than 16 square feet per face, two faces per sign. The secondary entrance sign shall have no more than eight square feet per face, two faces per sign. Only two sign faces shall be allowed at each entrance, however, said sign faces may be on two individual sign structures. 
d.  Places of worship, schools and institutions located in residential zoning districts are allowed a total of 60 square feet of signage to be located on a maximum of two signs, only one of which may be freestanding. One of the allowed signs may contain a changeable copy panel. No signs may contain more than 30 square feet per face with two faces per sign and a maximum of six feet in height and a minimum setback of ten feet. 
e.  Attached home occupation signs shall not exceed one square foot per face, with no more than two faces per sign, and shall not be illuminated. 
f.  Community identification signs are allowed provided they contain the name of the community and must be either a freestanding pole or a ground sign. The height of the sign shall be limited to nine feet, measured from grade to the top of the sign, with the maximum height to be determined by city staff based on such factors as, but not limited to, topography and sight distance at or near the sign location. The minimum setback shall be ten feet from the leading face of the curb or edge of the pavement of the street to the closest portion of the sign. These signs shall be allowed within a city street right-of-way upon issuance of a sign permit by the city planning and development department and with the approval of the city's traffic engineer. Additionally, the sign owner shall provide written notification to the immediately adjacent property owner at the same time an application is submitted to the city for such sign in the right-of-way. 
Each community shall be permitted one identification sign which shall have no more than 24 square feet per face, two faces per sign. Each sign face may also contain community facility identification panels on the sign which shall be included within the 24 square foot maximum and provided that the sign face that identifies the community may be no larger than 16 square feet. These additional panels shall only identify specific community facilities located within that community. 
(2)  Signage for all nonresidential zoning districts. 
a.  Signs allowed in nonresidential zoning districts may be either: 
Freestanding: 
	Pole (except in Urban Residential District) 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy (except in Central Business District and Urban Residential District) 
	Marquee (only in Central Business District as permitted) 
	Menu board 
Attached: 	
	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/canopy 
	Suspended or transom 
	Changeable copy (except in Central Business District and Urban Residential District) 
	Marquee (only in Central Business District as permitted) 
	Menu board 
 
b.  The sign(s) shall meet the following requirements based on the zoning district in which it is located. 
Zoning District 	Max. Hgt. 
Allowed 	Max. Sq. Footage per face 
Office I & II, Office Business, Institutional, Resort 	8 ft. 	60 sq. ft. 
CB-II, HB, RB, River CI, Industrial 	25 ft. 	125 sq. ft. 
NBD, CBI, NCD, Urban Residential 	12 ft. 	40 sq. ft. 
CBD, Urban Village 	20 ft. 	50 sq. ft. 
 
c.  Two business or product identification signs are allowed per lot, only one of which shall be a freestanding pole or ground sign, however, the allowed square footage of an attached sign may be divided into a maximum of two signs. Corner lots are allowed one additional attached sign on separate street frontage. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Freestanding signs may have a maximum of two faces per sign. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  Setbacks for freestanding pole or ground signs shall be a minimum of ten feet. However, in the event that the board of adjustment grants a variance for a sign to be larger than 125 square feet, the minimum setback requirement would be 15 feet. There shall be no minimum setback requirement for freestanding signs in the central business district. Signs shall not be located in any public right-of-way and shall not be located within a sight visibility triangle. 
f.  If projecting: Signs excluding awning/canopy signs) shall not project more than three feet from the façade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys, or driveways shall be at a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
g.  If suspended or transom: Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet. 
h.  If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with subsection 7-13-4(a)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
i.  If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
j.  If menu board: One external menu boards with one face is allowed per drive lane with a maximum of two per restaurant (in addition to its allowed signage as previously described). The total sign area for a menu board shall not exceed 32 square feet. These signs shall not be located so that the copy is designed to be visible to vehicular traffic from the roadway. The minimum setback shall be ten feet. 
k.  For any lot which has no street frontage along, but which is within 400 feet of the edge of the paved portion of Tunnel Road, Patton Avenue, or Hendersonville Road, the permitted size and height of a freestanding sign on that property shall be allowed to be increased by 20 percent of the allowed square footage and height for that zoning district. Provided, however, that any sign so constructed shall be at least 100 feet from the nearest edge of the paved portion of the roads listed hereinbefore. 
l.  In the central business district (CBD), marquee signs shall be allowed as an exception to the square footage allowed above. Marquee signs shall be allowed a maximum of 95 square feet per face, two faces per sign, for the allowed freestanding or attached sign. Marquee signs must meet the criteria as set forth by the definition of marquee sign in section 7-2-5 of this chapter and height and placement standards outlined in section 7-13-3(2). 
(3)  Commercial subdivision signs. In all non-residential zoning districts, major commercial subdivisions that have been approved by the planning and development director (or his designee) will be allowed one freestanding sign that advertises the name of the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed 60 square feet in area per face, with a maximum of two faces per sign, and is limited to eight feet in height, with a ten-foot minimum setback requirement. Commercial subdivision signs must advertise the name of the subdivision. However, tenants within the subdivision may also advertise on the sign, provided that said tenants utilize 50 percent of the allowed square footage or less. At least 50 percent of the allowed square footage must be used to advertise the name of the subdivision. Such a sign must be located on a parcel that is associated with the approved subdivision. This sign shall be allowed in addition to the signage allowed hereinbefore. 
(c)  On-premises signs: multiple tenant development: The following sign regulations shall be applicable within the zoning districts indicated for multiple tenant development. Any sign not specifically allowed is prohibited. 
(a)  Multiple tenant development may erect either a development identification or joint identification sign. In addition, tenant identification sign for individual tenants within a development are allowed. 
(b)  For a multiple tenant development, the development itself is allowed one identification sign, either freestanding (maximum of two faces per sign), or attached for each property boundary with street frontage with a maximum of two identification signs allowed per development. All other permitted tenant identification signs as allowed in subsection 7-13-4(c)(b)2. must be attached to the building(s). 
1.  Development and joint identification signs. 
a.  Where a development or joint identification sign is selected, such as sign may be of the following types. 
Freestanding: Pole (except in Urban Residential District), Ground, Changeable copy (except in Central Business District and Urban Residential District) 
Attached: Wall, Projecting, Window, Awning/canopy, Suspended or transom 
b.  The sign(s) shall meet the following requirement based on the zoning district in which it is located. 
Zoning District 	Maximum 
Height 
Allowed 	Maximum 
Size 
Per 
Face 	Maximum Height Secondary FreestandingIdentification Sign 
Residential (all districts) 	6 ft. 	25 sq. ft. 	3 feet or ground sign 
Office I & II, Office Business 
INST, Resort 	8 ft. 	90 sq. ft. 	4 feet or ground sign 
CB II, HB, RB, River, CI, IND, Light IND, Airport 	25 ft. 	200 sq. ft. 	12.5 feet or ground sign 
CBD, Urban Village 	20 ft. 	75 sq. ft. 	10 feet or ground sign 
NBD, CBI, NCD, URD, UP 	12 ft. 	60 sq. ft. 	6 feet or ground sign 
 
c.  Setbacks for freestanding development or joint identification signs in all zoning districts (except the Central Business District) shall be determined using the following requirements. 
1.  Signs that are 125 square feet in area or less will be required a ten-foot minimum setback. 
2.  Signs that are greater than 125 square feet in area will be required a fifteen foot minimum setback. 
3.  There shall be no minimum setback requirement for freestanding identification signs in the Central Business District (CBD). 
4.  Signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way and shall not be located within a sight visibility triangle. 
2.  Tenant identification signs. 
a.  Tenants in a multi-tenant development shall not be permitted to have their own freestanding sign. Tenant identification signs shall be of the following types of attached signs: 
Wall 
Awning 
Projecting 
Window 
Suspended or transom 
Changeable copy (except in Central Business District and Urban Residential District) 
b.  One attached sign is allowed for each exterior public business entrance which must be located on the façade with the public entrance for that business. The total allowable sign area for the building frontage having the primary business entrance shall be 25 square feet or one square foot per one linear foot of said building frontage, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the area be greater than the maximum square footage per face allowed for a development or joint identification sign in the zoning district where the business is located. Each secondary business entrance shall be allowed a total sign area of one square foot per three linear feet of building frontage where the secondary business entrance is located. A maximum of two secondary business signs is allowed. Signs may be illuminated internally or externally. 
A building meeting the definition of pedestrian-oriented design, as set forth in article II, will be permitted to divide the primary sign square footage into two separate attached sign faces. 
c.  Where two tenants share a common entrance, each tenant will be allowed one attached sign, not to exceed 25 square feet, on the portion of the building that the tenant occupies. Where more than two tenants share a common entrance, each tenant will be allowed one window sign, not to exceed 25 square feet. 
d.  If a tenant in a multi-tenant development subleases a space within the operational area of the unit to a sub-tenant, and the sub-tenant occupies less than 25 percent of the gross floor area of that unit, then the larger tenant will maintain its allowance for a tenant sign as provided in subsection (b). The subtenant will be allowed a tenant sign not to exceed 25 square feet. In the event that more than one sub-tenant exists, then all tenants will be limited to a 25 square foot window sign as described in the preceding subsection (c) regarding shared entrances. 
e.  If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
f.  If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy and marquee signs) shall not project more than three feet from the façade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys, or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line or building parapet. 
g.  If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with subsection 7-13-4(a)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of the building. 
h.  If suspended or transom: Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2407, § 4, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 2426, § 2, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2616, § 1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2742, § 1(b), 9-12-00; Ord. No. 2777, §§ 1(a), 1(b), 1(h), 12-19-00; Ord. No. 3043, §§ 1(b)—(g), 7-22-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(10), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(q), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(o), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3642, § 1i—o, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3677, § 1d, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 3714, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3715, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3742, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3773, §§ 1a, b, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3774, § 1c, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 4064, §§ 1c, h—j, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4208, § 1c, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 4228, § 1c, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 7-13-5. - Off-premises signs. 
(a)  General provisions for off-premises signs. Following August 28, 1990, off-premises signs shall not be erected, or maintained in any zoning district except in compliance with the provisions set forth in this article. 
(1)  Computation of sign area. 
a.  The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangular figure which encompasses all lettering, wording, frame, design or symbols, together with any background on which the sign is located and any illuminated part of the sign, if such background or such illuminated part of the sign is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Any cutouts or extensions shall be included in the area of a sign, but supports and bracing which are not intended as part of the sign shall be excluded. In the case of a multi-faced sign, the area of the sign shall be considered to include all faces visible from one direction. 
b.  Where three-dimensional figures are used as or on signs, the area shall be the total of all sides made an integral part of the projected figure used in conveying the intended message. 
(2)  Encroachment into the right-of-way. No part of any sign shall be located on, or extended into, a public right-of-way unless it can meet the following criteria: 
a.  The property is located along a city right-of-way with a width greater than 75 feet. 
b.  No part of the sign footer or structure is located closer than 25 feet from the edge of pavement. 
c.  The city's traffic engineer has determined that the sign would not create any traffic hazard. 
d.  The sign does not conflict with any utility or traffic control device. 
e.  The sign complies with all height and square footage allowances. 
(3)  Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any light used for the illumination shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly into surrounding areas or on the public roadway. 
b.  Neither direct nor reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
(4)  Visibility. No sign or structure shall be erected or maintained to impede safe and adequate visibility from vehicles or for pedestrians. 
(5)  Extensions. No extension(s) shall be allowed beyond those dimensions for the sign area as initially permitted. 
(b)  Off-premises signs by zoning districts. The following sign regulations shall be applicable within the zoning districts wherein off-premises signs are allowed. Any sign not specifically allowed is prohibited. 
In the Community Business II, Highway Business, Regional Business, River, Commercial Industrial, and Industrial District off-premises signs are allowed subject to the restrictions set forth herein. 
(1)  Size. No off-premises sign shall exceed six square feet per directional flow of traffic 12 square feet total per sign structure). In no event shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a larger off-premises sign. 
(2)  Height. No off-premises sign shall exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Spacing. 
a.  The minimum distance between any two sign structures shall be 1,000 linear feet on either side of the same street. 
b.  No off-premises sign shall be located within a 200-foot radius of a school, place of worship, public park, national park and/or forest land(s) or bridge. 
c.  No off-premises sign shall be located within nor cause obstruction to the sight visibility triangles of street intersections as described in subsection 7-11-3(g) of this chapter. 
d.  No off-premises sign shall be located within a 100-foot radius of a property zoned single-family residential or property in a multi-family zone that is in single-family residential use. 
e.  No off-premises sign shall be located within 50 feet of any building or on-premises sign. 
(4)  Setback. Minimum setback shall be ten feet. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(c)  Second tier development signage. Properties located one lot back from a thoroughfare with no direct frontage and having shared access with adjacent or adjoining parcels may share space on an adjacent property's freestanding sign in lieu of the second tier property's freestanding sign allowance, or may erect a sign on that property (meeting second tier sign standards) with the permission of the property owner if no other sign is used on that property. This option limits allowances to those normally provided for under the applicable zoning district in which the sign is located and does not increase square footage allowances or render a single tenant property multi-tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2426, § 3, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2565, § 2, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 2777, § 1(i), 12-19-00; Ord. No. 4064, §§ 1e, g, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 4208, § 1d, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 4228, § 1d, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 7-13-6. - Maintenance. 
(a)  General. To insure that signs are erected and maintained in a safe and aesthetic manner, it shall be unlawful for any sign designed to be visible from any public street or highway within the jurisdiction of the City of Asheville to be erected or maintained by any person, other than by a sign contractor properly licensed under subsection 7-13-2(b)(2) or by a designated representative of such licensed contractor, except that this requirement shall be interpreted to exclude those persons who construct and erect a principal use identification sign when said sign is used at said person's place of business and to exclude licensed general contractors erecting signs as part of a permitted construction or renovation project; provided, however, in all cases, all erection must be properly permitted and inspected for compliance with the applicable codes of the State of North Carolina and the City of Asheville and with other sections of this article. 
(b)  Maintenance requirements. The following maintenance requirements must be observed for all signs visible from any public street or highway within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(1)  No sign shall have more than 20 percent of its surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint or poster paper for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
(2)  No sign shall be allowed to stand with bent or broken sign facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts or be allowed to stand more than 15 degrees away from the perpendicular for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
(3)  No sign shall be allowed to have weeds, vines, landscaping or other vegetation growing upon it and obscuring its view from the street or highway from which it is to be viewed for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
(4)  No neon or internally illuminated sign may be allowed to stand with only partial illumination for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
(5)  If a sign or sign structure is damaged due to factors other than vandalism or other criminal or tortuous acts such that more than 50 percent of the value is lost, with such determination made by the sign administrator, any repair or replacement must be done in conformance with this article. If a sign or sign structure is damaged due to vandalism or other criminal or tortuous acts, it may be repaired or replaced, regardless of cost, but must be repaired or replaced as previously permitted or if no permit exists, it must be repaired or replaced to the same specifications to which and with the same materials of which the sign was constructed immediately prior to the act which caused the damage. 
(c)  Inspection. The sign administrator may inspect all signs for compliance with these maintenance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-13-7. - Structural and construction requirements. 
All on-premises and off-premises signs allowed by this article shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 7-13-8. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  General. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any sign which does not conform to the requirements set forth in this article. This requirement shall not be construed so as to prohibit the painting, repainting or changing of the face of a sign, including changing the message, where the resulting sign is the same size, shape and height as the preceding sign and no other alteration and no expansion is made to the sign or sign structure. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs - requirements for on-premises signs to come into compliance. 
(1)  All nonconforming on-premises signs (and their sign structures) erected and located in the city's jurisdiction prior to August 28, 1990, which did not conform as of August 28, 1990, with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in article 9 of Chapter 30 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on October 21, 1977, shall remain subject to the nonconforming sign provisions set forth in article 9 of Appendix A - Zoning of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(2)  All nonconforming on-premises signs (and their sign structures) erected and located in the city's jurisdiction prior to August 28, 1990, and which did conform prior to August 28, 1990, with the requirements adopted in article 9 of Chapter 30 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on October 21, 1977, or with the requirements adopted in article 9 of Chapter 30 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on August 28, 1990, shall be allowed to remain in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(3)  Nonconforming signs and signs deemed conforming which were allowed to remain by the sign regulations adopted as part of the readoption of Ordinance No. 322, effective October 21, 1977, shall not be allowed to remain, in accordance with the provisions set forth herein, and shall be made conforming or removed no later than August 28, 1995. 
(4)  All on-premises signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by a subsequent amendment to this article, or by amendment to the official zoning maps or by extension of the city's territorial jurisdiction (annexation), and which do not conform with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in Article 9 of Appendix - A Zoning Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on October 21, 1977, shall be made conforming or removed according to the following schedule: 
• Signs (and sign structures) erected within three years before the annexation, shall be made conforming or removed within ten years after the effective date of the annexation. 
• All other signs (and sign structures) shall be made conformed or removed within seven years after the effective date of the annexation. 
(5)  All on-premises (and their sign structures) which did not conform with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in article 9 of Appendix A - Zoning of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on October 21, 1977, but which have been granted a permit prior to the effective date of this chapter as a result of a variance granted by the board of adjustment shall be allowed to remain in accordance with the terms of the variance granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming signs - requirements for portable and moveable display signs and temporary signs. 
(1)  All portable and moveable display signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by a subsequent amendment to this chapter or to the official zoning maps or by extension of the city's territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be removed within 90 days of the effective date of said amendments or extensions. 
(2)  All temporary signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by subsequent amendments to this article or to the official zoning map, or by extension of the city's territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be removed within 90 days of the effective date of said amendments or extensions. 
(d)  Nonconforming signs—requirements for off-premises signs. 
(1)  All off-premises signs (and their sign structures) erected and located in the city's zoning jurisdiction prior to August 28, 1990, and which did not conform as of August 28, 1990, with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in article IX of chapter 30 (Appendix A—Zoning) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville on October 21, 1977, shall remain subject to the nonconforming sign provisions set forth in article 9 of Chapter 30 (Appendix A—Zoning) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville; provided, that such sign may be included in a removal/relocation/reconstruction agreement pursuant to paragraph (g) below. 
(2)  All other off-premises signs (and their sign structures) which do not conform with the sign regulations adopted on November 25, 1997 (Ordinance No. 2426), and which were erected prior to November 25, 1997, shall be deemed nonconforming and may not be altered or relocated except in a manner that conforms with the sign regulations adopted on November 25, 1997 (Ordinance No. 2426); provided, that such sign may be included in a removal/relocation/reconstruction agreement pursuant to paragraph (g), below. 
(3)  All off-premises signs (and their sign structures) that are (i) made nonconforming by a subsequent amendment to the city's sign regulations; (ii) become nonconforming by an amendment to the city's zoning map; or (iii) become nonconforming by inclusion within the city's zoning jurisdiction, shall be deemed nonconforming and may not be altered, relocated or reconstructed except in a manner that conforms with the sign regulations adopted on November 25, 1997 (Ordinance No. 2426); provided, that such sign may be included in a removal/relocation/reconstruction agreement pursuant to paragraph (g), below. 
(4)  In the event that a nonconforming off-premises sign has been made nonconforming by an extension of the sign area initially permitted for that sign, the extension shall not be allowed to continue after the copy which includes that extension has been changed. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs — spacing as only nonconformity. All off-premises signs which conform within five years of the effective date of this chapter with all the requirements of this article, except with the spacing requirement set forth in subsection 7-13-5(b)(3)a., shall be considered as conforming to the terms of this article, and not subject to the foregoing removal requirements. 
(f)  Nonconforming signs-prohibited actions. During the time periods set forth above for removal or conformance of nonconforming signs, sign structures, or uses, and unless otherwise provided in a removal/relocation/reconstruction agreement, such nonconforming signs, sign structures, or uses as described above shall be maintained as provided in section 7-13-6 but may not be: 
(1)  Changed to or replaced by another nonconforming sign or sign structure; 
(2)  Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements). 
(3)  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign or sign structure; 
(4)  Expanded; 
(5)  Reestablished after its discontinuance for 60 days; 
(6)  Continued in use after cessation of business; or 
(7)  Reestablished after damage or destruction due to factors other than vandalism or other criminal or tortuous acts if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value, as determined by the sign administrator. 
None of the foregoing prohibitions shall be construed to prohibit the painting, repainting, or changing of the face of a sign, including changing the message where the resulting sign is the same size, shape and height as the preceding sign and no expansion is made to the sign structure. 
(g)  Removal/relocation/reconstruction of nonconforming off-premises signs. 
(1)  Agreements authorized. For any sign that is registered as a qualified sign pursuant to subsection (2)(b), below, including any sign with respect to which enforcement proceedings had been instituted prior to the effective date of this ordinance on the grounds that said sign was a nonconforming off-premises sign under applicable city sign regulations, the city and sign owner may enter into an agreement providing for the removal, relocation, or reconstruction of said signs, or for the maintenance of said signs in their current locations, subject to the limitations set out below. In addition, the city and the sign owner may enter into an agreement providing for the removal, relocation, or reconstruction of qualified signs on or within the property where such sign is located, subject to the limitations set out below. 
(2)  Qualified signs; replacement, relocation or reconstruction—Non-digital. 
a.  Notice to sign owners. The planning and development director shall cause notice of the adoption of this section, describing its substance or enclosing a copy of the ordinance, to be provided by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of nonconforming off-premises signs within the city's zoning jurisdiction. Said notice need not specifically identify affected signs. If the sign owner cannot be located, said notice may be sent to the owner of the property whereon such sign is located, or affixed to the sign or sign structure itself. When additional area is included within the city's zoning jurisdiction, additional notices shall be sent. 
b.  Registration. Within 180 days of receipt of the notice provided for above, owners of nonconforming off-premises signs located within the city's zoning jurisdiction shall register any such sign owned by them with the city's planning and development office. Any nonconforming off-premises sign that has been properly registered will be considered a "qualified sign" for purposes of this section and eligible for the removal/relocation provisions set out below; provided, that no sign that was not permitted under applicable codes when erected may be a qualified sign. Any nonconforming off-premises sign that has not been properly registered will not be eligible. 
c.  Removal/relocation/reconstruction. 
1.  Internal relocation. Any qualified sign may be relocated or reconstructed on the lot on which it is currently erected so long as there is no increase in nonconformity with respect to height, setback or size. The spacing requirements in subparagraph (2)(d) below shall not apply to a qualified sign relocated on the same lot, so long as the relocation is the minimum possible distance to reasonably accommodate the needs of the sign owner and property owner. No zoning permit is required for such internal lot relocation. 
2.  Relocation within overlay. Any qualified sign may be relocated or reconstructed anywhere within the qualified sign overlay as defined in subsection (3) below, subject to the following limitations: 
(i)  Except as provided in this section, the relocated qualified sign may have no more square footage than the one being replaced and in no case may the relocated qualified sign have a size greater than 380 square feet per side; 
(ii)  The height of the relocated qualified sign may not exceed 40 feet (with no allowance), measured as provided in section 7-2-5 ("height"). This restriction may be varied as provided in section 7-13-9. 
(iii)  No relocated qualified sign may be attached to any building; 
(iv)  The relocated qualified sign shall be separated by a minimum of 500 feet from any other qualified sign on the opposite side of the same road and 1,000 feet on the same side of the road; provided, that if any other off-premises signs are located within the separation distance, the planning director shall be advised as to the location of such other sign prior to the relocation; and 
(v)  The relocated qualified sign may have no more faces than the one being replaced; and 
(vi)  The area of two or more qualified signs may be combined into one relocated qualified sign as long as the area of the relocated qualified sign does not exceed the combined area of the signs being replaced, or 380 square feet, whichever is less. 
3.  Qualified sign overlay mapping. For purposes of this article, the Qualified Sign Overlay Zone shall include the following areas: 
i.  Patton Avenue from the French Broad River to the outer limit of the ETJ jurisdiction in Enka; 
ii.  Merrimon Avenue from Chestnut Street North to Woodfin; 
iii.  Sweeten Creek Road from Fairview Road to the outer limit of the ETJ; 
iv.  Hendersonville Road from I-40 Interchange to the outer limit of the ETJ; 
v.  Tunnel Road from the tunnel to the outer limit of the ETJ past Oteen; 
vi.  Leicester Highway from Patton Avenue to the outer limit of the ETJ; and 
vii.  Brevard Road from I-240 Interchange to the outer limit of the ETJ. 
viii.  Airport Road from Hendersonville Road to the boundary between Buncombe County and Henderson County; and 
ix.  Long Shoals Road from Hendersonville Road to the outer limit of the ETJ. 
Notwithstanding the above, no Qualified Sign Overlay District shall be permitted for an area that is subject to the Blue Ridge Parkway Overlay District, nor for any area that is zoned to a residential zoning classification, as of the effective date of this section. 
4.  This section shall not apply to qualified signs located on Federal Aid Primary Highways. 
5.  Notwithstanding the requirements or prohibitions of any underlying zoning district on a lot where a qualified sign is located, these provisions related to relocating qualified signs shall control in cases of any conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2427, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 3168, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 3446, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 3572, § 1(o), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3619, §§ 1(b)—(d), 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 4071, § 1a, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 4085, § 1b, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 4208, § 1e, 6-25-13)  
Sec. 7-13-9. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances. In accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in article VI of this chapter, when unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, the board of adjustment shall vary the provisions of the ordinance upon a showing of all of the following: 
(1)  Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(2)  The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. 
(3)  The hardship did not the result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship. 
(4)  The variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial justices is achieved. 
No change in permitted uses may be authorized by the variance. Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. 
(b)  Variances - granting. In granting a variance, the board of adjustment shall make written findings that all of the above listed requirements have been met. If a variance is granted it shall be the least possible deviation from the requirements of this article. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violations of the provisions of the variance granted, including any conditions or safeguards, which are a part of the grant of the variance, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3943, § 1b, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 4274, § 1e, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 7-13-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4529, § 1, adopted October 25, 2016, repealed § 7-13-10, which pertained to signage plan and derived from Ord. No. 3427, adopted December 12, 2006.  
ARTICLE XIV. - ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 7-14-1. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  General standards and limitations. All accessory uses and accessory structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter. The provisions of this section establish additional requirements and restrictions for these uses and structures. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any accessory uses or accessory structures shall be treated as a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located in connection with any lawfully established principal use or structure. Any accessory use or structure may be approved in conjunction with approval of the principal use or structure. 
(1)  Setback and yard requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an accessory uses and structures shall not be located within a required front setback area. Accessory uses and structures may encroach into a required side or rear setback area, but may not be located closer than six feet to the side or rear property line. 
(2)  Detached canopies. Not withstanding subsection 7-14-1(a)(1) above, a detached canopy, located in a nonresidential district, which is subordinate to the principal structure, and situated on the same lot, and is used for purposes that are integral to the use of the principal structure shall be subject to the same minimum setback requirements as buildings in the same zoning district. 
(3)  Temporary accessory uses and structures. Temporary accessory uses and structures shall be governed by the standards for temporary uses set forth in section 7-14-2. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. 
(1)  Swimming pools. 
a.  Fence required. All permanent outdoor swimming pools having a depth of 18 inches or greater at the deepest point, except for commercial pools and pools operated by hotels or motels under constant surveillance, shall be completely surrounded by a fence, barrier or a wall with a height of no less than four feet. The fence or wall may be made of any suitable and durable materials. Other design requirements may apply: See section 7-9-2 if the property is located in a Historic Preservation Overlay District or section 7-9-3 if the property is located in the Downtown Design Review Overlay Area, or section 7-8-17 if in the River District Design Area. A principal or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
b.  Operation as business. No private residential swimming pool which is located in a residential district shall be operated as, or in conjunction with, a business, day care operation, bed and breakfast homestay or inn, or home occupation, except for those which are approved adult and child day care homes. 
(2)  Devices for the generation of energy or conservation. 
a.  Solar energy systems. Private, noncommercial solar energy systems shall comply with the minimum setback requirements. The City of Asheville Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to the required setbacks and allow such structures to be located in the front yard in order to allow for optimal placement provided that no portion of the structure or architectural features project over the property lines, that the structure will not adversely impact adjacent properties and will be compatible with the character of the neighborhood, and that it can be demonstrated that no other design can produce the same outcome. 
b.  Wind energy systems. Private, noncommercial wind energy conversion systems shall be setback from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the system and shall not exceed 80 feet. Noise generated by the system shall not exceed 60 decibels (dBA), as measured at the property line, except during short term events such as utility outages and severe wind storms. 
c.  Water conservation/holding tanks. Private, noncommercial water conservation/holding tanks, 12 feet or less in height, shall comply with the minimum setback requirements. Cisterns must cover their openings to prevent contamination and entrapment. 
1.  Storage outside of a substantially enclosed structure of any motor vehicle that is neither licensed nor operational. 
2.  Parking outside of a substantially enclosed structure of more than four motor vehicles between the front building line of the principal building and the street on any lot used for single-family, duplex, or family care home purposes. 
3.  Accessory structures and accessory apartments. Permitted in all residential districts as a use by right, subject to special requirements as set forth in section 7-16-1. 
4.  Uses not regarded as accessory. The following activities shall not be regarded as accessory to a residential principal use and are prohibited in residential districts. 
(3)  Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units are allowed as permitted in the table of permitted uses located in this chapter. The purpose of the accessory dwelling unit provision is to allow the efficient use of existing housing stock, parcels of land and community infrastructure, and to increase the number and variety of residential units while respecting the scale and character of existing neighborhoods. 
a.  General provisions. The following standards apply to accessory dwelling units located in all residential districts except urban residential. 
1.  An accessory dwelling unit shall be located only on a residential lot containing one single-family detached structure. The residential lot may contain other accessory structures as provided in this ordinance. 
2.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per single-family detached dwelling. 
3.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered as additional dwelling units for the purpose of determining minimum lot size or maximum density. 
b.  Standards. Accessory dwelling units may occupy conforming existing accessory structures or lawfully created non-conforming primary residential structures. The maximum size of the accessory dwelling unit shall be determined based on the following: 
1.  A detached accessory dwelling unit: 
Area—May not exceed the lesser of: 
70% percent of the gross floor area of the primary dwelling unit, or 
800 square feet. 
Height—The height of a detached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 25 feet. 
2.  An attached accessory dwelling unit (located within the same structure as the primary dwelling unit with shared foundation, exterior walls and roof): 
Area—May not exceed the lesser of: 
70% percent of the gross floor area of the primary dwelling unit, or 
1,000 square feet. 
Height—The height of an attached accessory dwelling unit will be governed by the height requirements for the residential structure. 
c.  Parking. Parking for the primary dwelling unit must be maintained or replaced on site. Parking for the accessory dwelling unit shall be provided at a rate of one parking space per accessory dwelling unit if off-street parking is required for the primary residential unit. This parking space(s) shall be located to the side or rear of the primary residential unit, outside of the front setback area. 
(4)  Accessory structures. 
a.  General provisions. The following standards apply to accessory structures located in all residential districts including Urban Residential. 
b.  The footprint of accessory structures located on a lot shall not exceed the following maximum footprint(s): 
Lot Size 	One Structure 	All Structures 
Less than 1 acre 	800 square feet 	1,000 square feet 
1 to 3 acres 	1,200 square feet 	1,600 square feet 
More than 3 acres 	No limit 	No Limit 
 
The footprint of the portion of accessory structures used as accessory dwelling units shall not be included in this calculation of footprint for accessory structures. 
The footprint of any accessory structures used for agricultural purposes shall not be included in this calculation of footprint for accessory structures. Such structures must meet the requirements established for agricultural uses established in section 7-16-1 of this chapter. 
c.  Accessory structures shall not exceed 25 feet in height except that height may be increased one foot for every one foot of additional side and rear setback, up to a maximum of 40 feet. 
d.  Accessory structures, except for detached garages shall be located only in side or rear yards for non-corner lots and not in front of the principal structure. On lots of more than three acres, accessory structures may be located in the front of the principal structure, but not in the required front yard. Accessory structures, including detached garages, located in side yards of corner lots whose rear or side yards are adjacent to a front yard of the adjacent lot shall maintain a setback equivalent to the front yard setback of the adjacent lot. Detached garages may be located in front of the principal structure if it is determined by the planning and development director that practical difficulties exist for garage location in side or rear yards due to topography, lot width or other physical factors. Upon this determination, detached garages may be located in front of the principal structure provided that: 1) the garage is not located in the front setback, and 2) the garage is located and/or designed so that it is clearly subordinate to the principal structure in terms of scale. 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Accessory structures providing common facilities for residential developments (clubhouse, pool house, etc.) shall not be subject to the gross floor area limits set forth in subsection 7-14-1(b)(4)b. above, or the location requirements set forth in subsection 7-16-1(b)(4)d. above. 
g.  Accessory structures may be located or expanded on lawfully existing nonconforming lots or lots (conforming or nonconforming) containing nonconforming structures, provided that all other requirements of this chapter and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations are met. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3480, § 1(a), 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1l, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 4431, § 1e, 6-23-15)  
Sec. 7-14-2. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Purpose. The following provisions are provided in recognition of the need for special allowances to be granted for temporary uses so that they may be permitted within the City of Asheville. These provisions, authorizing and regulating uses which are truly temporary in nature, are intended to permit such uses (and structures in which they are housed) when consistent with city regulations and policies and when safe and compatible with the area in which they are located. 
(b)  General provisions. Compliance with the following general provisions is required for all temporary uses unless otherwise specified. 
(1)  Parking and access. Each site occupied by a temporary use must provide or have available sufficient parking and vehicular maneuvering area for customers. Parking must be adequate to accommodate the proposed temporary use in addition to required parking for any permanent use or uses located on the site. The temporary use shall not create hazardous vehicular or pedestrian traffic conditions as determined by the city's traffic engineer and fire marshal. Temporary traffic control devices including signage to minimize traffic congestion may be required by the city. The design and installation of any such devices must be approved by the city's traffic engineer. 
(2)  Temporary nature. Substantial permanent changes to the development site to specifically accommodate the temporary activity are prohibited. 
(3)  Signs. Signs for temporary uses are regulated in article 13 of this chapter. 
(4)  Lighting. Lighting must be compliant with the City of Asheville's lighting standards. 
(5)  Adequate facilities. Adequate sanitary facilities, utilities, drainage, refuse management and similar necessary facilities and services must be available to serve employees, patrons or participants. 
(6)  Setbacks. Temporary uses are allowed to encroach within required building setbacks, but cannot be located within required buffers, street tree planting strips, or other landscaped areas required under this chapter. Temporary structures must comply with the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(7)  Presence of another use. A temporary use may be located on a property housing another permanent use or may be located on a vacant lot. The location of the temporary use shall not violate any requirements placed on any permanent use. 
(8)  Other permits, licenses, inspections. These regulations do not exempt the operator from any other required permits or inspections such as, but not limited to, those that might be required by the building safety department, the fire marshal, the finance department (privilege licenses), the State of North Carolina, or the Buncombe County Health Department. 
(9)  Discontinuation of use. All materials, structures, and products related to the temporary use must be removed from the premises between days of operation on the site, provided that materials, structures and products related to the temporary use may be left on-site overnight between consecutive days of operation. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use. 
(c)  Temporary uses/structures exempt from permit requirements. The following uses/structures are allowed in all zoning districts, unless otherwise stipulated in this article, and shall not require a zoning permit. Such uses shall conform to the requirements set forth in (b) above, the requirements set forth below, as well as to all other applicable requirements of the City of Asheville. 
(1)  City (co)sponsored events or authorized events on city-owned property must be reviewed and approved through a separate process. 
(2)  Collection and recycling centers for non-profit organizations are allowed in nonresidential districts. Containers and structures shall be located on private property and not on public rights-of-way. Structures shall not interfere with traffic circulation or visibility at intersections. Structures may not eliminate required parking spaces for other uses on the same parcel. 
(3)  Construction containers. Construction containers require a building permit and may be utilized for the duration of the building permit. 
(4)  Fundraising (non-commercial) events are only allowed in nonresidential districts and on property occupied by an institutional use in residential districts. If a fundraising event is specifically listed in subsection (d), below, then the provisions in subsection (d) shall apply. Except as specifically permitted as follows, a fundraising event shall be permitted for no more than three days. Seasonal sales, such as the sale of pumpkins or Christmas trees as fundraisers, may be permitted for up to 30 days. 
(5)  Outdoor sidewalk and retail sales, small scale. Outdoor sidewalk and retail sales, where no structure is erected in conjunction with the sale, are permitted in all nonresidential districts. Such sales must be operated by a business located on the same or adjoining property or by a non-profit organization. If the sale will take place on city rights-of-way, additional permits must be obtained. 
(6)  Private, non-commercial events on private property and evangelistic, religious events and services. 
(7)  Push cart vendors. Push cart vendors are regulated under section 16-144 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(8)  Short term commercial, promotional events. Short-term commercial, promotional events are permitted in all nonresidential districts. Such events are limited to eight hours in duration, up to four times per calendar year. 
(9)  Storage containers, portable on demand. Portable, on demand storage containers are allowed in all districts. Containers located in residential districts, may be permitted for a period of 14 consecutive days, up to two times per calendar year. In nonresidential districts, such containers may be located for a period of 60 consecutive days, up to two times per calendar year. The time, in all instances, shall run from the time of delivery of the container to the time of removal. 
Containers in any district, may be utilized for the duration of any building permit on the same parcel. Such containers shall not be permitted on any lot that does not contain a principal building. 
(10)  Yard/garage sales. Yard/garage sales are permitted in all districts but must be located on a parcel containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units. Sales are permitted on any one parcel three times a calendar year. The maximum duration for each occurrence is three days. 
(d)  Short term temporary uses/structures. A short term temporary use/structure is a use (and structure containing a use) which is located on a property no more than 180 days within any calendar year. Such uses are subject to the standards found in this section and in subsection 7-14-2(b) above and, unless otherwise specified, are only permitted in nonresidential districts. 
(1)  Permit required. All short-term temporary uses/structures must obtain a temporary use permit as set forth in section 7-5-3 of this chapter. The permit must be displayed at all times on the premises where the temporary use/structure is in operation. 
(2)  Duration. Except as specifically provided for elsewhere in this section, a short-term temporary use or structure shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 180 days in any calendar year. The days of operation must be listed on the permit and may be consecutive or intermittent throughout the calendar year. A day of operation shall mean any or part of any day on which the use is conducted. 
(3)  Additional standards. In addition to the general requirements for temporary uses/structures set forth in subsection 7-14-2(b) above, all such uses/structures shall comply with the following: 
a.  Permitted uses. Except as provided below in this section, the temporary use must be permitted (either by right or with special requirements) in the zoning district in which it is being located. 
b.  Limitation on permits. Only one temporary use permit shall be active on any lot or parcel at any time. However, more than one permit may be issued on any lot or parcel during a calendar year so long as the allowed period of duration is not exceeded. 
c.  Dwelling units. Dwellings are not allowed as temporary uses except as permitted by the building safety department in conjunction with a home that has been damaged by fire, wind, etc. that is under repair. 
d.  Circuses, carnivals, fairs, etc. Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, haunted houses and similar events may be held at a site up to three times per year with a maximum duration of 14 days per event. Such events may occur only in non-residential districts. 
e.  Temporary mobile food sales. Temporary mobile food vendors, pushcarts or stands may be allowed in all non-residential districts except for: the downtown area Central Business District corresponding to the Downtown Design Review Overlay District and the Biltmore Village Historic District; provided that uses/structures for mobile food sales are compliant with the following standards. 
1.  Hours of operation. Temporary food vendors and stands shall be allowed from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. with specific hours of operation indicated on the temporary use permit. Locations within 200 feet of a residential use will have reduced hours of 6:00 a.m. until midnight. 
2.  Proximity to public right-of-way. All sales shall be conducted at least ten feet from all public rights-of-way. 
3.  Health department approval. Any food service operation that sells, prepares or serves food must obtain an approved mobile food service permit from the Buncombe County Health Department and is subject to inspection. 
4.  Display of permit. A copy of the valid, approved permit from the Buncombe County Health Department and the City of Asheville shall be visually displayed on the mobile kitchen in clear view of all patrons. 
5.  Duration on site. All mobile food sale vehicles must leave the site every night or be parked so that the vehicle is not visible from public rights-of-way. 
f.  Events of public interest. An event of public interest is a temporary use involving the expected congregation of 100 or more persons at any one time. An event of public interest includes, but is not limited to: dances, fund raisers, picnics, haunted houses, outdoor concerts, tent meetings, races for motorized vehicles, and supervised public displays of fireworks. An event of public interest shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  Public safety plan. A public safety plan which identifies the means by which public safety will be ensured during the conduct of the temporary use must be approved by the City of Asheville. 
2.  Dates and hours of operation. All activities and uses shall be limited to the dates and hours of operation specified in the permit and shall be limited to a maximum duration of three days (per site). 
3.  Traffic control. Traffic control shall be arranged by the operators of the event in accordance with the City of Asheville and/or Buncombe County Sheriff's Office. 
4.  Parking. Public parking for the exclusive use of the facility/event shall be provided and a stabilized drive to the parking area shall be maintained. It is the responsibility of the operators to guide traffic to these areas. No parking shall be permitted on any road or public right-of-way. 
5.  Noise. Noise levels associated with events of public interest, except for supervised displays of fireworks, shall adhere to the City of Asheville Noise Ordinance. 
6.  Maintenance of site. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to see that the area used for the event is maintained in a condition that provides for the public health, safety, and welfare for event attendees and neighbors alike. In the event that authorized personnel from the City of Asheville and/or Buncombe County Sheriff's Office determine that the activity is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the City of Asheville and/or Buncombe County Sheriff's Office shall have the right to close the event. 
7.  Discontinuation of use. All materials, structures, and products related to the event of public interest must be removed from the premises between days of operation on the site, provided that materials, structures and products related to the temporary use may be left on-site overnight between consecutive days of operation. Each site occupied by an event of public interest shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use. 
8.  Signage. Events with an anticipated attendance of over 100 people at any one time may utilize up to 64 square feet of temporary signage. All signage must be properly secured and located on private property and not within a public right-of-way. Events with an anticipated attendance of over 1,000 people per day are not limited in their signage but must submit a signage plan along with a separate sign permit for review and approval at the discretion of the planning director, with input from appointed officials. This plan must include detailed descriptions of the signs including purpose, type, message, location, size, height, and fasteners. Only those signs that would not otherwise be prohibited may be considered and all other applicable standards shall apply. 
g.  Storage containers, portable on demand. Portable on demand storage containers located in non-residential districts and visible from public areas must first obtain a permit. All permits must be posted on the exterior of the container and visible to inspectors. All such containers when located in front of the principal structure must be located at a minimum of 15 feet back from the street edge and not include signage. 
h.  Fruit and vegetable markets. Fruit and vegetable markets may be permitted in non-residential districts and in residential districts when located on conforming institutional properties. Markets shall not overlap regular business hours for the primary use and shall operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(e)  Interim temporary uses/structures. An interim temporary use/structure is a use (and structure containing a use) which is located on a property often for periods exceeding 180 days due to the nature of the use. Such uses are subject to the standards found in this section and in subsection 7-14-2(b) above and, are only permitted in nonresidential districts. 
(1)  Factory fabricated buildings for places of worship and schools. Schools and places of worship may place factory fabricated transportable buildings on-site subject to the following conditions. 
a.  Duration. The time period shall not exceed five years. Time periods may not be extended by the board of adjustment. 
b.  Property line buffers. Property line buffers, if required, shall be installed according to the requirements set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(2)  Interim parking or construction staging. 
a.  A zoning permit shall be required and shall be valid for a period of: 
1.  Two years, when established in conjunction with, and is needed to support, an existing construction project for which there is a valid, open building permit. 
2.  One year, when not associated with a construction project. 
b.  Interim parking and construction staging established under this subsection shall not be required to comply with landscape, sidewalk or paving requirements found elsewhere in this chapter with the following exceptions if applicable: 
1.  The parking/staging area is greater than 10,000 square feet, in which case a planting strip with a minimum width of 10 feet shall be installed the length of the parking area, leaving room for cross access as desired; and/or 
2.  The area beyond the driveway apron exceeds five percent in grade, in which case the driveway shall be paved with a concrete, asphalt or bituminous surface. 
3.  The site is located in the Central Business District, in which case driveway width and other requirements specific to the zoning district will apply. 
c.  Interim parking and construction staging established under this subsection shall comply with, and is not exempted from, all other local, state and federal regulations including driveway, grading, stormwater, accessibility, and sign regulations. No waivers, exceptions or variances shall be granted to these standards. 
d.  The zoning permit for any such interim use may be renewed once for a period equal to the initial permit validity (see section a. above). 
e.  The interim use shall not be located within 500 feet of a residential use in a residentially zoned district. 
(3)  Real estate sales and/or model home offices. Real estate sales and/or model home offices shall be allowed within a new residential development, subject to the following conditions. 
a.  Location. The model home/temporary real estate sales office must be located on a lot that was approved by the planning and development director as part of the subdivision or development. 
b.  Number. There can be only one temporary real estate sales office in any development. 
c.  Duration. A real estate sales office may be approved for a period of up to three years. This period may be renewed for additional six-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension by the planning and development director. The request shall be submitted to the planning and development director at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(4)  Temporary offices. Temporary offices for construction and security personnel are permitted during the construction of a development for which the city has issued a permit. Temporary offices are also permitted for a nonresidential use when the permanent building for such use has been destroyed by a fire or natural catastrophe. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2535, § 5, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2684, § 1, 4-11-00; Ord. No. 3480, § 1(b), 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1m, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3757, § 1g, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3792, § 1c, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 4007, § 1c, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4043, §§ a—e, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 4152, § 1b, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 4613, § 1(b), 9-12-17)  
ARTICLE XV. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-15-1. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations for the subdivision of land set forth in this article are established to promote orderly growth and development; provide for suitable residential and nonresidential subdivisions with adequate streets, utilities and appropriate building sites; provide for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with existing or planned streets and with other public facilities; provide for the dedication or reservation of rights-of-way or easements for streets and utility purposes; and provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and for better identification and permanent location of real property boundaries. 
(b)  Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. 
(1)  Divisions of land exempt. The following divisions of land are not included within the definition of "subdivision", and are not subject to the city's subdivision regulations. 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city as shown in the city's subdivision regulations; 
b.  The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
c.  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors; 
d.  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city as shown in the city's subdivision regulations; and 
e.  The subdivision or recombination of land by public utilities for utility purposes or use. 
(2)  Determination and certification of exemption. The determination of whether a division of land is exempt from the definition of subdivision shall be made by the designated staff upon application of the property owner or agent, with supporting documentation (maps, plats, etc.), as needed. Upon a determination by the designated staff that the proposed subdivision is exempt, a certificate of exemption shall be issued, and the subdivision shall not be subject to the city's subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Effect of certification of exemption. Divisions of land found to be exempt from the definition of subdivision are not required to meet the city's subdivision regulations. However, a building or zoning permit may only be issued with respect to a lot that has been created by an exempt division if said lot meets the standards for development set forth elsewhere in this chapter, including but not limited to historic overlay district or local historic landmark guidelines and regulations. Where a regulation is contained both in this article and elsewhere in this chapter, although the regulation need not be met prior to property division and recordation, the lot in question must comply with said regulation before a building or zoning permit may be issued for the property. 
(c)  Coordination with other requirements. When applications for other approvals are required for the subdivision, applications for these approvals may be submitted simultaneously with the initiation of the subdivision approval process to reduce the time required to secure all necessary approvals. Application forms as required for other approvals may be obtained from the development services department. 
(d)  Plan submittal. Applications for subdivision approval shall be submitted to the Development Services department and must include plats with all information as required by this Chapter and the designated city departments. Applications for subdivision shall be filed in accordance with section 7-5-8 of this chapter. 
(e)  Approval required. 
(1)  Date of compliance. After the effective date of this chapter, no plat for the subdivision of land within the City of Asheville shall be filed, accepted for recording, or recorded, nor shall the County Register of Deeds or Clerk of Superior Court order the recording of a plat until it has been submitted to the city and approved as set forth herein. The signature of the designated staff on the plat shall signify conformance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  No conveyance without approval. No real property lying within the City of Asheville shall be subdivided until it conforms to all applicable sections of this chapter and other applicable law. Violations of this article shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties set forth in Article XVIII. Any sale or transfer of land in a subdivision subject to these regulations by reference to an unapproved plat or the use of a metes and bounds description shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Designation of approval agency. The City of Asheville Planning and Urban Design Department is designated as a planning agency for the purposes of N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-373. The Planning and Urban Design director or his/her designee shall be authorized to sign the plat signifying final approval of subdivisions. 
(4)  Dedication and acceptance of public areas. 
a.  Rights-of-way and easements. The approval of a final plat does not constitute acceptance by the city of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line or other public facility shown on the plat. When located within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, such dedications may be accepted only by resolution of the Asheville City Council following inspection and approval. Until the offer of dedication is accepted by the city in either of these manners, the property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of those areas. 
b.  Open space. Land designated as public open space or a park on a plat shall be considered to be offered for dedication, but not accepted until the Asheville City Council has by express action done so. Until such dedication has been accepted, such areas may be used for open space purposes by its owner or by an association representing owners of lots within the subdivision. Land so offered for dedication shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with the proposed public use without the approval of the Asheville City Council. 
(f)  Street and utility construction. 
(1)  Plans. Construction plans for all street, water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater facilities shall be submitted to the development services department consistent with preliminary plat approval. The street and utility construction plans for each subdivision, or portion thereof, shall include all improvements lying within or adjacent to the subdivision as well as improvements to all streets and water and sanitary sewer lines lying outside the subdivision which provide service to the subdivision. No final plat shall be approved until all improvements have been installed and approved or a guarantee accepted. 
(2)  No construction without plan approval. No improvement to or new construction of street, water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater facilities shall be permitted until the street and utility construction plans for such improvements/construction have been reviewed and approved by the designated city departments and appropriate governmental agencies. These agencies may include, but shall not be limited to, the Metropolitan Sewerage District, the North Carolina Department of Transportation, and the Division of Environmental Management of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources, or their successors. 
(3)  Inspection of construction. All construction undertaken pursuant to approved street and utility construction plans shall be inspected and approved by the City of Asheville and/or the appropriate governmental agencies. 
(4)  Guarantee in lieu of construction of improvements. In lieu of completion of construction of the required improvements and utilities prior to final plat approval, the property owner may submit a performance guarantee approved by the city, including but not limited to, a performance bond from a corporate surety, licensed in North Carolina to execute such bonds, or an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the City of Asheville, either of which shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of the installation of the required improvements, as determined by the city. The performance guarantee shall secure the completion of construction of the improvements shown on the approved preliminary plat. The performance guarantee shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the construction of improvements and installation of utilities are completed and accepted by the City of Asheville. Failure to maintain the required performance guarantee shall result in the revocation of the approval of the preliminary plat and any permits issued as a result of the preliminary plat approval. 
Failure to initiate construction of the improvements within one year of the date the performance guarantee was accepted by the city shall result in the city constructing the improvements, with the cost to be paid from the performance guarantee. In the event that the amount of the performance guarantee is insufficient to pay for the completion of the improvements, the property owner shall remain responsible and shall pay to the city the total amount of the insufficiency and if the city is not paid, the amount of the insufficiency shall constitute a lien on the property in favor of the city. 
(g)  Maintenance of common areas. Where subdivisions have common areas or facilities serving more than one dwelling unit, the developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of these common areas and facilities. This responsibility may be transferred to another entity, provided the developer prepares and records a document showing the transfer of the property and the maintenance responsibilities to a successor. In such case, the successor shall be responsible for the maintenance of the common access and facilities. 
(h)  Recordation of final plat. A final plat must be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County in accordance with the process outlined in section 7-5-8 of this chapter. 
(i)  Subdivision standards. All proposed subdivisions must meet the following standards: 
(1)  Lots. All lots shall conform to the following: 
a.  Conformance to other regulations. Every lot shall conform with all city ordinances, including but not limited to, regulations governing area, dimensions, street access, and historic overlay district and local historic landmark guidelines and regulations. 
b.  Lot lines and drainage. Lot boundaries shall be made to coincide with natural and pre-existing manmade drainage ways to the extent practicable to avoid the creation of lots that can be built upon only by altering such drainage ways. 
c.  Buildable area. Lots or parcels shall not be unreasonably shaped and shall be made to contribute to the buildable area of a lot. Unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, no subdivided lots may contain portions less than 15 feet wide. Additionally, portions of a lot that are less than 26 feet wide and longer than 25 feet will be excluded from the minimum lot area. 
d.  Lots on major thoroughfares. Residential lots in subdivisions shall not be entered from major thoroughfare streets. 
e.  Access requirements for all lots. Every new lot shall have access on a publicly maintained street or privately maintained street built to city standards. Each lot in subdivision shall meet the access requirements set forth in this chapter. 
f.  Lot boundaries. Lot boundaries must be contiguous with street right-of-way boundaries and shall not extend to the center of public streets. However, land to be subdivided which has existing property lines extending into street rights-of-way or into streets may continue to show the existing property lines extending into street rights-of-way or into streets. Areas in the public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with minimum lot size requirements. 
(2)  Landscaping and buffering. Landscaping shall be provided in the proposed subdivision as required by this chapter. Preservation of existing trees is encouraged. 
(3)  Open space. Open space as required by this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Asheville shall be provided in the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  Naming of streets and subdivisions. New streets shall be named in accordance with the standards outlined in Chapter 16 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. In addition, subdivision names or identification shall not duplicate or closely approximate phonetically the names of existing streets and subdivisions in the City of Asheville and must be approved by the emergency address coordinator. 
(5)  Streets. All streets must comply with the requirements of all other applicable city adopted plans and manuals including, but not limited to, the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
(6)  Utilities. All utilities must comply with the requirements of all other applicable city adopted plans and manuals including, but not limited to, the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. In addition: 
a.  Major subdivisions. An appropriate easement, of the width required by the utility company/agency, shall be provided for utilities including, but not limited to, electric service, telephone service, cable television service, sewer lines, and waterlines within the subdivision. The location of the easements and the physical relation of all utilities within the easement shall be delineated in the final plat. Placement of all utilities in a common easement is encouraged when such placement does not conflict with the requirements of other utilities. 
b.  Minor subdivisions. Utility easements shall be provided as required by the approving agency. 
(7)  Water supply for fire protection. 
a.  Water supply for fire protection shall be provided as required by the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. 
b.  Size, type, and installation of hydrants shall conform to the specifications set forth in the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
(8)  Stormwater management. 
a.  Design of the stormwater management system shall be consistent with the City of Asheville's stormwater regulations, as set forth in this chapter. 
b.  The stormwater management system design shall comply with the specifications set forth in the stormwater section of the City of Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual. 
(9)  Flood standards. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall comply with the requirements of the city's flood protection regulations set forth in this chapter. 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have the public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage as required by those utilities. 
c.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals whenever any portion of the project site is located within a designated flood hazard area. 
d.  Preliminary and final plats shall note the location of floodplain and floodway boundaries and the 100-year flood elevation. 
(10)  Steep slope ridge top development. All subdivision proposals within the City of Asheville shall be consistent with the requirements of the city's hillside development regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(11)  Historic overlay district development and local historic landmarks. All proposed subdivisions located within a local historic district or of land designated as a local historic landmark shall be subject to review and preliminary approval by the Historic Resources Commission ("HRC") as set forth in section 7-5-8. The preliminary approval will be granted if the HRC determines that the proposed subdivision would allow for new development features, at minimum, to be built in a manner that is congruous with the special character of the historic district and/or landmark as it relates to building setbacks, orientation and consistency with the historic development pattern. 
(12)  Electrical utilities. Electrical lines shall be installed underground unless inconsistent with flood protection requirements. 
(13)  Placement of monuments. The Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, as adopted by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, shall apply when conducting surveys. 
(j)  Phased development. Subdivisions may be designed to be platted and constructed in phases. A plan for phased development must be approved by the TRC. The plan must provide for: the provision of adequate public facilities to support each and every phase independent of the overall subdivision plan; and access and water supply for fire protection must be present for each phase to the extent required by the Asheville Fire Prevention Code. In approving the phases, the TRC may require that additional streets, water and sewer facilities, or other required public facilities be constructed as part of the phase or phases to ensure that sufficient public facilities will be in place to support each phase or phases independent of any future subdivision development. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 19, 20, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2664, § 1(v), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2904, § 1(v), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3031, § 1(g)—(i), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3032, § 1(j), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3261, §§ 1(b—d), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3328, § 1(r), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3466, § 1(b), 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3708, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 4492, § 1c, 4-12-16; Ord. No. 4736, § 1h—j, 3-26-19)  
ARTICLE XVI. - USES BY RIGHT, SUBJECT TO SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 7-16-1. - Uses by right, subject to special requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. Uses by right, subject to special requirements are uses permitted by right, provided that the specific standards set forth in this section are met. The specified standards are intended to insure these uses fit the intent of the districts within which they are permitted, and that these uses are compatible with other development permitted within the districts. All uses by right, subject to special requirements shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, properties and structures containing uses by right, subject to special requirements shall be conforming to all applicable development standards and nonconforming lots or structures shall not be used for uses by right subject to special requirements. Wireless telecommunication facilities may be co-located on existing nonconforming structures if doing so would reduce visual impacts, or would be a preferable aesthetic alternative to location of a new telecommunication tower. 
(2)  Uses by right, subject to special requirements shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and standards and shall be properly licensed and permitted. 
Approval procedures for uses by right, subject to special requirements are set forth in section 7-5-4. 
(b)  Uses by right, subject to special requirements listed (by zoning district). 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Adult day care centers. RM-16, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Office, Office II, Urban Residential 
(4)  Adult day care homes. All Residential Districts including Urban Residential, Urban Village. 
(4.1)  Agriculture. All Residential districts including Urban Residential and Urban Village. 
(5)  Antennas. All zoning districts. 
(6)  Assisted living facilities. RM-16, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential. 
(7)  Bakeries. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(8)  Barber shops and salons. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District, Resort. 
(9)  Homestays. All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
(10)  Bed and breakfast inns. All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
(11)  Boardinghouse. All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
(12)  Call centers. Industrial. 
(13)  Car washes. Urban Village District, Neighborhood Corridor. 
(14)  Cemeteries, animal. Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
(15)  Child day care centers. RM-16, Office, Neighborhood Corridor, Office II, Urban Village, Urban Residential. 
(16)  Child day care homes. All residential districts; Urban Residential. 
(17)  Civic, social service, and fraternal organizations when operating as a fraternity or sorority house. RM-16, Institutional. 
(18)  Clinics, medical, dental, psychiatric, optical. Urban Residential. 
(19)  Commercial uses accessory to residential uses. RM-8, RM-16, Neighborhood Business, Office, Office II, Institutional, Urban Place, Urban Residential, Urban Village. 
(20)  Cottage developments. RS-8, RM-6, RM-8, RM-16. 
(21)  Crematories, human. Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, River, Office, Office II, Community Business I, Community Business II. 
(22)  Crematories, animal. Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
(23)  Drive through facilities. Urban Village District. 
(24)  Dormitories. Industrial. 
(25)  Reserved. 
(26)  Dwellings, multifamily. Neighborhood Business. 
(27)  Dwellings, single-family detached. Urban Place, Urban Residential. 
(28)  Dwellings, townhouse. RM-6, RM-8, RM-16, RS-8, Office, Office II, Office Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Central Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, River, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential, Urban Place, Institutional. 
(29)  Eating and drinking establishments. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District; Office, Office II, Office/Business, Institutional, Central Business District, Neighborhood Business, River. 
(30)  Equipment Rental business. Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Neighborhood Corridor District. 
(31)  Family care homes. All residential districts including Urban Residential. 
(32)  Fire/police stations. Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential, Urban Place Districts. 
(33)  Funeral establishments. Urban Village District. 
(34)  Gasoline sales. Neighborhood Corridor, Central Business Districts, Urban Village. 
(35)  Government buildings and uses. Office, Office II, Office Business, Institutional, Community Business I, Community Business II, Urban Residential. 
(36)  Grocery stores. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(37)  Group homes. RM-16, Urban Residential District, Urban Village District. 
(38)  Home occupation. All residential districts including Urban Residential. 
(39)  Industrial equipment sales. Light Industrial. 
(40)  Industrial uses, light. Community Business I, Community Business II and Regional Business. 
(41)  Reserved. 
(42)  Lodging facilities. Urban Village District, Neighborhood Corridor. 
(43)  Microbrewery. Office, Office II, Office/Business, Central Business, Institutional, Resort. 
(44)  Mobile food vending. Office, Office II, Office Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Light Industrial, Industrial, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Place. 
(45)  Movie theaters. Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Neighborhood Corridor. 
(46)  Motor vehicle and boat service and repair. River, Industrial, Central Business, Urban Village, Community Business I, Community Business II, Neighborhood Corridor. 
(47)  Motor vehicle service facility (gasoline sales, car washes, and outdoor storage permitted separately). Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor. 
(48)  Nightclubs. Resort. 
(49)  Office. Light industrial, Industrial. 
(50)  Orphanages. Urban Village District. 
(51)  Outdoor storage. River District, Industrial, Community Business II, Neighborhood Corridor, Light Industrial. 
(52)  Parking decks, garages, facilities. Institutional, Urban Village. 
(53)  Pharmacies. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(54)  Pharmacies. Office. 
(55)  Places of worship. All residential except Urban Residential. 
(56)  Places of worship. Neighborhood Corridor District, Urban Residential District. 
(57)  Public utilities and related facilities. All residential including Urban Residential. 
(58)  Recreational uses, restricted to membership, non-profit. All residential including Urban Residential. 
(59)  Recycling operation. River District, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
(60)  Recycling collection center. River, Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Urban Village and Neighborhood Corridor, Institutional. 
(61)  Retail sales. Institutional, Resort, Light industrial, Industrial, Head of Montford Transition Overlay District, Urban Village, Neighborhood Business. 
(62)  Schools. Urban Village, Urban Residential. 
(63)  Schools. All residential except Urban Residential. 
(64)  Shelters. Urban Village District. 
(64.1)  Short-term vacation rental. All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
(65)  Small engine repair and service business. Community Business I, Community Business II, Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business. 
(66)  Stables. Central Business, Resort. 
(67)  Stadiums and arenas. Institutional. 
(68)  Studios, galleries and workshops for artists, artisans, and craftspeople - high impact. Central Business. 
(69)  Sustainable development projects. RM-6, RM-8, RM-16, Office, Office II, Office-Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, River, Commercial Industrial. 
(70)  Tailors/dressmaker shops. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(71)  Reserved. 
(72)  Video rental stores. Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(73)  Vocational and technical school. Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Light Industrial, Industrial. 
(74)  Warehousing and storage. Regional Business. 
(75)  Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell. All zoning districts. 
(76)  Wireless telecommunication facilities. All zoning districts except RS-2, RS-4, RS-8. 
(77)  Wireless telecommunication facility, collocation. All zoning districts. 
(78)  Electrified security fences. Industrial, Light Industrial. 
(c)  Uses by right, subject to special requirements standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Adult day care centers. 
a.  Use districts: RM-16, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Office, Office II, Urban Residential. 
b.  Courtyard space required facing the street. 
c.  Maximum building size 20,000 square feet in RM-16. 
d.  Maximum building size 12,000 square feet in Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Office, Office II. 
e.  In Urban Residential gross square footage may occupy up to 100 percent of the ground floor square footage but is not to exceed 8,000 square feet total. 
(4)  Adult day care homes. 
a.  Use districts: All Residential Districts including Urban Residential, Urban Village. 
b.  Maximum building or facility size: 2,000 square feet. 
c.  Client drop-off and pick-up may not obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
d.  Parking may not be located in a front yard. 
(4.1)  Agriculture. 
a.  Use districts: All residential districts including Urban Residential and Urban Village. 
b.  A site and operations plan must be submitted that includes a description of the proposed operation indicating: 
1.  Type of farming and (if applicable) list of products that will be sold on site, 
2.  Location and size of structures to be built to accommodate the use, 
3.  Permits for any animals regulated in Chapter 3 proposed as a part of the use, 
4.  Marketing plans (including on-site sales) if applicable, including proposed times and frequency of market operation or on-site sales, 
5.  Location of the intended public parking area (if applicable), and 
6.  Anticipated level of agriculturally related vehicle traffic. 
c.  If a market stand is proposed it must be a seasonal use to sell products grown on the property or created from products grown on the property. Market stands must provide off-street parking and may be open up to seven days a week. The proposal must include the proposed times and frequency of operation, location of intended public parking area, and products that will be sold on site. The public parking area may not exceed five spaces. 
d.  Standards for structures: 
1.  If the agricultural operation is on a lot that contains a dwelling unit or other primary structure, accessory structures not used for agricultural purposes are also allowed meeting the standards for accessory structures in section 7-16-1(c) of this chapter but may not exceed the cumulative limit for all structures established below. 
2.  Storage and production structures for community gardens are allowed by right meeting the standards below for a lot without a primary structure. 
3.  If the agricultural operation is on a lot that does not contain a dwelling or other primary structure, small storage or production structures (no larger than 12 × 12 and ten feet tall and not within the public right-of-way) are allowed by right. 
Larger storage or production structures may be built when there is no primary structure (home or other allowed use) on the property meeting the standards below but the applicant must submit a notarized affidavit stating and confirming that the structure will be used only for agricultural storage or production uses. 
(a)  The footprint of the proposed structure located on a lot without a primary structure may not exceed the following maximum footprint: 
Lot Size 	One Structure 	All Structures 
Less than 1 acre 	770 square feet 	1,000 square feet 
1 to 3 acres 	1,200 square feet 	1,600 square feet 
More than 3 acres 	2,500 square feet 	3,000 square feet 
 
(b)  Structures must meet required setbacks for the zone and may not exceed 20 feet in height except that height may be increased one foot for every one foot of additional side and rear setback, up to a maximum of 40 feet. 
(c)  On lots of more than three acres, structures may not be located in the required front yard. Structures located in side yards of corner lots whose rear or side yards are adjacent to a front yard of the adjacent lot, must maintain a setback equivalent to the front yard setback of the adjacent lot. 
(5)  Antennas. 
a.  Use districts: All. 
b.  This section covers antennas other than those associated with wireless telecommunication facilities and television and radio broadcast facilities. Antennas allowed as uses by right subject to special requirements by this section include: 
1.  Amateur radio facilities mounted on supporting structures less than 100 feet in height. 
2.  Residential antennas for receiving television, AM or FM radio broadcast signals. 
3.  Residential or business customer premise antennas for receiving microwave or satellite signals, provided such antennas are less than one meter (39.4 inches) in height or diameter and are mounted on a support structure less than 12 feet in height. 
c.  No antenna shall interfere with usual and customary radio and television reception except for broadcast facilities as provided for in the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
d.  All antennas must comply with FCC and FAA rules and regulations. 
e.  Antennas covered by this section which are to be located or constructed in local historic districts or on a local historic landmark shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the historic resources commission. 
(6)  Assisted living facilities. 
a.  Use districts: RM-16, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential. 
b.  Courtyard required facing the street. 
(7)  Bakeries. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
b.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
c.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
d.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Barber shops and salons. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
1.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
2.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
3.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Use districts: Resort 
1.  Only allowed as accessory to a permitted use. 
(9)  Homestays. 
a.  Use districts: All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
b.  No displays of goods, products, services, or other advertising shall be visible from outside of the dwelling. 
c.  The homestay operation shall be managed and carried on by a person who: 1) is a full-time resident of the property; and 2) is present during the homestay term for the entire time lodgers are staying at the property. To be a "full time resident," the person must reside on the property on a permanent basis, and it must be the person's primary home. For purposes of this homestay ordinance, a person can only have one primary, full time residence, and the homestay must be operated from that primary, full time residence. In order to be "present during the homestay term," the full time resident shall be at the property overnight and not away on vacation, visiting friends or family, travelling out of town for business or personal reasons, etc. during the homestay term. However, the full-time resident may be temporarily absent from the property for purposes related to normal residential activities such as shopping, working, attending class, etc. A minimum of two documents establishing proof of residency shall be supplied from an approved list of documents. 
d.  No activities other than lodging shall be provided. 
e.  No additional off-street parking is required for a homestay. 
f.  Only one homestay shall be permitted per lot/parcel. 
g.  Homestay permits shall be limited to one per person, at any given time. 
h.  No signage shall be allowed for homestays. 
i.  The length of stay of guests shall not exceed 30 days. 
j.  Exterior lighting shall be residential in nature and shall comply with the lighting requirements in the UDO. 
k.  The homestay owner or operator shall maintain liability insurance on the property, which covers the homestay use and homestay guests. 
l.  The homestay owner or operator must pay any applicable taxes, including occupancy and sales taxes, to the appropriate governmental entity. 
m.  The homestay area of the dwelling shall comply with all current and applicable building codes. 
n.  The homestay must be reviewed annually and inspected for compliance with this subsection. 
o.  Subsection 7-16-1(a)(1) shall not apply to homestays. Legally established, but non-conforming properties are eligible for a homestay use. 
(10)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
a.  Use districts: All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
b.  Bed and breakfast inns shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from other bed and breakfast inns, bed and breakfast homestays, and boardinghouses. In calculating the 500-foot distance between bed and breakfast inns or homestays, measurements shall be taken from the closest property line of the existing bed and breakfast inn or homestay lot or boardinghouse lot to the closest property line of the lot of the proposed bed and breakfast inn. Existing, legally established bed and breakfast inns that do not meet this separation requirement of 500 feet are permitted to expand within the subject property to the maximum limits allowed under this chapter, as long as all applicable development standards are met. 
c.  The owner/manager shall reside on the property. 
d.  The minimum lot area for a bed and breakfast inn shall be 20,000 square feet. 
e.  The maximum number of guest rooms provided by the bed and breakfast inn in a residential district shall be eight. 
f.  Accessory structures and outdoor activities. Accessory structures may be utilized for guest accommodation purposes as part of a bed and breakfast inn use. The number of guest bedrooms in the accessory structure (s) cannot exceed the number of guest bedrooms in the principal structure. Such accessory structures shall have or shall be constructed to have architectural compatibility with the principal structure. Accessory structures used to accommodate the guests of bed and breakfast inn uses are not subject to the floor area limitations for accessory structures but shall not exceed 35 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure and shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures unless such setback requirements are modified through the application of the flexible development standards provisions of this Code. Passive recreation-related outdoor activities such as tea-time are allowed outside the principal structure or any accessory structure(s), but all other activities and functions designed to serve and entertain guests shall take place only within the principal structure. 
g.  The length of stay of guests shall not exceed 14 days. 
h.  No home of less than 3,500 heated square feet, and less than 30 years old shall be used for a bed and breakfast inn. 
i.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by subsection 7-11-2(c) of this chapter. Parking shall be located on the same lot on which the bed and breakfast inn is located, at the rear of the lot and screened with vegetation from adjacent properties and from the street. 
j.  Signage shall be limited to a single sign, not to exceed eight square feet, with a maximum height of four feet. The sign may be located in the front yard and indirectly lighted. 
k.  Exterior lighting shall be residential in nature and shall not be directed towards adjacent properties. 
l.  Activities and functions at the bed and breakfast inn shall be provided for overnight guests only and shall be limited to breakfast and an afternoon and/or evening refreshment. In addition to the functions for overnight guests, the bed and breakfast inn may have four social gatherings per year. No commercial activities other than providing lodging for registered guests shall be permitted. 
m.  Comply with N.C. State Building Code requirements. 
(11)  Boardinghouse. 
a.  Use districts: All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
b.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
d.  Spacing: boardinghouses shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from other boardinghouses and bed and breakfast establishments. 
e.  Maximum number of rooms: equal to one room per one-half of the lot area required for each residential unit in the respective district. 
f.  The owner or manager of the boardinghouse shall reside on premises. 
g.  Parking shall be provided as required by subsection 7-11-2(c) of this chapter. Parking shall be located on the same lot on which the boardinghouse is located at the rear of the lot and screened with vegetation from adjacent properties and from the street. 
(12)  Call centers. 
a.  Use districts: Industrial. 
b.  Shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the total building square footage. 
(13)  Car washes. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District. 
1.  No washing facilities are to be located in front of the building. 
2.  All wastewater shall be collected on-site and piped to sanitary sewer system or recycled on site. 
b.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor. 
1.  Must be ancillary use located behind principal structure 
(14)  Cemeteries, animal. 
a.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
b.  Shall be operated by a business entity or non-profit group. 
c.  The operator of an animal cemetery must provide evidence of ownership of the property on which the cemetery is to be located, and copies of contracts or other instruments providing for perpetual maintenance and closure procedures. 
d.  Minimum setback from any property line: Same as that required in the respective district, but no less than ten feet. 
(15)  Child day care centers. 
a.  Use districts: RM-16. 
1.  Maximum enrollment: 79 children. 
2.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard widths. 
Front: Same as that for permitted uses in the respective districts but no less than the lesser setback of existing homes on adjacent lots. 
Side and rear: 25 feet. 
5.  Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and shall not be located in the required setbacks or buffer yards. 
6.  Child drop-off and pick-up shall be located on the site so as not to obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
7.  Parking shall not be located in the front yard. 
b.  Use districts: Office, Neighborhood Corridor. 
1.  Maximum enrollment: 50 children. 
2.  Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and shall not be located in the required setbacks or buffer yards. 
3.  Child drop-off and pick-up shall be located on the site so as not to obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
4.  Parking shall not be located in the front yard. 
c.  Use districts: Office II. 
1.  Maximum enrollment: 125 children. 
2.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
4.  Minimum yard widths: 
Front: Same as that for permitted uses in the Office II District. 
Side and rear: 25 feet. 
5.  Any outdoor play space shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and may not be located in the required setbacks or bufferyards. 
6.  Client drop-off and pick-up shall not obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
7.  Parking shall not be located in the front yard. 
d.  Use districts: Urban Village. 
1.  Play space required for day care centers does not count towards open space requirements for the Urban Village. 
e.  Use districts: Urban Residential. 
1.  Maximum enrollment: 30 children. 
2.  Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and shall not be located in the required setbacks or buffer yards. 
3.  Child drop-off and pick-up shall be located on the site so as not to obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
4.  Parking may not be located in a front yard. 
5.  Gross square footage may occupy up to 100 percent of the ground floor square footage but is not to exceed 6,000 square feet total. 
(16)  Child day care homes. 
a.  Use districts: All residential districts; Urban Residential. 
b.  Maximum enrollment: Eight children. 
c.  Any outdoor play space shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and may not be located in the required setbacks or bufferyards. 
d.  Client drop-off and pick-up shall not obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public streets. 
e.  Parking shall not be located in the front yard. 
(17)  Civic, social service, and fraternal organizations when operating as a fraternity or sorority house. 
a.  Use districts: RM-16. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
3.  Minimum yard widths: 
Front: Same as that for permitted uses in the respective districts; but no less than the lesser setback of existing homes on adjacent lots. 
Side and rear: 25 feet. 
4.  Shall be associated with an educational facility. 
5.  Maximum number of bedrooms: Shall equal one room per one-third of the lot area required for each residential unit in the same district. 
6.  Shall be located within one-half-mile of the institutional use it is intended to serve. 
7.  Parking shall not be located in the front yard. 
b.  Use districts: Institutional. 
1.  Shall be associated with an educational facility. 
2.  Shall be located within one-half-mile of the educational facility served. 
(18)  Clinics, medical, dental, psychiatric, optical. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Residential. 
b.  Gross square footage may occupy up to 100 percent of the ground floor square footage but is not to exceed 5,000 square feet total. 
(19)  Commercial uses accessory to residential uses. 
a.  Use districts: RM-8, RM-16, Neighborhood Business, Office, Office II, Institutional, Urban Place, Urban Residential, Urban Village. 
b.  Permitted only when accessory to multi-family residential. 
c.  Services limited to: dining halls, barber and beauty shops, laundry facilities, food stores, banks, newsstands, drugstores, flower shops, gift shops. 
d.  No signs or merchandise visible from off premises. 
e.  May occupy no more than 25 square feet per dwelling unit within the residential development. 
(20)  Cottage developments. 
a.  Use districts: RS-8, RM-6, RM-8, RM-16. 
b.  Purpose: The purpose of this use is to allow small infill development of small single-family homes as a means to increase the stock of housing affordable at the "workforce" and "affordable" housing levels. It is intended that the allowed greater density will be offset by the smaller size of the homes, and the design of the development - its layout and landscaping are of particular importance to ensure that it complements the surrounding existing neighborhood. Further it is important that any proposal be designed to fit into the context of the surrounding existing neighborhood, so the relationship of the design to existing setbacks and prevailing lot sizes and housing orientation should be taken into account. 
c.  The property shall be lawfully established and conforming to the underlying zoning district(s). 
d.  The minimum and maximum number of cottage homes in a cottage development shall be five and 15, respectively. Cottage developments shall not be subject to the density limitations of the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Cottage developments shall not be developed on sites subject to steep slopes and ridgetop requirements. 
f.  Cottage developments shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from other cottage developments. In calculating the distance between such uses, measurements shall be taken from the closest property line of the lot of the closest existing cottage development to the closest property line of the lot of the proposed cottage development. 
g.  The minimum setback requirements for the underlying zoning district shall apply and, in addition, there shall be a minimum of six feet separating cottage homes from each other and adjacent structures on all sides. 
h.  The maximum height for cottage homes shall be 28 feet. Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet in height. For the purpose of this subsection, height shall be calculated as the vertical distance from grade to the midpoint of the peak and eave. 
i.  The maximum gross floor area for individual cottage homes shall be 1,400 square feet, with a maximum gross floor area on the ground floor of 1,200 square feet. For the purpose of this subsection, gross floor area shall include the floor area of any attached garages and shall not include the floor area of any roofed porches, provided such porches are not enclosed. 
Accessory structures shall be limited to detached garages and community buildings and such uses shall not contain more than 800 square feet of gross floor area. The maximum number of such accessory structures shall not exceed 60 percent of the total number of cottage homes in a cottage development. 
j.  Parking requirements for cottage developments shall be as follows: 
• The minimum and maximum parking requirement for cottage developments shall be a minimum of one space per each cottage home and a maximum of two spaces per each cottage home, respectively. 
• Parking lots with six or more spaces shall not be provided within 25 feet of an adjoining street right-of-way or property line unless screened by a Type A buffer. 
• Parking for cottage developments should generally be dispersed across the site in groupings of fewer than six spaces. No more than 12 spaces shall be grouped together. 
k.  Cottage developments shall not contain accessory dwelling units. 
l.  Open space requirements for cottage developments shall be of two types, as specified below: 
• Common open space - A minimum of 500 square feet shall be provided for each cottage home. Common open space shall be arranged so that at least 75 percent of the cottage homes are adjacent to and have direct access to the open space so that it forms a central common green where a minimum of 20 percent is improved to include space for congregation and/or recreation including, but not limited to: common lawn; gazebos; patios; gardens; connected walking trails; communal fire pit, etc. All communal features shall be available to all residents. 
• Private open space - A minimum of 300 square feet shall be provided for each cottage home. Private open space shall be designated by fencing, landscaping, hardscaping or other means to create a separate private area for the exclusive use of the person(s) residing in each individual cottage home. If the required private open space is provided in more than one location (such as a flower bed in the front and a fenced yard or patio in the rear), no one area shall contain less than 100 square feet. 
m.  Cottage homes shall be oriented towards the primary road with a build-to line that is within five-feet of the average build-to line of the homes on the same side of the street for the same block. When no average build-to line is established, the underlying setback shall apply. 
(21)  Crematories, human. 
a.  Use districts: Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, River, Office, Office II, Community Business I, Community Business II. 
b.  Shall obtain and annually renew a permit from the Western North Carolina Regional Air Quality Agency. 
c.  Shall comply with all standards set by the North Carolina Crematory Authority and North Carolina Board of Funeral Services. 
d.  In the Office Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, permitted only as an accessory use to a funeral establishment. 
(22)  Crematories, animal. 
a.  Use districts: Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
b.  Shall comply with all applicable public health and environmental laws and rules and shall obtain and maintain all applicable licenses and permits. 
c.  Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall provide a certification by the North Carolina Division of Air Quality of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources that either all air quality regulations have been complied with or that no permits are required. 
d.  In the Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, and River districts: 
1.  Shall have a buffer or privacy fence to visually screen material, buildings, and equipment storage areas from adjoining residentially zoned or used property. 
2.  No noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare shall be noticeable beyond any property line. 
3.  Permitted only as an accessory use to animal cemeteries, veterinary clinics, or animal shelters. 
(23)  Drive through facilities. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District (note: additional standards regarding drive-through facilities for specific uses in other districts can be found elsewhere in this section of the ordinance). 
b.  To be located only behind or to the side of the main structure. 
c.  Drive through facilities not allowed for convenience stores. 
(24)  Dormitories. 
a.  Use districts: Industrial. 
b.  Permitted only as an accessory use. 
c.  To be occupied only by employees of the principal use. 
(25)  Reserved. 
(26)  Dwellings, multifamily. 
a.  Use districts: Neighborhood Business. 
b.  May not be located at the first floor or street level 
(27)  Dwellings, single-family detached. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Place, Urban Residential. 
b.  Not more than 25 percent of the total number of dwellings in any development shall be detached single-family dwellings. 
(28)  Dwellings, townhouse. 
a.  Use districts: RM-6, RM-8, RM-16, RS-8, Office, Office II, Office Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Central Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, River, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential, Urban Place, Institutional. 
b.  Minimum lot size, width and side yards (except for street sides of corner lots and end units in townhouse clusters) are waived for lots containing townhouse units; provided that the residential density for each phase of a project does not exceed the maximum permissible residential density for the respective use district. A common area that supports the townhouse development may be used to reduce the residential density to the required maximum provided that this area is commonly owned (or owned by the related community association) and is adjacent to one or more of the lots containing townhouse units within each phase of the development. This common area must be accessible to all residents of the townhouse development. 
c.  Within RM-6 districts, townhouse developments where the total area within lots containing townhouse units exceeds the maximum residential density permitted within the zoning district, an area of undeveloped, vegetated land sufficient to reduce the residential density to the required maximum shall be designated as permanent open space and shall be dedicated for use by the residents of the townhouse units. This open space area shall be adjacent to one or more of the lots containing townhouse units within each phase of the development, and accessible to all residents of the townhouse development. 
d.  Within RM-6 districts townhouse projects shall be limited to no more than four townhouses in one attached cluster. 
e.  All parking shall be located to the rear of the structure(s) unless garages are provided for each new unit and the majority of the homes on both sides of the block have parking located in the front of the structure(s). 
f.  All townhouse developments shall comply with all other applicable development and subdivision standards. 
(29)  Eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
1.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
2.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
3.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Use districts: Office, Office II, Office/Business, Institutional, Central Business District, Neighborhood Business, River 
1.  No drive-through facilities shall be permitted. 
2.  No outdoor speakers systems (except for the Central Business District and River), shall be permitted. 
3.  Maximum of 4,000 square feet for size of restaurants in Office II. 
(30)  Equipment rental business. 
a.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Neighborhood Corridor District. 
b.  Only items allowed to be sold as a permitted use within the district shall be rented. 
c.  No outdoor storage of rental items shall be permitted. 
(31)  Family care homes. 
a.  Use districts: All residential districts including Urban Residential. 
b.  Parking shall not be located in any required setback other than that which would occur on a driveway. 
c.  Family care homes shall be spaced a minimum of 600 feet from all other family care homes as measured from the closest property line of each property containing a family care home. 
(32)  Fire/police stations. 
a.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Residential, Urban Place Districts. 
b.  Excludes protective services. 
(33)  Funeral establishments. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District. 
b.  No crematorium services on premises. 
c.  Rear access required for delivery and pick up. 
(34)  Gasoline sales. 
a.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor, Central Business Districts. 
1.  Gas canopy to be located behind the principle structure. 
2.  A maximum of three fueling pumps (or six distribution points). 
b.  Use districts: Urban Village. 
1.  Pumps or gas/fueling islands are to be located behind main structure. 
2.  Main building must be built to corner on corner lots. 
3.  No gasoline sales allowed at convenience stores. 
(35)  Government buildings and uses. 
a.  Use districts: Office, Office II, Office Business, Institutional, Community Business I, Community Business II, Urban Residential. 
b.  Shall not contain protective function, jails/detention facilities, or related facilities. 
c.  In the Urban Residential District, gross floor area shall be limited to 5,000 square feet. 
(36)  Grocery stores. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
b.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
c.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
d.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(37)  Group homes. 
a.  Use districts: RM-16, Urban Residential District, Urban Village District. 
b.  Private yard or garden space required; minimum size 500 square feet (minimum dimension 15 feet). 
c.  Client drop off at the rear or side of the main building. 
d.  Group homes shall be spaced a minimum of 600 feet from all other family care homes and group homes as measured from the closest property line of each property containing a family care home or group home. 
(38)  Home occupation. 
a.  Use districts: all residential districts including Urban Residential. 
b.  No display of goods, products, services, or other advertising shall be visible from outside of the dwelling, except that home occupations shall be allowed one attached sign which shall not exceed one square foot per face, with no more than two faces per sign, and such sign shall not be illuminated. 
c.  Home occupations shall be operated by a resident of the dwelling. However, a maximum of one full-time equivalent non-resident of the dwelling may be employed as part of the home occupation. 
d.  On-premises retail sales shall not be a component of the home occupation. 
e.  A maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for the home occupation. If the home occupation is housed in an accessory structure, the square footage of the accessory structure shall not exceed 25 percent of the square footage of the principal structure (home). Provided, however, that artist's studios and workshops that are separate structures shall adhere to the following size standards: 
• Lot size less than 1 acre—structure maximum footprint 770 square feet 
• Lot size 1 to 3 acres—structure maximum footprint 1,200 square feet 
• Lot size more than 3 acres—no limit on structure size. 
• Maximum height—20 feet. 
f.  Only one vehicle principally used in connection with the home occupation shall be parked or stored on premises; provided, however, that the vehicle shall be parked in an enclosed garage. 
g.  No equipment or process shall be used in connection with the home occupation that creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference off-premises. 
h.  In addition to required parking as stipulated in section 7-11-2, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for use in conjunction with the home occupation. 
i.  The home occupation shall not materially increase the traffic that is found in its vicinity when the use is not in operation. Pursuant to this, a maximum of six individuals per day may visit the home occupation. 
j.  Artist's studios and workshops developed as home occupations and located in an accessory structure shall meet the following setbacks: 
• Front—setback for residential structures in the zoning district. 
• Side and rear setback. 
• Structure footprint less than 770 square feet—12-foot setback. 
• Structure footprint 770 square feet to 1,200 square feet—20-foot setback. 
• Structure footprint more than 1,200 square feet—25-foot setback. 
(39)  Industrial equipment sales. 
a.  Use districts: Light Industrial. 
b.  Sales must be inside only. 
(40)  Industrial uses, light. 
a.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II and Regional Business. 
b.  All activities associated with the use must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
c.  The use must be operated in a manner that prevents external effects of the activity such as but not limited to smoke, soot, dirt, vibration and odor from being detectable at any property line. 
(41)  Reserved. 
(42)  Lodging facilities. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District. 
1.  Courtyard space that may include a valet or drop-off function shall be required adjacent to access street. 
2.  No HVAC units are to be visible from streets or adjacent uses. 
b.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor. 
1.  Facility may contain no more than 20 guest rooms. 
(43)  Microbrewery. 
a.  Use districts: Office, Office II, Office/Business, Central Business, Institutional, Resort. 
1.  No drive through facilities permitted. 
2.  No outdoor speaker systems (except for the Central Business District) shall be permitted. 
3.  Maximum of 4,000 square feet in Office and Office II. 
4.  Must have an off-street or alley loading dock. 
(44)  Mobile food vending. 
a.  Use Districts: Office, Office II, Office Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business, River, Commercial Industrial, Light Industrial, Industrial, Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor, Urban Place. 
b.  Permitting: Permitting to establish mobile food vending as a permanent use will incorporate the following permits: 
1.  Permitting the mobile food site: Mobile food vending will only be allowed on parcels with an approved development permit and the actual number of vendors permitted will be dependent on site conditions and the ability to comply with spacing requirements outlined in subsection c. below. 
2.  Permitting the mobile food vendor: A mobile food vendor is required to obtain a permit for each separately approved mobile food site where vending will occur, according to the following regulations: 
a.  A mobile food vendor is permitted to vend at more than a single site but each location must be approved by individual permit. 
b.  The mobile food vendor permits will be renewed annually along with requirements for the Buncombe County Health Department. 
c.  The number of permits issued for individual mobile kitchens will be limited to two in the Biltmore Village Historic District. In Biltmore Village and the downtown national register district (corresponding to the adopted map 'Traditional Downtown Core' located in 7-8-18 of the UDO) an individual person or other entity may secure no more than one permit for a single mobile kitchen, but they may operate from multiple locations within these areas subject to the ability to meet other permitting requirements. Because the number of permits is limited in Biltmore Village, a vendor who secures a mobile food vending permit and fails to operate within 30 days of issuance of the permit shall have their permit revoked. 
d.  Mobile food vendor permits will run with the calendar year and existing vendors will have the option to renew. 
e.  A copy of the valid, approved permit and health inspection grade card from the Buncombe County Health Department and the City of Asheville shall be visually displayed on the mobile kitchen in clear view of all patrons. 
f.  Copies of other required permits will be submitted with the mobile food vendor permit application. 
g.  Operating without a valid permit will be considered a criminal Class III misdemeanor and enforceable as such. Violations of the approved permit by the mobile food vendor shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of article XVIII of this chapter. 
c.  Site improvements: The permit to establish a mobile food site will require approval of a site plan illustrating the proposed placement of the mobile food vendor(s) and the following items: 
1.  Access into the site and parking for vendor patrons at the rate of one parking space per mobile food vendor (applicable only if off-street parking is required in the zoning district). 
2.  Landscaping—The site will be improved to meet the standard for street trees. In addition the affected area of the site will provide a minimum eight-foot-wide property line buffer when directly adjacent to residentially zoned and used parcels. This buffer should be planted to include a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs to result in a vegetative screen that is 75 percent opaque year-round. As an alternative, the buffer may be reduced by 50 percent with the installation of an opaque fence. Existing buildings that screen the impacts of the mobile food vendor(s) will be considered a substitute for the property line buffer or portions thereof. 
3.  Sidewalks: Sidewalks will be required along the frontage lines of the parcel if the road is designated on the city's needed linkages sidewalk list. 
4.  Site maneuvering: Each mobile food vendor will need sufficient space for maneuvering onto the lot, for safe access by pedestrians, and for emergency response. 
5.  Setbacks: Setbacks for individual mobile food vendors will be ten feet from side and rear property lines and other parked vehicles (if any). There is not a required setback from the frontage line except that no portion of the mobile kitchen will be permitted to encroach into the right-of-way. 
6.  Other site features: Permitting for the mobile food site will take into consideration the ability for the primary site user to maintain compliance with minimum parking standards (if there is one) referencing the specific zoning district standards as described in the UDO. 
7.  Permanent electric power infrastructure is the preferred method for supplying power at the mobile food site. If this is pursued, then the applicable permits must be obtained. 
8.  Proposed dining areas and related furniture if any (approved subject to evaluation for compliance with the NC State Building Code). 
d.  Other requirements for mobile food vendors: 
1.  No mobile food vendors will be permitted to vend in a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
2.  All mobile food vendors are required to maintain permits issued by the Buncombe County Health Department and the City of Asheville will defer to Buncombe County for health and food safety regulations. 
3.  All mobile food vendors shall leave the mobile food site when they are not in operation. 
4.  Aside from festivals or special events that are administered under separate permits, the mobile food vendor will be required to maintain a list of times and locations (if more than one) for operating the mobile kitchen. Changes to scheduled times must be updated in a manner mutually agreeable to the City of Asheville. 
5.  Mobile food vendors will be limited to the sale of food and non-alcoholic drinks. The sale of other merchandise or services will not be permitted. 
6.  Mobile food vendors are encouraged to use recyclable and/or compostable containers, cups and utensils. 
7.  Hours of operation: 
(a)  Mobile food vendors located in the downtown Central Business District may operate from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(b)  In areas outside of the downtown Central Business District mobile food vendors may operate from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. unless located within 200 feet of a residential use. When located within 200 feet of a residential use mobile food vendors are limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight). 
8.  The mobile food vendor(s) will be required to remove trash and litter from the mobile food site each day and to maintain the cleanliness of the site during hours of operation. The vendor must provide a minimum of one receptacle for use by patrons. 
9.  The mobile food site will be subject to the outdoor lighting and noise ordinance standards established by the City of Asheville. 
10.  (a)  In the downtown Central Business District and the Biltmore Village Historic District, mobile food vendors will be required to use electric power from the site to supply outside power needs to the truck. 
(b)  In other areas of the city outside of the downtown Central Business District and the Biltmore Village Historic District, electric power from the site is also the preferred outside power source but generator(s) may be used if they operate at 65 decibels or less and if they are properly attached per manufacturer's standards to the mobile food vehicle. 
11.  Vendors may not bring temporary facilities such as tents, shade cloths, or temporary restrooms to the mobile food site. In any event a single chair may be brought by the vendor for use by staff. 
12.  Mobile food vendors shall maintain 20 feet between other mobile food vendors based on fire code separation. 
13.  Vendors will be subject to random inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements. 
14.  Signage: Mobile food vendors may have signage on their mobile kitchen, not to exceed 45 square feet total per vehicle including letters and/or logo advertising the business. No roof signs will be allowed. 
(45)  Movie theaters. 
a.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Neighborhood Corridor. 
b.  Shall have a maximum seating capacity of 250 persons. 
(46)  Motor vehicle and boat service and repair. 
a.  Use districts: River, Industrial, Central Business, Urban Village, Community Business I, Community Business II, Neighborhood Corridor. 
b.  Use must be conducted entirely within an enclosed building in all listed districts. 
c.  New uses and expansions if located in the regulated flood hazard area must comply with the City of Asheville Environmental Protection Standards in article 12. 
d.  No storage of abandoned or inoperable vehicles. 
e.  If located adjacent to a residential use, must provide a screened buffer meeting Type A standards. 
(47)  Motor vehicle service facility (gasoline sales, car washes, and outdoor storage permitted separately). 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village. 
1.  No automobile work areas are to be located in front of building. 
2.  All auto work areas shall be screened from adjacent uses. 
3.  Gas sales permitted separately with standards. 
4.  On corner lots main building shall be built to the corner. 
b.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor. 
1.  Height standards: one story structure allowed. 
2.  Gas sales permitted separately with standards. 
3.  Car wash facilities permitted separately with standards. 
4.  Repair bays to be located behind principle structures. 
5.  Vehicles must be stored covered or fenced off with opaque fencing and not visible from ROW areas. 
(48)  Nightclubs. 
a.  Use districts: Resort. 
1.  Must be an accessory use located within the main building of the permitted use. 
(49)  Office. 
a.  Use districts: Light industrial, Industrial. 
b.  Shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the total building square footage in a light industrial district and no more than 20 percent of the total building square footage in an industrial district unless they primarily serve employees on site. 
(50)  Orphanages. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District. 
b.  Private fenced yard/garden play space required; minimum size required 500 square feet (minimum dimension 15 feet). 
(51)  Outdoor storage. 
a.  Use districts: River District, Industrial. 
1.  New uses and expansions of this type, if located in the regulated flood hazard area must be elevated to meet FEMA regulations; except stone, gravel and mulch storage exempted. 
b.  Use districts: Community Business II, Neighborhood Corridor, Light Industrial. 
1.  Only allowed as accessory to other uses in these districts. 
2.  If located adjacent to a residential use, must provide a screened buffer meeting Type A standards. 
c.  Use districts: additional standards regarding drive-through facilities for specific uses in other districts can be found elsewhere in this section of the ordinance). 
(52)  Parking decks, garages, facilities. 
a.  Use districts: Institutional, Urban Village. 
b.  Shall be an accessory use to the primary uses allowed in the zoning district in which the parking deck is proposed. 
c.  Within the Institutional District, a parking deck shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property located in a residential zoning district or used for residential purposes. 
(53)  Pharmacies. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
b.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
c.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
d.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(54)  Pharmacies. 
a.  Use district: Office. 
b.  Items sold shall be limited to prescription and non-prescription drugs and related medical and health supplies. 
c.  Shall not operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(55)  Places of worship. 
a.  Use district: All residential except Urban Residential. 
b.  For the purposes of these development standards, places of worship shall be placed in the following categories based upon the number of seats in the sanctuary(ies): 
1.  Small place of worship—Not more than 300 seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
2.  Medium place of worship—301 to 800 seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
3.  Large place of worship—More than 800 seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
c.  Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size for places of worship shall be as follows: 
1.  Small place of worship—Minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the place of worship is located. 
2.  Medium place of worship—Two acres. 
3.  Large place of worship—Three acres. 
d.  Lot location: Places of worship shall be located as follows: 
1.  Small places of worship may be located on any street. 
2.  Medium places of worship shall be located on property which abuts a major or minor thoroughfare, as identified in the City of Asheville's Thoroughfare Plan, or on a residential collector street provided that the property (if located on a residential collector street) is located within: 
• 500 feet of a major or minor thoroughfare if that portion of the collector street which serves as the connecting street passes through an area with residential uses; or 
• 1,000 feet of a major or minor thoroughfare if that part of the collector street which serves as the connecting street passes through an area with only non-residential uses. 
3.  Large places of worship shall be located on property which abuts a major thoroughfare, as identified in the City of Asheville's Thoroughfare Plan. Places of worship wishing to expand and which owned the property on which they wish to expand prior to February 8, 2000, or prior to the extension of the city's jurisdiction to the property shall not be required to meet the lot location standards. 
e.  Setbacks: Setbacks for places of worship shall be as follows: 
1.  Small and medium place of worship: 
• Front: Same as residential uses in the zoning district. 
• Side: 25 feet. 
• Rear: 25 feet. 
• No parking or other activities shall be located in any of the required setbacks. In addition, parking shall not be located in front of the principal structure(s). 
2.  Large place of worship: 
• Front: 50 feet, except that buildings, or portions of buildings, with a width not exceeding 50 feet, may be set back a distance equivalent to the front setback for residential uses in the zoning district in which the place of worship is located. 
• Side: 25 feet. 
• Rear: 25 feet. 
• No parking or other activities shall be located in any of the required setbacks. In addition, parking shall not be located in front of the principal structure(s). 
f.  Access points: Access onto place of worship property from local residential streets shall be limited to a total of two driveway access points onto all surrounding local residential streets. 
g.  Parking. Off street parking shall be provided at the following ratio: 
1.  Minimum: One space per eight seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
2.  Maximum: One space per three seats in the sanctuary(ies). Parking exceeding the maximum number of spaces shall meet the requirements set forth in subsection 7-11-2(c)(2). 
3.  On-street parking may be used to provide up to 50 percent of the required off street parking provided that: 
• On-street parking is permitted on the street where the parking is proposed to be located; 
• The on-street parking is located within 1,000 feet of the place of worship; 
• The city traffic engineer has approved the on-street parking proposal; and 
• Area residents have been notified of the proposed parking arrangement. 
4.  The use of pervious materials for parking is encouraged. 
h.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as required by section 7-11-3 of this chapter, except as required by the following standards: 
1.  Parking and outdoor activity areas shall be buffered from adjacent residential uses with an "A" buffer as described in section 7-11-3 of the UDO. The buffer shall incorporate a wall, berm, and/or shrubs with a minimum height of three feet. Walls shall have a maximum height of six feet. If a landscaped berm is used, the berm shall be completely covered with landscaping within 24 months of the issuance of the certificate of compliance. If shrubs are used, they must have a minimum height of 30 inches at the time of planting. The purpose of the landscape buffer is to visually separate the parking and outdoor activity area(s) from adjacent residential uses. Where grade changes or other features of the site make it difficult for a standard buffer to visually separate the parking and outdoor activity area(s) from adjacent residential uses, the buffer shall be developed and/or located as required to create an effective visual separation. 
2.  Parking and outdoor activity areas shall be buffered from the street with a planting strip with a minimum width of ten feet which incorporates one large deciduous tree for each 30 feet of street frontage or one small deciduous tree for each 20 feet of street frontage. Buffers around parking areas shall incorporate a wall, berm, and/or shrubs with a minimum height of three feet. Walls and/or fences serving as buffers around parking areas shall have a maximum height of six feet. 
i.  Impervious surface standards. Impervious surfaces shall not exceed: 
1.  Small and medium place of worship—60 percent impervious. 
2.  Large place of worship—70 percent impervious. 
j.  Lighting. Lighting shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The height of lighting fixtures for exterior illumination shall not exceed 16 feet in parking and vehicular access areas and 12 feet in pedestrian areas. Lights located on buildings for the purpose of illuminating architectural details or signs shall be exempt from the height limitation provided that the light(s) is (are) shielded and directed away from residential areas. 
2.  All exterior light fixtures shall be located at least 20 feet from the property line of residentially used properties. 
3.  Light fixtures shall be designed such that the light beam is shielded and/or directed away from residential areas. 
4.  To the extent possible, lighting within parking areas shall be provided by bollard type lights instead of taller area illumination lights. 
5.  Lights in parking areas, vehicular access areas, and pedestrian activity areas not required for security shall be turned off when the area(s) is (are) not in use. 
k.  Height of buildings shall not exceed 40 feet. Steeples, spires, bell towers, minarets, and similar architectural features shall not be subject to the height limitation. 
l.  Offices associated with the activities or business of the place of worship shall occupy not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the buildings on the lot. 
m.  No commercial activities (selling of items to the general public on an on-going basis) shall be permitted. 
n.  No warehouse structures shall be permitted. 
o.  No facilities for vehicle maintenance shall be permitted. 
p.  No grading shall be permitted within ten feet of side and rear property lines, other than for utilities, landscaping, and access. 
q.  No grading shall occur until site development plans for the place of worship have been approved by the City of Asheville. 
r.  Outdoor speaker systems are prohibited. 
s.  Factory fabricated transportable buildings designed to serve as expansion space for existing places of worship may be utilized subject to requirements found in the temporary use section (article XIV) of this chapter. 
(56)  Places of worship. 
a.  Use district: Neighborhood Corridor District, Urban Residential District. 
b.  Main building may be set back up to a maximum of 25 feet. 
(57)  Public utilities and related facilities. 
a.  Use districts: All residential including Urban Residential. 
b.  Permitted facilities shall be limited to switching boxes and transformer stations and buildings. 
c.  No employees shall be based at the facility. 
d.  The facility shall be screened from adjacent properties and streets with a vegetative screen which, at a minimum, meets the standards for "A" buffer as set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
(58)  Recreational uses, restricted to membership, non-profit. 
a.  Use districts: All residential including Urban Residential. 
b.  Use limitations: golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, clubhouses with indoor recreational facilities. 
c.  Retail sales may occur as an accessory use occupying a maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area of the clubhouse or other recreational building. 
d.  The use shall be operated on a membership basis and payments, if any, for the use of the recreational facilities are made on an installment basis rather than on a per use or daily fee basis. 
(59)  Recycling operation. 
a.  Use districts: River District, Commercial Industrial, Industrial, Light Industrial. 
b.  New uses and expansions of this type must operate in an enclosed building(s) and comply with the City of Asheville Environmental Protection Standards found in article 12. 
c.  The temporary loading of materials into trucks for transport or distribution may occur in outdoor areas provided materials are not stored for a period of greater than 24 hours. 
(60)  Recycling collection center. 
a.  Use districts: River. 
1.  New uses and expansions of this type if located in the regulated flood hazard area, must operate in an enclosed building(s) and comply with the City of Asheville Environmental Protection standards found in article 12. 
b.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II, Resort, Highway Business, Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Urban Village and Neighborhood Corridor, Institutional. 
1.  If located adjacent to a residential use or zoning, a Type A landscape buffer as set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter must be provided. 
2.  Setbacks shall be as follows: 
• Front: 25 feet. 
• Side: 10 feet. 
• Rear: 20 feet. 
(61)  Retail sales. 
a.  Use districts: Institutional. 
1.  Maximum gross floor area per retail use: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Maximum gross retail use floor area per building: 15,000 square feet. 
3.  Permitted retail uses: Same as that of the Community Business I District. 
b.  Use districts: Resort. 
1.  Shall be an accessory to a permitted use. 
c.  Use districts: Light industrial, Industrial. 
1.  Fruit and vegetable markets permitted by right, all other retail uses are limited to no more than 20 percent of the total building square footage in the light industrial districts and no more than ten percent of the total building square footage in the industrial districts. 
d.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
1.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
2.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
3.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
4.  May not include gasoline sales. 
e.  Use districts: Urban Village, Neighborhood Business. 
1.  No gasoline sales allowed at convenience stores. 
2.  No drive through facilities allowed. 
(62)  Schools. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village, Urban Residential. 
b.  Play yard playfield space shall not count towards open space requirements unless field is open for public play. 
c.  Playgrounds shall be fenced where they are adjacent to roadways. 
d.  Driveway pick up and drop off is allowed in the setback area. 
e.  In the Urban Residential District, gross square footage may occupy up to 100 percent of the ground floor square footage but is not to exceed 10,000 square feet total. 
(63)  Schools. 
a.  Use districts: All residential except Urban Residential. 
b.  Minimum lot size: 
• Kindergarten (only): One acre. 
• K-12: Two acres. 
c.  Minimum setback standards: 
• Front: Twice that for permitted uses in the respective zoning district. 
• Side: 25 feet. 
• Rear: 25 feet. 
d.  Parking and active recreation areas shall not be located within the required building setbacks. 
e.  Primary access shall be provided from thoroughfare or collector streets. Local residential streets shall not be used for primary access. 
f.  Factory fabricated transportable buildings designed to serve as expansions space for existing schools may be utilized subject to requirements found in the temporary use section (article XIV) of this chapter. 
(64)  Shelters. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village District. 
b.  Distinct times of operable ingress and egress hours shall be agreed upon at time of the permit approval. 
c.  Courtyard space is required but may be placed at side or rear of the property. 
(64.1)  Short-term vacation rental. 
a.  Use districts: All districts as noted in sections 7-8-1(d) Table of Permitted Uses and sections 7-8-28(3.2) and 7-8-29(3.2) Permitted Use Table. 
b.  No displays of goods, products, services, or other advertising shall be visible from outside of the dwelling. 
c.  No activities other than lodging shall be provided. 
d.  Off-street parking shall be required per Sec. 7-11-2. 
e.  No signage shall be allowed for short-term vacation rentals. 
f.  The length of stay of guests shall be less than one month. 
g.  Exterior lighting shall be residential in nature and shall comply with the lighting requirements in the UDO. 
h.  The short-term vacation rental owner or operator shall maintain liability insurance on the property, which covers the short-term vacation rental use and guests. 
i.  The short-term vacation rental owner or operator must pay any applicable taxes, including occupancy and sales taxes, to the appropriate governmental entity. 
j.  The short-term vacation rental shall comply with all current and applicable building codes. 
k.  The short-term vacation rental must be reviewed annually and inspected for compliance with the annual zoning permit. 
(65)  Small engine repair and service business. 
a.  Use districts: Community Business I, Community Business II. 
1.  Only items allowed to be sold as a permitted use within the district shall be repaired or serviced. 
2.  No outdoor storage of items, parts, equipment, etc. shall be permitted. 
b.  Use districts: Highway Business, Regional Business, Central Business. 
1.  On-site operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(66)  Stables. 
a.  Use districts: Central Business, Resort. 
b.  All horses, mules or other beasts of burden shall be stabled, washed, and fed within an enclosed building. 
c.  An annual inspection shall be conducted by a licensed veterinarian (D.V.M.), experienced in the care and treatment of horses, for both the sanitary conditions of the stable facility and health of the animals. The veterinarian shall have experience in the care and treatment of horses. The results of this inspection shall be submitted to the City of Asheville animal control officers within 30 days of inspection. 
d.  On-site waste collection receptacles shall be housed within the stable building and all waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary fashion no less frequently than one time per week. 
e.  The drainage of all liquid by-products from the stable shall be discharged into a permitted sanitary sewer line and shall not be disposed of by way of storm sewers. 
f.  No horse, mule, or other beast of burden shall be maintained except pursuant to the permit issued by the city manager or his designee in accordance with chapter 3 of the City of Asheville Code of Ordinances. 
g.  See chapter 3 of the City of Asheville Code of Ordinances for additional restrictions. 
h.  In the Resort District use allowed only when accessory to the primary use. 
(67)  Stadiums and arenas. 
a.  Use districts: Institutional. 
b.  Shall be an accessory use to a permitted use within the district. 
c.  Access shall be from internal streets serving the principal use. 
d.  All public address and loud speaker systems shall be directed away from residential areas and shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
e.  Shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(68)  Studios, galleries and workshops for artists, artisans, and craftspeople - high impact. 
a.  Use districts: Central Business. 
b.  Shall not be located on the first floor street level. 
c.  Shall be entirely conducted within an enclosed building. 
d.  A minimum of 25 percent of the gross floor area shall be used for retail sales, and in the Central Business district must maintain the showroom for retail or wholesale sales at the front entrance. 
e.  Must demonstrate that the use controls smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. 
(69)  Sustainable development projects. 
a.  Use districts: RM-6, RM-8, RM-16, Office, Office II, Office-Business, Community Business I, Community Business II, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business, River, Commercial Industrial. 
b.  Purpose. This section is intended to meet key strategic goals by providing incentives for the construction of high quality, sustainably based development projects that are reasonably compatible with the natural and built environments of the city. It is not the intent of this section to provide an alternative for other, small-scale infill development processes, such as the process for allowing duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes in single-family zoning districts. 
c.  General. All sustainable development projects shall meet the following minimum standards. Additionally, all sustainable development projects shall meet the standards established elsewhere in the Unified Development Ordinance except as otherwise afforded through appendix 7-G and subsection f. below. 
1.  A minimum of five residential units must be provided. 
2.  All property owners in residential districts receiving density bonuses shall execute a good neighbor agreement. A sample of such an agreement can be provided by the planning and development department or may be submitted by the owner for review and approval by the planning director. This agreement shall be posted in clear view of all residents and shall be provided separately to each resident. 
3.  All sustainable development projects offering affordable housing shall provide a declaration of deed restrictions ensuring that rents or sale prices shall remain affordable for a period of no less than 15 years, increasing by no more than four percent per annum, or the annual increase in the Consumer Price Index, whichever is lower, excepting rental housing constructed with other public funding that includes a separate long-term affordability requirements that is equal to or more rigorous. 
4.  Sustainable development projects receiving density bonuses are not eligible for other use by right, subject to special requirements uses. 
5.  All units shall be within one-eighth-mile of a high frequency transit corridor or other corridors as identified on the "Sustainable Development Project Eligibility Map" on file with the planning and development department. 
6.  Seventy-five percent of the project area, including all grading activity, must be located within a one-eighth-mile of the designated applicability area identified on the sustainable development project eligibility map. 
7.  All units shall be Energy Star Certified. 
d.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided per subsection 7-11-2(c) with the additional following requirements. 
1.  All Off-street parking located in residential districts shall comply with the following: 
a)  When located in a sidewalk priority area or along a major thoroughfare or connector street as described in the City of Asheville Pedestrian Plan, all parking shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure(s) and shall not be located closer to the street than the leading edge of said structure(s). 
b)  Parking in excess of two spaces located in front of the principal structure may be approved by the planning and development director provided the area will be screened to be 80 percent opaque year round from adjacent single-family zoning, and: 
• The topography of the site makes it difficult to access the side or rear of the property; or 
• The majority of the properties on both sides of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed have parking areas located in front of the principal structures. 
c)  All off-street parking areas of five or more spaces shall be screened with vegetation from adjacent single-family zoned lots. The vegetative screening shall consist of the planting required for a Type A buffer or its equivalent as determined through the alternative landscape compliance process. Other designated buffers would not be required between structures or open lawn areas. 
d)  Landscaping shall be provided as required per subsection 7-11-3(d)(4). 
2.  Off-street parking requirements may be reduced or waived per subsection 7-11-2(c)(4). 
e.  Architectural and design requirements. 
1.  For all large multi-family and mixed use structure(s) containing more than four units, the following standards apply: 
a)  The structure shall be oriented towards the primary access street in a manner similar to the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
b)  The front yard depth for the proposed structure shall be not less than the average front yard depth for the residential structures on the same side of the street on the block on which the new construction is proposed. A modification of ten percent or two feet, whichever is greater, may be considered in cases of physical hardship or practical difficulty. 
c)  For commercially zoned areas, buildings shall meet the definition of pedestrian oriented design as defined in article 2 of this chapter. 
d)  On corner lots, buildings shall be located at the corner where the exposed corner-side resembles the front of the building. See subsection 7-8-23(f)(2) for building templates. 
e)  Façades facing primary access streets (primary façades) should include well-defined entrances facing the street. Buildings placed at the corner may include a corner entrance. 
f)  Windows shall be placed evenly across the primary façade and make up a minimum of 20 percent of the wall surface for an exclusively residential structure and, 20 percent of the wall surface above the ground story for a mixed use structure, to complement pedestrian activity. 
g)  The first floor of all mixed use structures shall be designed in a way that a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the first floor primary façade incorporates pedestrian scale windows, doors and other openings to complement pedestrian activity. 
h)  All storefront windows shall be transparent or lightly tinted and shall not appear false or applied. 
i)  Sidewalk or greenways shall provide connections from the new construction to the existing community on all frontages where the subject property abuts a public right-of-way. In situations where a parcel does not directly abut a public right-of-way, a sidewalk or greenway connection shall be provided along private easements or rights-of-way. Projects with 50 units or more, shall provide a minimum of two pedestrian/bike access points. 
j)  For projects with a frontage length greater than 400 feet, a network of internal streets and sidewalks shall be required unless otherwise approved by the planning director where exceptions may be considered in cases of practical difficulty and/or conflicting goals. 
f.  Development incentives. 
1.  Additional density may be applied to the base density allowed by right under the existing zoning per appendix 7-G. Review levels will be determined by base densities not including units added as a result of the application of this section. Regardless of the base density, any project between 50—69 units total shall be required a Level II review as set forth in subsection 7-5-9(b); projects with 70 or more units shall be required a Level III review as set forth in subsection 7-5-9(a). 
2.  Minimum lot size, lot width, and setback requirements for single-family structures in a new single-family subdivision may be reduced by 30 percent when one or more of the following criteria is met: 
• Dedicated community open space is provided at a minimum rate of 500 square feet per unit. Community open space areas must be maintained for the benefit of the entire community and must be accessible by all units in the community either directly or by a sidewalk or trail system. 
• The subdivision is within 300 feet of a public park where a connection is provided by sidewalk or greenway. 
3.  Off-street parking requirements may be reduced by 25 percent if: 
• 60 percent or more of the units are affordable (as defined by the City of Asheville) and if the city's traffic engineer and planning director determine that adequate on-street parking is available within a 100-foot radius to off-set the balance of spaces needed, or 
• 60 percent or more of the units are one-bedroom or efficiency apartments. 
4.  Height maximums may be extended an additional 10 feet if 100 percent of the units are affordable or if Silver, or higher, LEED certification is achieved. 
5.  Lot sizes, widths, and setbacks may be reduced by 30 percent if no density bonuses are being sought and the project meets Bronze (or higher) LEED certification or NC Healthy Built Homes certification. 
(70)  Tailors/dressmaker shops. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
b.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
c.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
d.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(71)  Reserved. 
(72)  Video rental stores. 
a.  Use districts: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
b.  Shall be located on the first floor with office and/or residential uses above. 
c.  Shall provide an operable storefront entrance on Montford Avenue (or on Hill Street if the entrance is within 50 feet from the Montford Avenue side of the building). 
d.  Individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(73)  Vocational and technical school. 
a.  Use districts: Urban Village, Neighborhood Corridor. 
1.  No truck or motor vehicle driving training school. 
b.  Use districts: Light Industrial, Industrial. 
1.  No living quarters may be provided. 
(74)  Warehousing and storage. 
a.  Use districts: Regional Business. 
b.  Storage and warehousing shall be permitted as an accessory use only. 
c.  The size of the area designated or used for outdoor storage shall not exceed the total gross floor area of the principal building. 
(75)  Wireless telecommunication facilities, microcell. Any reference in this section to "wireless telecommunication facilities" shall be deemed to include the modifier, "microcell," unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
a.  Use districts: All zoning districts. 
b.  Microcellular wireless telecommunication facilities are permitted on buildings and other existing structures (other than off-premises signs) which do not require an increase in height to accommodate the facility. Utility poles may be extended in height in residential zoning districts to the lesser of 20 feet above the vegetative canopy in the vicinity of the site as determined by the city arborist, or 80 feet in height. Such extensions shall qualify as an existing structure for purposes of this section. Such height extensions of utility poles shall only be permitted if no other distribution pole within 1,320 feet of the proposed site has been extended in height above the average pole height on the same distribution line as documented by the utility owning such poles. 
c.  All antennas associated with microcellular wireless telecommunication facilities mounted on a building or other existing structure (other than a utility pole) shall be flush-mounted against the side of the building or structure and camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface on which they are mounted. 
d.  Antennas associated with a microcellular wireless telecommunication facility mounted on a utility pole must be mounted atop the pole or flush mounted against the sides of the pole, and shall be colored to match or complement the color of the utility pole and shall be mounted in as unobtrusive a manner as possible. 
e.  Antennas associated with a microcellular wireless telecommunication facility may not be co-located on a tower or other support structure used by an amateur radio operator. 
f.  Equipment enclosures associated with microcellular wireless telecommunication facilities mounted on a building or other existing structure (other than a utility pole) shall be mounted inside the building or structure, attached to an exterior surface, or placed underground or on a concrete pad on the ground outside the building or structure. If mounted on an exterior surface, the enclosures shall be colored or camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface on which they are mounted. If placed on a concrete pad on the ground, the enclosures shall be screened so as to make them unobtrusive. 
g.  Equipment enclosures associated with a microcellular wireless telecommunication facility mounted on a utility pole, must be mounted on the utility pole; provided, however, if combiners are used to allow co-location by sharing of an antenna or antenna array and pole-mounting of equipment enclosures cannot be accommodated on the pole, the combiner and additional equipment enclosures may be placed underground or on a concrete pad on the ground. If placed on a concrete pad on the ground, such additional equipment enclosures shall be screened so as to make them unobtrusive. 
h.  All cabling and wiring connecting antennas, equipment enclosures, and other components of a microcellular wireless telecommunication facility shall be colored or concealed in a manner as to render them unobtrusive. 
i.  Microcellular wireless telecommunication facilities located in a local historic district or on a historic landmark shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the historic resources commission. 
j.  Generators may not be used as a primary electrical power source. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
k.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license must accompany its application. If the applicant is not an FCC licensee, the applicant must demonstrate that it has binding commitments from one or more FCC licensees to utilize the wireless telecommunication facility and must submit a copy of each such wireless service provider's FCC license. If FCC licenses have previously been filed with the city in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant may certify that such licenses remain in full force and effect. 
l.  As part of its application each applicant for a microcellular wireless telecommunication facility shall be required to execute a standard maintenance/removal agreement binding the applicant and its successors and assigns to maintain properly the exterior appearance of and ultimately remove the facility upon abandonment or cessation of operations. Such agreement shall require the applicant to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the city for all costs it incurs to perform any work required of the applicant by the agreement that the applicant fails to perform. A $1,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the city, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement. The applicant and its successors and assigns shall be required to continue such bond or other security until such time as the facility has been removed and all other requirements of its maintenance/removal agreement have been satisfied. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
m.  Abandoned or unused wireless telecommunication facilities shall be removed within 180 days of abandonment or cessation of operations. If not removed within that period, such facilities may be removed as provided in the permittee's maintenance/removal agreement and the costs of removal recovered from the permittee's bond or other security. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intention to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
n.  An annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be required for each wireless telecommunication facility located in the city. Before an annual permit shall be issued or renewed an applicant or permittee must certify that: 
1.  It currently holds an FCC license to provide commercial wireless services and that such license is in good standing or, if the permittee is not an FCC licensee, that the license of each of its FCC tenants is in good standing. 
2.  The wireless telecommunication facility continues to be operated by the permittee and that it has a continuing need for the facility to meet the requirements of its FCC license. 
3.  That the facility continues to comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations. 
4.  That the permittee currently has general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 in force covering the wireless telecommunication facility as evidenced by a certificate of insurance attached to its renewal application. 
5.  That it is in compliance with its maintenance/removal agreement and that any bond or other security given in conjunction therewith remains in full force and effect. 
6.  That it has not constructed, maintained, modified or operated any wireless telecommunication facilities in the city without the city's approval or, if it has done so, that it has ceased operating and has removed all such facilities. Failure to obtain or renew an annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall result in the wireless telecommunication facility being deemed abandoned and subject to removal, as well as subjecting the facility's owner to all other penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' advance written notice to the permittee at its last known address of the pending expiration of the permittee's annual wireless telecommunication facility permit. Fees for annual wireless telecommunication facility permits shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
(76)  Wireless telecommunication facilities. Any reference in this section to "wireless telecommunication facilities" shall be deemed to include the modifier, "concealed", unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
a.  Use districts: All zoning districts except RS-2, RS-4, RS-8. 
b.  Concealed wireless telecommunication facilities are permitted on buildings and alternative structures (other than off-premises signs and telecommunication towers). 
c.  For purposes of this section, antennas mounted on an electric transmission tower shall qualify as a concealed wireless telecommunication facility provided antennas associated with such a facility do not extend more than ten feet above the top of the supporting structure nor more than two feet from the sides of the structure. Equipment enclosures associated with such a facility may be mounted on the structure or placed underground or on the ground. If placed on the ground, equipment enclosures shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened so as to make them unobtrusive. 
d.  For purposes of this section, antennas mounted on an utility pole shall qualify as a concealed wireless telecommunication facility provided antennas associated with such a facility do not extend more than ten feet above the top of the supporting structure nor more than two feet from the sides of the structure, and equipment enclosures associated with the facility occupy less than 60 cubic feet. Equipment enclosures associated with such a facility may be mounted on the structure or placed underground or on the ground on a concrete pad. Utility poles may be extended in height in RM-6, RM-8 and RM-16 zoning districts to the lesser of 20 feet above the vegetative canopy in the vicinity of the site as determined by the city arborist, or 80 feet in height. Such extensions shall qualify as an existing structure for purposes of this section. Such height extensions of utility poles shall only be permitted if no other distribution pole within 1,320 feet of the proposed site has been extended in height above the average pole height on the same distribution line as documented by the utility owning such poles. 
e.  Panel antennas associated with concealed wireless telecommunication facilities may not exceed eight feet in height. If flush-mounted on the side of a building or alternative structure, antennas shall be camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the surface. Antennas extending above the roof line of a building shall be concealed behind an RF-transparent parapet wall or façade which is camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the building or structure. Such parapet walls or façades shall not extend more than ten feet above the roof line. Where a parapet wall is at least eight feet in height, omnidirectional (whip-type) antennas may extend above the parapet wall by a distance equal to the height of the parapet wall. 
f.  Antennas associated with a concealed wireless telecommunication facility may not be co-located on a tower or other support structure used by an amateur radio operator. 
g.  Electronic equipment associated with concealed wireless telecommunication facilities may be placed inside a building or, if placed on a rooftop, all equipment enclosures shall be mounted behind a parapet wall or façade which is camouflaged to match or complement the color and architectural treatment of the building. If placed on the ground on a concrete pad, except as provided in subsection d. above, equipment enclosures shall be screened so as to make them unobtrusive. 
h.  All cabling and wiring connecting antennas, equipment enclosures, and other components of concealed wireless telecommunication facilities shall be colored or concealed in a manner as to render them unobtrusive. 
i.  Generators may not be used as a primary electrical power source. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
j.  Concealed wireless telecommunication facilities located in a local historic district or on a historic landmark shall require a certificate of appropriateness from the historic resources commission. 
k.  Applicants for concealed wireless telecommunication facilities shall first be encouraged to consider properties owned by the city or Buncombe County, or instrumentalities thereof, before considering private properties. Public properties shall be subject to the same restrictions and standards of appropriateness as private properties. All such public agencies or instrumentalities shall retain discretion as to whether to make a specific property available for wireless telecommunication facilities and to make determinations with respect to site capacity, aesthetics, or suitability of such facilities. If an applicant proposes to use public property for the location of a concealed wireless facility, the completed application shall receive the same expedited service as for qualified collocated facilities. 
l.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license must accompany its application. If the applicant is not an FCC licensee, the applicant must demonstrate that it has binding commitments from one or more FCC licensees to utilize the wireless telecommunication facility and must submit a copy of each such wireless service provider's FCC license. If FCC licenses have previously been filed with the city in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant may certify that such licenses remain in full force and effect. 
m.  As part of its application, each applicant for a concealed wireless telecommunication facility shall be required to execute a standard maintenance/removal agreement binding the applicant and its successors and assigns to maintain properly the exterior appearance of and ultimately remove the facility within 180 days of the abandonment or cessation of operations of the facility. Such agreement shall require the applicant to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the City of Asheville for all costs it incurs to perform any work required of the applicant by the agreement that it fails to perform. A $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the City of Asheville, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement. The applicant and its successors and assigns shall be required to continue such bond or other security until such time as the facility has been removed and all other requirements of the maintenance/removal agreement have been satisfied. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
n.  Abandoned or unused wireless telecommunication facilities shall be removed within 180 days of abandonment or cessation of operations. If not removed within that period, such facilities may be removed as provided in the permittee's maintenance/removal agreement and the costs of removal recovered from the permittee's bond or other security. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intent to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
o.  An annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be required for each wireless telecommunication facility located in the city. Before an annual permit shall be issued or renewed an applicant or permittee must certify that: 
1.  It currently holds an FCC license to provide commercial wireless services and that such license is in good standing or, if the permittee is not an FCC licensee, that the license of each of its FCC tenants is in good standing. 
2.  The wireless telecommunication facility continues to be operated by the permittee and that it has a continuing need for the facility to meet the requirements of its FCC license. 
3.  That the facility continues to comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations. 
4.  That the permittee currently has general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 in force covering the wireless telecommunication facility as evidenced by a certificate of insurance attached to its renewal application. 
5.  That it is in compliance with its maintenance/removal agreement and that any bond or other security given in conjunction therewith remains in full force and effect. 
6.  That it has not constructed, maintained, modified or operated any wireless telecommunication facilities in the city without the city approval or, if it has done so, that it has ceased operating and has removed all such facilities. Failure to obtain or renew an annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall result in the wireless telecommunication facility being deemed abandoned and subject to removal, as well as subjecting the facility's owner to all other penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' advance written notice to the permittee at its last known address of the pending expirations of the permittee's annual wireless telecommunication facility permits. Fees for annual wireless telecommunication facility permits shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
(77)  Wireless telecommunication facility, collocation. Any reference in this section to "wireless telecommunication facility" shall be deemed to include the modifier, "collocated," unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
a.  Use districts: All zoning districts. 
b.  Application fees for a co-located wireless telecommunication facility shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
c.  Wireless telecommunication facilities may be co-located on any structure which hosts one or more existing permitted and approved wireless telecommunication facilities provided, however, that the proposed co-located wireless facility must meet equipment enclosure and antenna size restrictions for the type of facility and zoning district in which the existing facility was approved (i.e., microcell and concealed wireless telecommunication facilities). The structure on which the wireless telecommunication facilities are to be located may be improved, rehabilitated, or altered structurally to accommodate the proposed co-location, provided that the height of a nonconforming structure is not increased and provided further that the proposed co-location complies with all other requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. 
c.1.  Expedited review. Any application for collocation of a wireless telecommunication facility that meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  The collocation does not increase the overall height and width of the tower or wireless support structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached. 
2.  The collocation does not increase the ground space area approved in the site plan for equipment enclosures and ancillary facilities. 
3.  The wireless facilities in the proposed collocation comply with applicable regulations, restrictions, or conditions, if any, applied to the initial wireless facilities placed on the tower or other wireless support structure. 
4.  The additional wireless facilities comply with all federal, state and local safety requirements. 
5.  The collocation does not exceed the applicable weight limits for the wireless support structure as determined by the planning director or designee, shall be deemed complete unless within 45 days from the date of submission (or within some other mutually agreed upon time), the applicant is notified of deficiencies or incompleteness of the application. When the application is deemed complete, whether by curing any deficiencies or by operation of the preceding sentence, the city shall issue a written determination approving or denying the application within 45 days. 
d.  Where co-location is proposed by use of a combiner (allowing two or more commercial wireless service providers to share a common antenna or antenna array), an equipment enclosure which houses only the combiner and amplifiers may exceed the maximum permitted dimensions for other types of equipment enclosures up to a maximum of 70 cubic feet. 
e.  Antennas associated with a co-located wireless telecommunication facility may not be co-located on a tower or other support structure used by an amateur radio operator. 
f.  Co-located wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
1.  Use of dual-band/multi-band antennas (to allow sharing of antennas or antenna arrays by wireless providers using different frequency bands) or by using combiners (to allow antenna sharing by users of the same frequency band) is encouraged in order to minimize the height of support structures and the visual impact of multiple co-located antennas or antenna arrays. 
2.  Antennas associated with a co-located wireless telecommunication facility shall be mounted so as to present the smallest possible silhouette, profile, or cross-section. Preferred antenna mounting scenarios are, in order of descending preference: 
a.  Compact dual-polarized antennas in a cylindrical unicell arrangement extending less than two feet from the structure, and mounted atop the tower; 
b.  Panel antennas flush-mounted against the tower; and 
c.  Antennas mounted at the end of straight or curved davit arms or brackets extending from the sides of the tower. 
3.  No co-located wireless telecommunication facility located on a telecommunication tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, triangular framework, or like structures or equipment, except during periods of construction or repair. Curved or straight davit arms or brackets used for antenna mounting shall be connected to the tower at the base of the arms or brackets only and such arms or brackets (and any antennas or hardware mounted thereon) shall not be physically interconnected with any similar arm or bracket. 
4.  All equipment enclosures and other improvements accessory to a co-located wireless telecommunication facility shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall be maintained in good appearance and repair. No equipment enclosure shall exceed 12 feet in height. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view with a row of evergreen trees and/or shrubs planted in a landscape strip with a minimum width of five feet, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  Generators may not be used as a primary electrical power source. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
6.  Equipment enclosures and other improvements shall be enclosed within a security fence consisting of chain link fencing at least eight feet in height. The fence may be topped with barbed wire. The planning and development director may require as a condition of approval that the fencing be screened by appropriate landscaping or other means, or may waive or modify the fencing requirement if he/she determines that doing so will enhance the overall appearance of the facility without any compromise in safety or security. 
7.  Signage at any ground-based portion of a co-located wireless telecommunication facility site shall conform to the following provisions: 
a.  A sign listing the name of the wireless telecommunication service provider operating the site, the site name or number and an emergency telephone number shall be posted at or near the entrance to the site so as to be readily visible to persons outside the site's security fencing. 
b.  Equipment hazard warning and informational signs are permitted. 
c.  The posting of any other signs or advertising is prohibited at any wireless telecommunication facility or upon any telecommunication tower. 
g.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license must accompany its application. If the applicant is not an FCC licensee, the applicant must demonstrate that it has binding commitments from one or more FCC licensees to utilize the wireless telecommunication facility and must submit a copy of each such wireless service provider's FCC license. If FCC licenses have previously been filed with the city in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant may certify that such licenses remain in full force and effect. 
h.  As part of its application, each applicant for a co-located wireless telecommunication facility shall be required to execute a standard maintenance/removal agreement binding the applicant and its successors and assigns to maintain properly the exterior appearance of and ultimately remove the co-located facility within 180 days of the abandonment or cessation of operations of the co-located facility. Such agreement shall require the applicant to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the City of Asheville for all costs it incurs to perform any work required of the applicant by the agreement that it fails to perform. A $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the City of Asheville, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement when a separate equipment shelter is constructed to house the equipment for the co-located wireless telecommunication facility. A $1,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the City of Asheville, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement when the equipment for the co-located telecommunications facility is housed in an existing equipment shelter. The applicant and its successors and assigns shall be required to continue such bond or other security until such time as the co-located facility has been removed and all other requirements of the maintenance/removal agreement have been satisfied. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
i.  Abandoned or unused wireless telecommunication facilities shall be removed within 180 days of abandonment or cessation of operations. If not removed within that period, such facilities may be removed as provided in the permittee's maintenance/removal agreement and the costs of removal recovered from the permittee's bond or other security. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intention to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
j.  Co-located wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be constructed unless the facility owner has general liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00. The owner of a co-located wireless telecommunication facility shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance showing evidence of its coverage and the certificate shall contain a requirement that the insurance company notify the city 30 days prior to the cancellation, modification or failure to renew the insurance coverage required. 
k.  An annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be required for every wireless telecommunication facility located in the city. Before a permit shall be issued or renewed an applicant or permittee must certify that: 
1.  It currently holds an FCC license to provide commercial wireless services and that such license is in good standing or, if the permittee is not an FCC licensee, that the license of each of its FCC tenants is in good standing. 
2.  The wireless telecommunication facility continues to be operated by the permittee and that it has a continuing need for the facility to meet the requirements of its FCC license. 
3.  That the facility continues to comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all conditions of its conditional use permit. 
4.  That the permittee currently has general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 in force covering the wireless telecommunication facility as evidenced by a certificate of insurance attached to its renewal application. 
5.  That it is in compliance with its maintenance/removal agreement and that any bond or other security given in conjunction therewith remains in full force and effect. 
6.  That it has not constructed, maintained, modified or operated any wireless telecommunication facilities in the city without the city's approval or, if it has done so, that it has ceased operating and has removed all of such facilities. Failure to obtain or renew an annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall result in the wireless telecommunication facility being deemed abandoned and subject to removal, as well as subjecting the facility's owner to all other penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this section, the city shall give 30 days' advance written notice to the permittee at its last known address of the pending expiration of the permittee's annual wireless telecommunication facility permit. Fees for annual wireless telecommunication facility permits shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
(78)  Electrified security fences. 
a.  Use districts: Industrial and Light Industrial. 
b.  Must meet the following standards: 
(1)  The construction or use of an electrified security fence for other than animal control is allowed only as provided in this section in addition to the other requirements of section 7-10-3. No person may install, maintain, or operate an electric fence that does not meet the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Electrified security fences are not allowed in: 
a.  Public rights-of-way, utility rights-of-way, and public construction easements; or 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any residential use. 
(3)  Electrified security fences shall comply with the following design and technical standards: 
a.  Energizer standards - The energizer for electric fences must be driven by a storage battery system (which may include a solar powered system), not to exceed 12 volts direct current. No use of alternating current is allowed. The fence cabling and wires must not be connected to any overhead power line post and no individual section of an electrified fence may be connected to more than one energizer. 
The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact must not exceed energizer characteristics described in paragraph 22.108 and shown in Figure 102 of International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76, latest edition. The electrified fence system must regulate voltage, pulse, and amperage at all times. 
A lightening diverter/arrestor must be installed between an electrified fence and its energizer; and any energizer used must be connected to a dedicated ground system. All energized ground system cables must be properly insulated, and any energizer ground system must not be connected to any building or plumbing system, and must be located at least ten feet from any buried pipes, wires, or other utilities of any kind. 
b.  Fence system design - The electrified security fence must be designed so that it does not interfere with the transmission of power, telephone, data, radio, or television signals. The fence must not interfere with overhead utility lines or the maintenance of those lines. The electrified fence must be located to prevent nearby power lines from affecting the performance of the fence. 
c.  Alarm system - Electrified fences must be equipped with a monitoring alarm system and must obtain a permit meeting the standards of the City of Asheville for alarms in chapter 13, article II, section 13-32 of the City Code that activates simultaneously with any contact to the electrified area of the fence. 
d.  Fence height - In no case may an electrified security fence exceed ten feet in height. The electrified security fence must be completely surrounded on its perimeter by a nonelectrical fence or wall that also may not exceed ten feet in height. 
Any portion of an electrified security fence or its surrounding perimeter nonelectric fence that exceeds six feet in height must be located beyond the front setback, and any portion that exceeds eight feet in height it must be located beyond the side or rear setback. 
e.  Fence separation - The electrified security fence must be separated from the perimeter fence or wall by a distance of at least 12 inches and no more than 36 inches, except at gate openings. The area between the perimeter fence and the electrified fence must be kept unobstructed and clear of any vegetation or objects. The lowest portion of the perimeter fence or wall of an area enclosed by an electrified fence must be constructed so that no space exists between the ground and fence or wall. 
f.  Electrified fence sign - At least one warning sign must be placed on each side the electrified security fence, no higher than four feet from the ground. There can be no less than 25 feet between signs. At least one sign must be placed on any vehicle or pedestrian access gate. The signs must be not larger than one square foot in size with lettering a minimum of one inch high. Signs must be black, or black and red, on a white or yellow background; and must state "Danger - Electric Fence Inside" or "Warning - Electric Fence Inside" in English and Spanish and contain the an illustration indicating the potential for electric shock. 
g.  Disconnect box - An disconnect switch within a "key box" (Knox Box) must be installed at a location or locations acceptable to the fire department that will disconnect the electrified fence completely from all energizers in an emergency by police, fire, or other emergency personnel. The location of this switch must be clearly marked and easily observable and accessible from a primary path of entry. The type of key box, type of key, installation, and maintenance must be as determined and approved by the fire department. 
h.  The owner of the electric fence and/or the owner of the property where the fence is located must provide the city with a hold harmless/indemnification agreement in a form satisfactory to the city attorney prior to the installation of the electrified fence. 
i.  The city, or a third party designated by the city, may conduct inspections with notice and may enter the premises for such purpose with permission. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2428, §§ 21, 22, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2462, §§ 1(c), 2, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2490, § 1, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 2506, § 1, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2527, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2539, §§ 2—4, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2535, §§ 6—9, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2619, § 1(g), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2622, §§ 1(b), (c), 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2634, §§ 1(a), (b), (g), (h), 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2650, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2651, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2663, § 1(h)—(j), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2723, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2851, §§ 1(b), 1(c), 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2903, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2973, § 1(d), (e), 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3018, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 3022, 5-13-2003; Ord. No. 3028, § 1(g) and (h), 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 3052, §§ 1(c) and (d), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3083, §§ 1(b) and (c), 1-13-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(11), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3187, § 1, 1-23-04; Ord. No. 3327, § 1(b), (c), 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3335, § 1(b), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3337, § 1(b), 2-28-06; Ord. No. 3362, §§ 1(c), (d), 5-23-06; Ord. No. 3394, §§ 1(b)—(g), 9-26-06; Ord. No. 3412, §§ 1(d), (e), 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3479, §§ 1(c)—(e), 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3480, § 1(f), 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3489, §§ 1(c), (d), 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3572, §§ 1(p), (q), 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3579, §§ 1(c), (d), 1-22-08; Ord. No. 3685, § 1e—j, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3700, § 1n, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3713, § 1, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3743, §§ 1b—d, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3744, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 3757, § 1h, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3792, §§ 1d, e, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3793, §§ 1a—c, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3794, §§ 1e, f, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3856, §§ 1d, e, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3874, §§ 1q—cc, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3897, §§ 1(c)—(e), 9-14-10; Ord. No. 3908, §§ 1c, d, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3959, § 1q, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4007, § 1d, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 4151, §§ 1a, b, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 4152, §§ 1c—h, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 4207, §§ 1a—c, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 4233, §§ 1d—f, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 2-11-14; Ord. No. 4403, § 1d, 4-14-15; Ord. No. 4431, §§ 1f, g, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 4470, § 1c, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4505, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 4579, § 1, 4-25-17; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(u—x), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1o—u, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-16-2. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Purpose. Conditional uses are uses which are generally compatible with other land uses permitted in a zoning district but which, because of their unique characteristics or potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and/or the city as a whole, require individual consideration of their location, design, configuration, and/or operation at the particular location proposed. Such individual consideration may also call for the imposition of individualized conditions in order to ensure that the use is appropriate at a particular location and to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
All conditional uses shall, at a minimum, meet the conditions set forth in this chapter. Any use identified as a conditional use in a zoning district shall not be permitted without the approval of city council. 
The approval procedure for conditional uses is set forth in section 7-5-5 of this chapter. 
(b)  Conditional uses listed (by zoning district) 
(1)  Historic landmark conditional use. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Telecommunications towers. 
(4)  Telecommunication tower/support structure, concealed. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Adult establishments. 
(9)  Those uses listed as uses by right subject to special requirements in the Montford Transition Overlay District that exceed a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Ancillary non-residential uses in residential districts. 
(12)  Detention centers, jails, and related correctional facilities. 
(13)  Government buildings and uses. 
(14)  Motor vehicle and boat sales, new and used. 
(15)  Drive through facilities. 
(16)  Group homes. 
(17)  Electrified security fences. 
(c)  Conditional use standards. The Asheville City Council shall not approve the conditional use application and site plan unless and until it makes the following findings, based on the evidence and testimony received at the public hearing or otherwise appearing in the record of the case: 
(1)  That the proposed use or development of the land will not materially endanger the public health or safety; 
(2)  That the proposed use or development of the land is reasonably compatible with significant natural and topographic features on the site and within the immediate vicinity of the site given the proposed site design and any mitigation techniques or measures proposed by the applicant; 
(3)  That the proposed use or development of the land will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property; 
(4)  That the proposed use or development of the land will be in harmony with the scale, bulk, coverage, density, and character of the area or neighborhood in which it is located; 
(5)  That the proposed use or development of the land will generally conform with the comprehensive plan, smart growth policies, sustainable economic development strategic plan, and other official plans adopted by the city; 
(6)  That the proposed use is appropriately located with respect to transportation facilities, water supply, fire and police protection, waste disposal, and similar facilities; and 
(7)  That the proposed use will not cause undue traffic congestion or create a traffic hazard. 
(d)  Additional conditional use standards. 
(1)  Historic landmark conditional use. 
a.  Use districts: All districts. 
b.  Property must be designated by the city council as a historic landmark. 
c.  Property owner must show that the current permitted uses or restricted uses of the property in the zoning district in which it is located are such that the property cannot be preserved and the granting of a conditional use permit enables its preservation. 
d.  Uses which may be permitted shall be limited to uses that are not inconsistent with the design and/or uses for which the structure(s) on the property had been designed or used during the life of the structure(s). 
e.  Prior to consideration of the request for the conditional use permit by the city council, the historic resources commission of the Asheville and Buncombe County shall submit to city council a written recommendation relative to the appropriateness of the applications being considered. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Telecommunication towers. 
a.  Use districts: Office/Business, Community Business II, Resort, Institutional, Highway Business, Regional Business Commercial Industrial, River, Industrial, Light Industrial. In addition, where the city council determines that a concealed telecommunication support structure is not feasible or not an available alternative, a telecommunications tower shall be allowed as a conditional use in residential districts at schools, fire stations, publicly-owned housing complexes, recreation centers, community centers; provided: (i) said use is not otherwise non-conforming, (ii) the property is not subdivided for the purpose of accommodating a telecommunication tower and, (iii) the application meets the standards set forth in subsections 7-16-2(c) and (d) of this chapter. 
b.  The applicant for a conditional use permit for a telecommunication tower shall bear the burden of demonstrating by substantial evidence in a written record that a bona fide need exists for the proposed telecommunication tower and that no reasonable combination of locations, techniques or technologies will obviate the need for, or mitigate the height or visual impact of, the proposed telecommunication tower. 
c.  Application fees for a conditional use for a telecommunication tower shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
d.  The city may elect to retain outside consultants or professional services to review a conditional use application for a telecommunication tower and to make recommendations on relevant issues including, but not limited to, verification of the applicant's due diligence, analysis of alternatives, conditions of approval, and compliance with state and federal rules and regulations at the applicant's expense. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has posted a $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security satisfactory to the city, guaranteeing payment of such expenses. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
e.  In addition to the notice requirements of section 7-5-20 of this chapter, the applicant for a conditional use permit for a telecommunication tower shall be required to notify by regular mail all property owners within a one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) radius of the proposed location of any public hearing on the application at least ten days prior to the hearing. The planning and development director may require the applicant to conduct a crane or balloon test to simulate the height of the proposed tower. Notice of the dates and times of such tests shall be mailed by the applicant to all property owners within a one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) radius of the proposed location at least ten days prior to the primary test date. The notice shall state primary and alternate test dates, as well as a range of dates for testing in the event of extended periods of inclement weather. The planning and development director shall review and approve the sufficiency of the notice prior to mailing and, as part of its application, the applicant will be required to submit a certificate of mailing and attach a copy of the notice and a list of the addresses to which it was sent. In the event the applicant shall seek to increase the height of a proposed tower, or move its location more than 50 feet laterally, from that stated in the original notices, additional notice shall be required to be given in accordance with the above provisions and all time periods shall run from the date of supplemental notification. 
f.  Applicants for telecommunication towers shall first be encouraged to consider properties owned by the city or Buncombe County, or instrumentalities thereof, before considering private properties. Public properties shall be subject to the same restrictions and standards of appropriateness as private properties. All such public agencies or instrumentalities shall retain discretion as to whether to make a specific property available for wireless telecommunication facilities and to make determinations with respect to site capacity, aesthetics, or suitability of such facilities. 
g.  Telecommunication towers proposed on properties under the ownership or control of the North Carolina Department of Transportation shall simulate typical highway lighting towers in height and appearance and shall be clustered amongst or near such towers so as to be unobtrusive. If due to topography, existing vegetative canopy, or other local conditions, the city council determines that a tower disguised as a coniferous tree is a preferable aesthetic alternative to a simulated lighting tower, it may require such camouflage treatment as a condition of approval. If any portion of a telecommunication tower located on such properties is used to mount cameras, instruments, sensors or antennas for governmental use, and the same structure supports or incorporates commercial wireless telecommunication facilities, the governmental use shall be deemed incidental or accessory to the commercial use and the entire facility shall be treated as a commercial use for purposes of this section. 
h.  It is the policy of the city to encourage co-location and the use of existing structures where appropriate. In furtherance of that policy objective, the following provisions shall apply to an application for a conditional use permit for a telecommunication tower: 
1.  A conditional use for a telecommunication tower shall not be approved unless the tower is designed structurally, electrically, mechanically and in all respects to accommodate at least two additional users. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant submits: 
a.  A letter of intent agreeing to make all of its wireless telecommunication facilities (including existing facilities) within the city available to providers of functionally equivalent services at commercially reasonable rates. 
b.  A copy of an executed lease for the proposed tower site that allows co-location or leasing or subleasing to other providers of functionally equivalent services. 
2.  Applicants are encouraged to meet co-location requirements by using dual-band/multi-band antennas to allow sharing of antennas or antenna arrays by wireless providers using different frequency bands or by using combiners to allow antenna sharing by users of the same frequency band. 
3.  A conditional use application for a telecommunication tower shall not be approved if an electric transmission tower is located above, or no less than 25 feet below, the ground elevation of and within the search radius of a proposed telecommunication tower, unless the applicant can demonstrate one or more of the following: 
a.  That sufficient easements or other interests in real property cannot be obtained to accommodate the wireless telecommunication facility; 
b.  That the electric utility owning the electric transmission tower is unwilling to allow its use for wireless facilities; 
c.  That the applicant is unable to gain sufficient ingress and egress to the electric transmission tower; 
d.  That the existing use of the electric transmission tower would interfere with the operations of the applicant as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented; 
e.  That the planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the electric transmission tower as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer, and the electric transmission tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
Electric transmission towers may be increased in height to that allowed for telecommunication towers in the district in which the electric transmission tower is located if the city council determines such height extension is preferable to placement of a new telecommunication tower in that area. 
4.  A conditional use application for a telecommunication tower shall not be approved unless the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative structures more than 30 feet in height (after first considering electric transmission towers) within a one-quarter mile (1,320 foot) radius of the proposed telecommunication tower due to one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, building or alternative structures, as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower, building or structure cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
b.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment on the towers, buildings or alternative structures, as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
c.  Existing or approved towers, buildings or other structures within the search radius, or combinations thereof, cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer. 
d.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunication equipment upon existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative structures. 
5.  Antennas associated with a wireless telecommunication facility may not be co-located on a tower or other support structure used by an amateur radio operator. 
i.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with usual and customary radio and television reception excepting broadcast facilities as provided for in the regulations of the FCC. 
j.  All telecommunication towers must comply with FCC and FAA regulations. 
k.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license must accompany its application. If the applicant is not an FCC licensee, the applicant must demonstrate that it has binding commitments from one or more FCC licensees to utilize the wireless telecommunication facility and must submit a copy of each such wireless service provider's FCC license. If FCC licenses have previously been filed with the city in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant may certify that such licenses remain in full force and effect. 
l.  As part of its application, each applicant for a telecommunication tower shall be required to execute a standard maintenance/removal agreement binding the applicant and its successors and assigns to maintain properly the exterior appearance of and ultimately remove the facility within 180 days of the abandonment or cessation of operations of the facility. Such agreement shall require the applicant to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the City of Asheville for all costs it incurs to perform any work required of the applicant by the agreement that it fails to perform. A $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the City of Asheville, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement. The applicant and its successors and assigns shall be required to continue such bond or other security until such time as the facility has been removed and all other requirements of the maintenance/removal agreement have been satisfied. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
m.  Abandoned or unused wireless telecommunication facilities shall be removed within 180 days of abandonment or cessation of operations. If not removed within that period, such facilities may be removed as provided in the permittee's maintenance/removal agreement and the costs of removal recovered from the permittee's bond or other security. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days written notice of its intention to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
n.  All telecommunication towers shall comply with FAA lighting requirements. In addition, in a specific instance, the city may impose lighting requirements for a tower that is not required by FAA regulations to be lit. 
o.  Except as otherwise provided herein, minimum setbacks for telecommunication towers shall be in accordance with the setback requirements set forth in the development standards for the district in which the location of the tower is proposed. In addition, for all properties other than city-owned properties, telecommunication towers must be setback from any residentially zoned or residentially used properties a distance equivalent to the full height of the tower being erected. The city council may reduce the setback requirement upon a showing by the applicant that there are special physical circumstances or conditions affecting the proposed site such that the strict application of the setback requirement would not allow the most effective use of the proposed site to minimize the visual impact of the wireless telecommunication facility. 
o.1.  In residential districts, a minimum lot size of five acres is required for all properties other than city-owned properties. This requirement may be reduced by the city council if other site features are found to mitigate the impact of the tower but, under no circumstances shall the lot size be reduced to less than three acres. 
p.  Telecommunication towers shall be buffered from adjacent properties with a buffer which, at a minimum, meets the requirements of an "A" buffer as described in section 7-11-3 of this chapter, regardless of adjacent zoning district classifications or uses. 
q.  No telecommunication tower shall be located: 
1.  On top of buildings; 
2.  In local historic districts, on the property on which a local historic landmark is located, or within 1,000 feet of any local historic district or local historic landmark. 
3.  In areas determined by the city council to be "view areas" (formerly "viewsheds of superior quality"), taking into consideration the definitions by the United States Department of Interior, Blue Ridge Parkway Office. A map indicating the location of the "view areas" which has been reviewed and adopted by the city council shall be kept on file in the planning and development department of the city. 
4.  On a restricted mountain ridge. 
r.  In cases where an applicant is required to perform an environmental assessment (EA) or an environmental impact statement (EIS) under the National Environmental Policy Act or the National Historic Preservation Act, such EA or EIS shall be submitted as part of its application for a conditional use permit. An application for a conditional use permit will not be deemed complete until any required EA or EIS has been submitted to the city. 
s.  Telecommunication towers shall not be constructed unless the company erecting the tower has general liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00. The owner of a telecommunication tower shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance showing evidence of its coverage and the certificate shall contain a requirement that the insurance company notify the city 30 days prior to the cancellation, modification or failure to renew the insurance coverage required. 
t.  Telecommunication towers shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
1.  Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment. The city council may condition approval on the use of specific concealment techniques where it determines that doing so is necessary or desirable. 
2.  Guyed towers are prohibited. Commercial wireless telecommunication towers shall be of a monopole design unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding environment. 
3.  Use of dual-polarized antennas which electronically combine the functions of transmit and receive antennas (rather than spatial diversity antenna arrays which rely on antennas being physically separated), dual-band/multi-band antennas (allowing two or more providers of different types of commercial wireless services to share a common antenna), and use of combiners (allowing antenna sharing by providers using the same frequency band) are encouraged. 
4.  Antennas shall be mounted on telecommunication towers so as to present the smallest possible silhouette, profile, or cross-section. Preferred antenna mounting scenarios are, in order of descending preference: 
a.  Compact dual-polarized antennas in a cylindrical unicell arrangement extending no more than two feet from the sides of the supporting structure and mounted atop the tower; 
b.  Panel antennas flush-mounted against the tower; 
c.  Antennas mounted at the end of straight or curved davit arms or brackets extending from the sides of the tower. 
5.  No telecommunication tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, triangular framework, or like structures or equipment, except during periods of construction or repair. Curved or straight davit arms or brackets used for antenna mounting shall be connected to the tower at the base of the arms or brackets only and such arms or brackets (and any antennas or hardware mounted thereon) shall not be physically interconnected with any similar arm or bracket. 
6.  All equipment enclosures and other improvements accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall be maintained in good appearance and repair. No equipment enclosure may exceed 12 feet in height. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view with a minimum "B" buffer as described in section 7-11-3 of this chapter, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
7.  Generators may not be used as a primary electrical power source. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
8.  Telecommunication towers, equipment enclosures and other improvements shall be enclosed within a security fence consisting of chain link fencing at least eight feet in height. The fence may be topped with barbed wire. The city council may require as a condition of approval that the fencing be screened by appropriate landscaping or other means. The city council my waive or modify the fencing requirement if it determines that doing so will enhance the overall appearance of the facility without any compromise in safety or security. 
9.  Telecommunication towers shall have a flat gray or galvanized finish unless the city council determines another color scheme would be a preferable aesthetic alternative. 
10.  No two telecommunication towers shall be constructed within 1,320 feet of each other unless documentation is provided to the planning and development department to show that co-location on towers within the 1,320 feet is not technically feasible. 
11.  No telecommunication tower shall be permitted which exceeds 100 feet in height. 
12.  Signage at any telecommunication tower site shall conform to the following provisions: 
a.  A sign listing the name of the wireless telecommunication service provider operating the site, the site name or number and an emergency telephone number shall be posted at or near the entrance to the site so as to be readily visible to persons outside the site's security fencing. 
b.  Equipment hazard warning and informational signs are permitted. 
c.  The posting of any other signs or advertising is prohibited at any wireless telecommunication facility or upon any telecommunication tower. 
13.  The city council may require any other conditions deemed necessary or desirable to ameliorate the impact of the tower on the adjacent properties and uses. Such conditions shall include, but are not limited to: the height of the tower; the construction or type of tower; lighting; and co-location of the antennas and facilities of different parties on a single tower. 
u.  An annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be required for each wireless telecommunication facility located in the city. Before a permit shall be issued or renewed an applicant or permittee must certify that: 
1.  It currently holds an FCC license to provide commercial wireless services and that such license is in good standing or, if the permittee is not an FCC licensee, that the license of each of its FCC tenants is in good standing. 
2.  The wireless telecommunication facility continues to be operated by the permittee and that it has a continuing need for the facility to meet the requirements of its FCC license. 
3.  That the facility continues to comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all conditions of its conditional use permit. 
4.  That the permittee currently has general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 in force covering the wireless telecommunication facility as evidenced by a certificate of insurance attached to its renewal application. 
5.  That it is in compliance with its maintenance/removal agreement and that any bond or other security given in conjunction therewith remains in full force and effect. 
6.  That it has not constructed, maintained, modified or operated any wireless telecommunication facilities in the city without the city's approval or, if it has done so, that it has ceased operating and has removed all such facilities. 
Failure to obtain or renew an annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall result in the wireless telecommunication facility being deemed abandoned and subject to removal, as well as subjecting the facility's owner to all other penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' advance written notice to the permittee at its last known address of the pending expiration of the permittee's annual wireless telecommunication facility permit. Fees for annual wireless telecommunication facility permits shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
v.  Conditional use permits for telecommunication towers shall be valid for an initial period of five years. Upon application by the permittee within 60 days prior to the expiration of the initial permit period, a review shall be conducted to determine whether and under what conditions the conditional use may be extended for successive five-year periods. Costs associated with the review process shall be borne by the permittee. Fees for five-year permit renewal shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. Grounds for nonrenewal or revocation include: 
1.  The use involved is no longer allowed as a conditional use in the zoning district or fails to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter as adopted on January 12, 1999, or any subsequently enacted land use regulations in effect at the time of renewal and the permittee has failed to supply reasonable assurances that the facility will be brought into compliance within 180 days of the initial permit's expiration; 
2.  The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of any conditional use approval; 
3.  The facility has not been properly maintained; 
4.  The facility has not been upgraded to minimize its impact, including community aesthetics, to the greatest extent permitted by the technology exists at the time of renewal; or 
5.  The permittee has failed to operate the facility for a continuous period of 180 days or more. 
If a conditional use is not renewed prior to its expiration, it shall automatically become null and void without notice and hearing five years after it is issued or upon cessation of use for more than 180 days, whichever comes first. Within 180 days after expiration or revocation of a conditional use approval for a telecommunication tower, or the abandonment or cessation of operation of the wireless facility, the tower and facility shall be removed from the property. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intent to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
w.  A conditional use approval for a telecommunication tower shall become null and void if the facility is not constructed and placed in service within one year of the date of approval provided, however, that the conditional use approval may be extended one time for six months if substantial construction has commenced before the end of the initial year. 
(4)  Concealed telecommunication support structures. 
a.  Use districts: All zoning districts except the Central Business District. In residential districts, concealed telecommunication support structures may only be permitted as a conditional use at schools, places of worship, fire stations, publicly-owned housing complexes, recreation centers, community centers, or other properties not used for residential purposes; provided that the existing or current use is not otherwise non-conforming, and that the property is not subdivided for the purpose or accommodating a telecommunications tower. 
b.  Concealed telecommunication support structures are a narrowly limited alternative means for providing wireless service to parts of the community, such as residential areas, where conventional telecommunication towers would be aesthetically unacceptable. In order to encourage design creativity and to assure that such structures are in harmony with their setting, the city council shall not approve the conditional use application for a concealed telecommunication structure unless it finds that: 
1.  The structure is a work of public art that enhances and is compatible with its surroundings; or 
2.  On developed parcels, that the structure appears integral to or complements the design of any building or complex of buildings located on the same parcel and is not readily discernible or distinguishable as a telecommunication structure; and 
3.  That the overall location, design, and configuration is appropriate to the particular proposed location. 
c.  The applicant for a conditional use permit for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall bear the burden of demonstrating by substantial evidence in a written record that a bona fide need exists for the proposed structure and that no reasonable combination of locations, techniques or technologies will obviate the need for, or mitigate the height or visual impact of, the proposed structure. 
d.  Application fees for a conditional use for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville's Fees and Charges Manual. 
e.  The city may elect to retain outside consultants or professional services to review a conditional use application for a concealed telecommunication support structure and to make recommendations on relevant issues including, but not limited to, verification of the applicant's due diligence, analysis of alternatives, conditions of approval, and compliance with state and federal rules and regulations at the applicant's expense. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has posted a $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security satisfactory to the city, guaranteeing payment of such expenses. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
f.  In addition to the notice requirements of section 7-5-20 of this chapter, the applicant for a conditional use for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall be required to notify by regular mail all property owners within a one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) radius of the proposed location of any public hearing on the application at least ten days prior to the hearing. The planning and development director may require the applicant to conduct a crane or balloon test to simulate the height of the proposed structure. Notice of the dates and times of such tests shall be sent by the applicant by regular mail to all property owners within a one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) radius of the proposed location at least ten days prior to the primary test date. The notice shall state primary and alternate test dates, as well as a range of dates for testing in the event of extended periods of inclement weather. The planning and development director shall review and approve the sufficiency of the notice prior to mailing and, as part of its application, the applicant will be required to submit a certificate of mailing and attach a copy of the notice and a list of the addresses to which it was sent. In the event the applicant shall seek to increase the height of a proposed structure, or move its location more than 50 feet laterally, from that stated in the original notices, additional notice shall be required to be given in accordance with the above provisions and all time periods shall run from the date of supplemental notification. 
g.  Applicants for a conditional use for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall first be encouraged to consider properties owned by the city or Buncombe County, or instrumentalities thereof, before considering private properties. Public properties shall be subject to the same restrictions and standards of appropriateness as private properties. All such public agencies or instrumentalities shall retain discretion as to whether to make a specific property available for wireless telecommunication facilities and to make determinations with respect to site capacity, aesthetics, or suitability of such facilities. 
h.  It is the policy of the city to encourage co-location and the use of existing structures where appropriate. In furtherance of that policy objective, the following provisions shall apply to an application for a conditional use permit for a concealed telecommunication support structure: 
1.  A conditional use for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall not be approved unless the tower is designed structurally, electrically, mechanically and in all respects to accommodate at least one additional user. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant submits: 
a.  A letter of intent agreeing to make all of its wireless telecommunication facilities (including existing facilities) within the city available to providers of functionally equivalent services at commercially reasonable rates. 
b.  A copy of an executed lease for the proposed tower site that allows co-location or leasing or subleasing to other providers of functionally equivalent services. 
2.  Applicants are encouraged to meet co-location requirements by using dual-band/multi-band antennas to allow sharing of antennas or antenna arrays by wireless providers using different frequency bands or by using combiners to allow antenna sharing by users of the same frequency band. 
i.  A conditional use application for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall not be approved if an electric transmission tower is located above, or no less than 25 feet below, the ground elevation of and within a one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) radius laterally of a proposed structure, unless the applicant can demonstrate that sufficient easements or other interests in real property cannot be obtained to accommodate the wireless telecommunication facility, or that the electric utility owning the electric transmission tower is unwilling to allow its use for wireless facilities. Such electric transmission towers may be increased in height to that allowed for concealed telecommunication support structures in the district in which the transmission tower is located (other than in residential districts) if the city council determines such height extension is preferable to placement of a new concealed telecommunication support structure. 
j.  A conditional use application for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall not be approved unless the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative structures more than 30 feet in height (after first considering electric transmission towers) within a one-quarter mile (1,320 foot) radius of the proposed structure due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, building or alternative structures, as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower, building or structure cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
2.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment on the towers, buildings or alternative structures, as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
3.  Existing or approved towers, buildings or other structures within the search radius, or combinations thereof, cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer. 
4.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunication equipment upon existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative structures. 
k.  Antennas associated with a wireless telecommunication facility may not be co-located on a tower or other support structure used by an amateur radio operator. 
l.  Before approving a concealed telecommunication support structure, the city council may consider the desirability of relocating wireless facilities located on other structures to the proposed new structure in order to facilitate reductions in visual impacts or the decommissioning of other structures. 
m.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with usual and customary radio and television reception excepting broadcast facilities as provided for in the regulations of the FCC. 
n.  All telecommunication towers must comply with FCC and FAA regulations. 
o.  A copy of the applicant's FCC license must accompany its application. If the applicant is not an FCC licensee, the applicant must demonstrate that it has binding commitments from one or more FCC licensees to utilize the wireless telecommunication facility and must submit a copy of each such wireless service provider's FCC license. If FCC licenses have previously been filed with the city in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant may certify that such licenses remain in full force and effect. 
p.  As part of its application, each applicant for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall be required to execute a standard maintenance/removal agreement binding the applicant and its successors and assigns to maintain properly the exterior appearance of and ultimately remove the facility within 180 days of the abandonment or cessation of operations of the facility. Such agreement shall require the applicant to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the City of Asheville for all costs it incurs to perform any work required of the applicant by the agreement that it fails to perform. A $5,000.00 cash bond, or other security acceptable to the City of Asheville, shall be required in conjunction with the maintenance/removal agreement. The applicant and its successors and assigns shall be required to continue such bond or other security unit until such time as the facility has been removed and all other requirements of the maintenance/removal agreement have been satisfied. Private business users operating a single wireless telecommunication facility at their principal place of business and governmental users are exempt from the bond requirement. 
q.  Abandoned or unused wireless telecommunication facilities shall be removed within 180 days of abandonment or cessation of operations. If not removed within that period, such facilities may be removed as provided in the permittee's maintenance/removal agreement and the costs of removal recovered from the permittee's bond or other security. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intent to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
r.  Concealed telecommunication support structures shall not have aircraft obstruction lighting unless, in a particular instance, the city council may require such lighting. The exterior of the structure may be illuminated if such lighting is approved by the city council as part of the concealed structure's overall design. 
s.  Except as otherwise provided herein, minimum setbacks for concealed telecommunication support structures shall be in accordance with the setback requirements set forth in the development standards for the district in which the location of the tower is proposed. In addition, telecommunication towers must be set back from any residentially zoned or residentially used properties a distance equivalent to one-half the height of the tower being erected. The city council may reduce the setback requirement upon a showing by the applicant that there are special physical circumstances or conditions affecting the proposed site such that the strict application of the setback requirement would not allow the most effective use of the proposed site to minimize the visual impact of the wireless telecommunication facility. 
t.  Concealed telecommunication support structures shall be buffered from adjacent properties with a row of evergreen trees and/or shrubs planted in a landscape strip with a minimum width of five feet, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
u.  No concealed telecommunication support structure shall be located: 
1.  In local historic districts, on the property on which a local historic landmark is located, or within 1,000 feet of any local historic district unless the historic resources commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness indicating its approval of the proposed structure; 
2.  In areas determined by the city council to be "view areas" (formerly "viewsheds of superior quality"), taking into consideration the definitions by the United States Department of Interior, Blue Ridge Parkway Office, unless the applicant demonstrates that the structure will not result in derogation of resources, values or purposes for which the Blue Ridge Parkway was established. A map indicating the location of the "view areas" which has been reviewed and adopted by the city council shall be kept on file in the planning and development department of the city. 
3.  On a restricted mountain ridge. 
v.  In cases where an applicant is required to perform an environmental assessment (EA) or an environmental impact statement (EIS) under the National Environmental Policy Act or the National Historic Preservation Act, such EA or EIS shall be submitted as part of its application for a conditional use permit. An application for a conditional use permit will not be deemed complete until any required EA or EIS has been submitted to the city. 
w.  Concealed telecommunication support structures shall not be constructed unless the company erecting the structure has general liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00. The owner of such a structure shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance showing evidence of its coverage and the certificate shall contain a requirement that the insurance company notify the city 30 days prior to the cancellation, modification or failure to renew the insurance coverage required. 
x.  Concealed telecommunication support structures shall be designed to meet the following standards: 
1.  Structures and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment. The city council may specify a particular concealment technique or architectural treatment as a condition of approval. 
2.  All antennas shall be mounted behind an RF-transparent façade and shall be arranged so as to make efficient use of space inside the support structure in order to maximize co-location opportunities. Use of dual-polarized antennas which electronically combine the functions of transmit and receive antennas (rather than spatial diversity antenna arrays which rely on antennas being physically separated), dual-band/multi-band antennas (allowing two or more providers of different types of commercial wireless services to share a common antenna), and use of combiners (allowing antenna sharing by providers using the same frequency band) are encouraged in order to make efficient use of space within a concealed structure. 
3.  All equipment enclosures and other improvements accessory to a concealed telecommunication support structure shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall be maintained in good appearance and repair. No equipment enclosure may exceed 12 feet in height. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view with a minimum "B" buffer as described in subsection 7-11-3(d)(15) of this chapter, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood and land uses. 
4.  Generators may not be used as a primary electrical power source. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
5.  Equipment enclosures and other improvements associated with a concealed telecommunication support structure shall be enclosed within a security fence consisting of chain link fencing at least eight feet in height. The fence may be topped with barbed wire. The city council may require as a condition of approval that the fencing be screened by appropriate landscaping or other means. The city council may waive or modify the fencing requirement if it determines that doing so will enhance the overall appearance of the facility without any compromise in safety or security. 
6.  The height of any concealed telecommunication support structure shall be limited to the minimum height necessary to achieve effective signal propagation above the surrounding vegetative canopy, and to maintain an appropriate sense of scale with the surrounding buildings, land uses and landscape. No concealed telecommunication support structure shall be permitted which exceeds 100 feet in height. 
7.  Signage at any concealed telecommunication support structure site shall conform to the following provisions: 
a.  A sign listing the name of the wireless telecommunication service provider operating the site, the site name or number and an emergency telephone number shall be posted at or near the entrance to the site so as to be readily visible to persons outside the site's security fencing or entrance. 
b.  Equipment hazard warning and informational signs are permitted. 
c.  The posting of any other signs or advertising is prohibited at any wireless telecommunication facility or upon any concealed telecommunication support structure provided, however, that the city council may approve signage on the exterior of a concealed telecommunication support structure identifying the property on which the facility is located if such signage is integral to the overall concealment scheme. 
8.  The city council may require any other conditions deemed necessary or desirable to ameliorate the impact of the support structure on adjacent properties and uses. Such conditions shall include, but are not limited to: the height of the structure; the design, construction or type of structure; lighting; and co-location of the antennas and facilities of different parties on a single structure. 
y.  An annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be required for each wireless telecommunication facility located in the city. Before a permit shall be issued or renewed an applicant or permittee must certify that: 
1.  It currently holds an FCC license to provide commercial wireless services and that such license is in good standing or, if the permittee is not an FCC licensee, that the license of each of its FCC tenants is in good standing. 
2.  The wireless telecommunication facility continues to be operated by the permittee and that it has a continuing need for the facility to meet the requirements of its FCC license. 
3.  That the facility continues to comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all conditions of its conditional use permit. 
4.  That the permittee currently has general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 in force covering the wireless telecommunication facility as evidenced by a certificate of insurance attached to its renewal application. 
5.  That it is in compliance with its maintenance/removal agreement and that any bond or other security given in conjunction therewith remains it full force and effect. 
6.  That it has not constructed, maintained, modified or operated any wireless telecommunication facilities in the city without the city's approval or, if it has done so, that it has ceased operating and has removed all such facilities. 
Failure to obtain or renew an annual wireless telecommunication facility permit shall result in the wireless telecommunication facility being deemed abandoned and subject to removal, as well as subjecting the facility's owner to all other penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' advance written notice of its intent to the permittee at its last known address of the pending expiration of the permittee's annual wireless telecommunication facility permit. Fees for annual wireless telecommunication facility permits shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. 
z.  Conditional use permits for concealed telecommunication support structures shall be valid for an initial period of five years. Upon application by the permittee within 60 days prior to the expiration of the initial permit period, a review shall be conducted to determine whether and under what conditions the conditional use may be extended for successive five-year periods. Costs associated with the review process shall be borne by the permittee. Fees for five-year permit renewals shall be in accordance with the City of Asheville Fees and Charges Manual. Grounds for nonrenewal or revocation include: 
1.  The use involved is no longer allowed as a conditional use in the zoning district or fails to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter as adopted on January 12, 1999, or any subsequently enacted land use regulations in effect at the time of renewal and the permittee has failed to supply reasonable assurances that the facility will be brought into compliance within 180 days of the initial permit's expiration; 
2.  The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of any conditional use approval; 
3.  The facility has not been properly maintained; 
4.  The facility has not been upgraded to minimize its impact, including community aesthetics, to the greatest extent permitted by the technology existing at the time of renewal; or 
5.  The permittee has failed to operate the facility for a continuous period of 180 days or more. 
If a conditional use is not renewed prior to its expiration, it shall automatically become null and void without notice and hearing five years after it is issued or upon cessation of use for more than 180 days, whichever comes first. Within 180 days after expiration or revocation of a conditional use approval for a concealed telecommunication support structure, or the abandonment or cessation of operation of the wireless facility, the structure and facility shall be removed from the property. Prior to removing a wireless telecommunication facility pursuant to this provision, the city shall give 30 days' written notice of its intention to do so to the permittee at its last known address. 
aa.  A conditional use approval for a concealed telecommunication support structure shall become null and void if the facility is not constructed and placed in service within one year of the date of approval provided, however, that the conditional use approval may be extended one time for six months if substantial construction has commenced before the end of the initial year. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Adult establishments. 
a.  Use districts: Regional Business, Commercial Industrial, Highway Business. 
b.  The purpose of this section shall be to set forth the appropriate special requirements by which adult establishments may be established within the City of Asheville's zoning jurisdiction. Adult establishments, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located near a residential zoning district or certain other districts which permit residential, educational, religious, or recreational uses. Studies have shown that lower property values and increased crime rates tend to accompany and are brought about by the concentration of adult establishments. The city council finds that regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects do not contribute to the blighting of surrounding neighborhoods and to protect the integrity of the city's residential areas, schools, places of worship, libraries, child care centers, and public parks and playgrounds which are typical areas in which juveniles congregate. 
To address the purposes set forth above, the following restrictions are established: 
1.  No lot containing an adult establishment shall be located within a 1,000 foot radius of any lot containing another adult establishment. 
2.  No lot containing an adult establishment shall be located within a 1,000 foot radius of any residential zoning district. Provided, however, the establishment of a residential zone subsequent to the lawful commencement of an adult establishment will not render the adult establishment non-conforming. 
3.  No lot containing an adult establishment shall be located within a 1,000 foot radius of any church, school, library, licensed child care center, public recreation center, or public park or playground. Provided, however, the establishment of any place of worship, school, library, licensed child care center, public recreation center, or public park or playground subsequent to the lawful commencement of an adult establishment will not render the adult establishment non-conforming. 
4.  The required distance shall be measured from the closest edge of the property occupied by an adult establishment to the closest edge of the property occupied by a protected use, zone, or by another adult establishment. Provided, however, that an adult establishment is located in a multi-tenant facility, the distance shall be measured from the closest edge of the portion of the facility occupied by such establishment. 
5.  Except for permitted business identification signage, no printed material, slide, video, photograph, written text, live show, or other visual presentation shall be visible, nor shall any live or recorded voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the walls of the establishment. 
6.  Any external lighting shall be arranged so as not to be directed toward any residential area. 
(9)  Those uses listed as a use by right, subject to special requirements which exceed a total floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
a.  Use district: Head of Montford Transition Overlay District. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Ancillary non-residential uses: 
a.  Use districts: All residential districts including Urban Residential. 
b.  Ancillary non-residential uses shall be limited to landscaping, and stormwater detention and related facilities in support of the principal use. 
c.  Ancillary uses shall be located on lots adjacent to, or immediately across the street from the principal use. 
d.  The principal use must be located in a non-residential zoning district, and must be a permitted use in that district. 
e.  Ancillary uses under this section may not be located on lots that, within 18 months prior to the date of application, had more than one residential structure that was demolished, except pursuant to a determination by the city building inspector that said structures were dilapidated. 
f.  Ancillary uses under this section may not extend into the adjacent residential zone by more than one lot, and the maximum lot size shall be one acre unless city council determines that a larger lot size will be compatible with the residential character of the area. 
g.  Once a conditional use permit is granted for an ancillary non-residential use, no other conditional use permits for ancillary non-residential uses shall be granted for the same principal use. 
h.  Ancillary uses under this section must be buffered from adjacent residential property and meet all other landscaping requirements set forth in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. 
i.  All activities associated with non-residential uses conducted in the residential district, including deliveries and refuse collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless city council determines that other operating hours are appropriate. 
j.  Outdoor storage, storage containers, and display of goods shall be prohibited. 
(12)  Detention centers, jails, and related correctional facilities 
a.  Use districts: Central Business District, Regional Business District, Commercial Industrial District. 
b.  Design standards: The structure must comply with the downtown design review guidelines for new construction in the areas covered by the design review guidelines. Compliance with the design guidelines for structures located in this area shall be mandatory. The city council approving the conditional use permit shall assume authority for determining compliance with the downtown design review standards for these uses. In other locations, the structure must comply with the design standards set forth in the supplemental developmental standards for large retail structures. For the purpose of this condition, the structure shall be treated as a general retail structure. 
c.  Fencing: No chain link, barbed wire, razor wire, or similar fence materials shall be used in areas that are visible from adjacent properties or from the public way unless specifically permitted by the city council approving the conditional use permit. 
d.  Fenced areas: Fenced areas shall not abut any principal street unless specifically permitted by the city council approving the conditional use permit. 
e.  Lighting: Lights in pedestrian areas and parking lots shall not exceed 16 feet in height. All lights other than those in public pedestrian areas, including security lights, shall be full cut-off type fixtures, and shall not produce direct glare or light trespass on adjacent properties. 
f.  Signage: All signage must be reviewed and approved as part of the conditional use permit application. City council may attach conditions addressing the location, size, number, and illumination of signs based upon circumstances related to the location and impact of the sign(s). 
g.  Operational standards: No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted. Vehicle entering and/or leaving the facility shall not use sirens or emergency lights unless responding to an emergency. 
h.  Loading/unloading: All loading and unloading areas shall be located internally on the site and screened from view from adjacent properties and public ways. All loading and unloading activities shall take place between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless specifically waived by the city council approving the conditional use permit or in conflict with a judicial order. This condition includes prisoner pick up and drop off of more than two prisoners. 
i.  Exercise yard exercise yards and other outdoor activity areas shall be located internally on the site and screened from view from adjacent properties and public ways. 
j.  Vehicle storage: All vehicles associated with the use shall be stored in an enclosed or screened area. The vehicle storage area may be screened with vegetation, fences, a combination of fences and landscape material, or other means designed to effectively screen the stored vehicles from adjacent properties and the public way. 
(13)  Government buildings and uses. 
a.  Use districts: Central Business District. 
b.  The proposed location for the use or building will not unduly or unreasonably restrict the availability of key land for private development. 
c.  No alternative location for the building or use exists within areas previously developed for government buildings and/or uses. 
d.  If a new structure is proposed in the areas covered by the design review guidelines, the ability of the structure's design to comply with the downtown design review guidelines for new construction shall be a factor in the review of the request. New structures in these areas must substantially comply with the design guidelines as determined by the Asheville City Council. 
(14)  Motor vehicle and boat sales, new and used. 
a.  Use district: Central Business 
b.  Minimum lot size: 1 acre 
c.  In order to maintain an urban streetscape, storage of automobiles outside an enclosed building shall be limited to not more than 25 percent of the total number of automobiles offered for sale, or, alternately, the outdoor storage of automobiles for sale shall be screened by buildings occupying at least 75 percent of the street frontage of the subject property. 
d.  Automobiles needing repair shall be stored within an enclosed building or, alternately, screened from all public rights-of-way. 
e.  Lighting shall comply with the standards of the City of Asheville. 
f.  If a new structure is proposed in the areas covered by the design review guidelines, the ability of the structure's design to comply with the downtown design review guidelines for new construction shall be a factor in the review of the request. New structures in these areas must substantially comply with the design guidelines as determined by the Asheville City Council. 
(15)  Drive through facilities and uses. 
a.  Use districts: Neighborhood Corridor. 
b.  The purpose of this section is to ensure the pedestrian character and safety along the corridor are protected but allow drive through facilities at locations that will not detract from the rest of the district. 
c.  Drive through facilities will generally operate with a single window and will be located to the side or rear of the structure. City Council may consider other proposals with more than a single window for locations that are appropriate for this use. 
d.  Drive through facilities shall not be placed on the street side of a building on a corner lot but shall be located to the side or rear of the structure. 
e.  Outdoor speakers and lighting must be designed and used in such a way to eliminate both noise and light trespass to neighboring properties. 
f.  Hours of operation may also be limited by City Council to ensure compatibility with neighboring uses in the vicinity of the drive through. 
g.  For new structures in the Neighborhood Corridor district, compliance with items in the Design and Operation Standards in article 12 of the Neighborhood Corridor District shall be a requirement of this conditional use review as determined by City Council. 
(16)  Group homes. 
a.  Use districts: RS-8, RM-6, RM-8. 
b.  Separation requirement: Group homes shall be spaced a minimum of 600 feet from all other group homes and family care homes as measured from the closest property line of each property containing a family care home or group home. 
c.  Parking shall be located in the rear and shall be screened with vegetation from adjacent single-family uses as set forth in subsection 7-11-3(d)(4)k. The vegetative screening shall consist of the planting required for a Type A buffer or its equivalent as determined through the alternative landscape compliance process. Parking in the front or side of the lot may be approved by the planning and development director provided that the parking area can be adequately screened from adjacent residential uses and: 
• The topography of the site makes it difficult to access the rear of the property; or 
• The property on the opposite side of the street is developed with non-residential uses; or 
• The majority of the residential properties on both sides of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed have parking located in the front or side; no more than two parking spaces shall be provided in front using this option for a group home located in an RS-8 zoning district. 
d.  It is the intent of these standards to ensure that group home structures resemble other residential structures in the neighborhoods where they are to be located. Pursuant to this intent, a group home structure shall be architecturally compatible with residential structures in the area in which it is to be constructed. Architectural compatibility shall be determined based upon compliance with the following standards: 
• The structure shall be oriented on the lot in a manner similar to the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
• In the RS-8 district, the structure shall have a single front entrance and any other entrances as required under various codes shall be located on the side(s) or rear of the structure. A corner side of the structure may have a single entrance provided the intent of this section is met. 
• The height of the structure shall be no more than four feet taller than the height of the tallest residential structure located on the side of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed. 
• The roof design, pitch and materials proposed for the structure shall be similar to the roof design, pitch and materials of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
• A front porch shall be provided on the proposed structure if a majority of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which the new structure is proposed have front porches. 
• Unless precluded by topography, the front yard depth for the proposed structure shall be not less than the average front yard depth for the residential structures on the same side of the street on the block on which the new construction is proposed. 
• In RS-8 districts, the floor area of the group home structure shall not be more than 150 percent larger than the average floor area of single-family residential structures in the same block of the group home structure unless this floor area is provided below the grade of the principal façade of the group home structure or is otherwise designed to minimize its difference in size with said residences. 
e.  It is the intent of this section that group home uses will be located in areas where employment, goods, and services can readily be reached by a variety of means of transportation. Transit, a sidewalk network, and/or close proximity to employment, goods, and services shall be required for approval of a conditional use permit for a group home unless the intended residents of the group home do not require this service. 
f.  The group home structure(s) and the site on which it is located shall be maintained in accordance with standards established by applicable local and state regulations, including, but not limited to, the City of Asheville Minimum Housing Code. The City Council may require the submittal and implementation of a specific maintenance plan in order to ensure proper maintenance of the property in accordance with this provision." 
g.  That the definition of group home in section 7-2-5 be amended to read: Group home means a residential home provided by an agency, organization or individual for persons who need sheltered living conditions for rehabilitation, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 122C-3(11)b (or its successor). This definition does not include family care home as defined herein. 
(17)  Electrified security fences. 
a.  Use districts: Commercial Industrial. 
b.  Must meet standards for such fences in subsection 7-16-1(c). 
(e)  Conditions attached to approval. In approving the conditional use, the Asheville City Council may attach such conditions to the approval as it deems necessary to have the proposed use meet the standards set forth in subsection 7-16-2.(c) above and elsewhere in this chapter, and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. All such conditions shall be stated in the resolution approving the application. Such conditions may be stricter than any requirement or limitation stated elsewhere in this chapter for the proposed use. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: limitations on the size, bulk and location of structures; requirements for landscaping, signage, and outdoor lighting; the provision of adequate ingress and egress; dedication of rights-of-way for streets or utilities; provision of recreational space and facilities; limitations on the duration of the approval and the time period within which the use will be developed; limitations on hours of operation; limitations on the transfer of such approval to a successor-in-interest or lessee of the property; provision of special fire protection features; and the mitigation of environmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2462, §§ 2, 3, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2535, §§ 10—12, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2589, § 1(f), 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2622, § 1(d), 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2634, §§ 1(c)—(f), 1(i)—(k), 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2649, §§ 1(f), (g), 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2735, § 1b., c., 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2792, § 1(f), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 9-250-01; Ord. No. 2871, §§ 1(l)—1(o), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2872, §§ 1(c), 1(d), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2973, § 1(d), (e), 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3028, § 1(i), 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 3052, § 1(e), 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3064, §§ 1(e)(f), 10-14-03; Ord. No. 3083, § 1(d), 1-13-04; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3157, § 1(a)(12)—(15), 8-24-04; Ord. No. 3262, §§ 1(d, e), 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3479, §§ 1(f), (g), 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3582, §§ 1(e), (f), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 3757, §§ 1i, k, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3793, § 1d, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3897, § 1(f), 9-14-10; Ord. No. 3908, §§ 1f, g, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 3922, §§ 1a—e, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 3959, §§ 1r—z, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 2-11-14; Ord. No. 4560, § 1o, p, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4608, § 1(y), (z), 8-22-17; Ord. No. 4613, § 1(c), (d), 9-12-17)  
ARTICLE XVII. - NONCONFORMITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3478, § 1, adopted May 22, 2007, deleted Art. XVII, §§ 7-17-1—7-17-9, in their entirety. Former Art. XVII, §§ 7-17-1—7-17-9, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2428, §§ 23—25 adopted Nov. 11, 1997; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, adopted Aug. 24, 2004; and Ord. No. 3417, §§ 1(f), (g), adopted Nov. 28, 2006. 
 
Sec. 7-17-1. - Nonconformities—Purpose, application and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. It is recognized that, over time, lawful nonconformities may develop as a result of amendments to the zoning map or unified development ordinance which change the application of city development regulations to particular properties. It is important that such properties, while nonconforming, be adequately maintained and permitted to continue, but not expanded or enlarged in any fashion that increases the extent of nonconformity. Where possible, such nonconformities should be made, wholly or incrementally, conforming. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of this section apply only to lawful nonconformities, except as noted below. Nonconformities other than lawful nonconformities shall be considered violations of the unified development ordinance. This article shall not apply, however, to any feature which is the subject of a variance from particular regulations that has been granted by an authorized reviewing board or commission or to applications of flexible development standards to such features. Where a variance or flexible development determination has been granted for a feature which does not otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter, that feature shall be deemed conforming. Nonconformities associated with signs are addressed in section 7-13-8 of this chapter. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the meaning ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Appraised value means the value assigned to a structure by the Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser. 
(2)  Dimensional nonconformity means any nonconformity involving a dimensional or numerical development requirement except those involving signs or landscaping and buffering which are addressed in article XIII and section 7-11-2, respectively. Dimensional nonconformities may include, without limitation, nonconformities associated with density, lot size, lot width, lot depth, setbacks, height, structure size standards, impervious surface standards, open space, number of parking spaces, or separation requirements between particular uses or zoning districts. 
(3)  Impact means the effect of one land use upon another as measured by traffic or noise generation, site activity, hours of operation, site lighting, vibration, smoke or odor emissions, or similar factors. 
(4)  Lawful nonconformity means any nonconformity involving a dimensional or numerical requirement or use of property that affects a structure erected or a lot created in conformity with the then-applicable development requirements of the city, but subsequently made nonconforming by action of the city through a zoning map or unified development code amendment. 
(5)  Nonconforming use means any nonconforming involving the use of the property. This may include, without limitation, nonconformities associated with a use not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located or a use conditionally allowed in the zoning districts in which it is located but for which no conditional use permit has been obtained. 
(6)  Renovation means the repairing or remodeling of a structure in which the exterior walls, foundation and roof are maintained structurally intact. 
(Ord. No. 3478, § 1, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 7-17-2. - Dimensional nonconformities. 
(a)  Lawfully established nonconforming lots. Lawfully established nonconforming lots having one or more dimensional nonconformities may be used for any permitted or conditional use allowed in the zoning district in which the lot is located provided that any structure or expansion/addition to an existing structure proposed for the use meets all applicable dimensional and numerical requirements and all applicable procedures are followed. Such lots may be recombined with adjoining lots to increase the extent of their conformity provided new nonconformities are not created. A lot that that is only nonconforming due to the fact that it does not comply with access standards can be developed with one single-family residence and typical residential accessory structures if some form of legal access is provided the property. 
(b)  Structures. Structures having one or more dimensional nonconformities may be used for any permitted or conditional use allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located, and, upon any change in use, shall comply with the requirements of article XI of this chapter. Such structures may be expanded or enlarged provided the extent of the applicable nonconformity is not increased or new nonconformities are not created. Expansions, enlargements, or reconstruction of such structures exceeding 50 percent of the pre-expansion floor area, shall require such structures to meet all applicable dimensional and numerical requirements, except density, which may be retained at the prior nonconforming level but not increased. For the purpose of this section, the value of any expansion, enlargement, or reconstruction of such structures over a three-year period shall be used when calculating the 75 percent threshold. A structure undergoing renovation, as defined in section 7-17-1 above, shall not be subject to the above provisions and shall only be required to meet the provisions of article XI if the renovation cost exceeds 75 percent of the structure's appraised value as determined by Buncombe County Tax Assessor or by an MAI-certified real estate appraiser. 
(c)  Overcoming presumption of discontinuation of use. A presumption that a nonconforming use of structure has ceased, based solely on the length of time the structure has remained vacant or inactive, may be rebutted if the structure has not been vacant for more than two years. Such a presumption may be overcome, upon demonstrating that substantial good faith efforts have been made to re-establish the use during this period. Obtaining permits to maintain the existing use or providing documentation that shows continuous marketing of the property for sale or lease for the existing use (e.g. MLS listing, realtor contract, etc.) shall be regarded as substantial good faith efforts. 
(Ord. No. 3478, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3791, §§ 1h, i, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 7-17-3. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Discontinuation of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use is allowed to continue unless the use is discontinued for a period of 180 or more consecutive days, and there are no substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use during this period. Obtaining permits to maintain the existing use or significant continuous efforts to market the property for sale or lease for the existing use (e.g., MLS listing, realtor contract, etc.) shall be regarded as substantial good faith efforts. A nonconforming use shall be deemed discontinued after a period of 365 consecutive days regardless of any substantial good faith efforts to re-establish the use. Thereafter, the structure or property associated with the use may be used only for conforming use. Conditional uses discontinued for a period of 365 or more consecutive days shall be regarded as nonconforming uses and shall not be re-established without new conditional use permit approval. 
(b)  Replacement of one nonconforming use with another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be allowed to be replaced by another nonconforming use of equal or lesser impact as provided in subsection (c) below. For uses not listed below, a nonconforming use may be allowed to be replaced by another nonconforming use upon a finding by the planning and zoning commission that the proposed use is more nearly compatible with the surrounding properties than the nonconforming use which it replaces, as measured by traffic or noise generation, site activity, hours of operation, and other factors that the commission finds relevant to compare or differentiate between the existing use(s) and the proposed replacement use(s). The planning and development director or commission, as applicable, may establish conditions to ensure that the compatibility factors are maintained as approved. 
(c)  Land use impact table. 
General Land Use Classification 	Land Use Impact 
	Low 	Medium 	High 
Residential 	0-8 dwelling units/acre 	8-16 dwelling units/acre 	> 16 dwelling units/acre 
Recreational 	Arboretums; camps; campgrounds; golf courses; passive parks 	Commercial indoor recreation; governmental recreation 	Commercial outdoor recreation 
Institutional 	Adult care centers and homes; assisted living facilities; child care centers and homes; places of worship; family care homes; orphanages 	Colleges and universities; medical centers and hospitals =25,000 square feet of gross floor area; shelters; schools (including vocational and training schools) =25,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Armories; dormitories; fraternity and sorority houses; hospitals; medical centers and hopsitals >25,000 square feet of gross floor area; schools (including vocational and training schools) >25,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Public/Semi-public 	Libraries; museums; public cultural facilities 	Civic, social service and fraternal facilities; community centers; government buildings not elsewhere classified; post offices 	Amphitheaters; auditoriums; convention and conference centers; detention facilities, jails and related correctional facilities; exhibition halls; public utilities and related facilities; stadiums and arenas; transportation terminals 
Office/Business 	Bakeries; barber shops and salons; bed & breakfast inns; bicycle shops; bookstores; candy, pastry, ice cream and snack shops; cat café; florists; funeral homes; gift shops; health and fitness facilities; home occupations; homestays; instructional services; laboratories; livework units; offices, not classified elsewhere <10,000 sq. ft.; pharmacies <10,000 sq. ft; radio and television studios; residentially related commercial services; studios galleries, and workshops for artists designers, and photographers; tailors/dressmaker shops 	Adult establishments; boardinghouses; camper/trailer park; car washes; optical clinics; medical, dental and, psychiatric, veterinary offices and clinics; convenience stores; copying centers; delicatessens; distributive businesses; financial institutions; fruit and vegetable markets; grocery stores; hardware/garden supply stores; industrial equipment sales with no outdoor storage or display; laundry and dry cleaning establishments; lodging facilities with 20 or fewer guest rooms; manufactured home sales and servicing; motor vehicle and boat service and repair; offices not classified elsewhere: > 10,000 sq. ft.; pharmacies > 10,000 sq. ft.; plant nurseries, sales and greenhouses; printing and publishing; recycling collection centers; rental businesses; repair and servicing businesses; research and technology production uses; restaurants; retail gasoline sales; retail sales not classified elsewhere; self-service storage facilities; taxi stands; video rental stores; warehousing 	Automobile, truck, and utility trailer rental; automobile sales, new and used; automobile service stations; bars, nightclubs; flea markets; heavy equipment and specialized vehicle sales, rental, and service establishments; industrial equipment sales with outdoor storage or display; kennels; Lodging facilities with 21 or more guest rooms; lumber yards; motor freight terminals; recreational vehicle sales and servicing; theaters; wholesale sales 
Industrial 	Cottage industries 		Assembly, packaging, processing, production, and manufacturing; recycling and resource recovery. 
Other uses 	Agriculture; bona fide farms; cemeteries; columbariums; fish hatcheries and farms; parking lots, as principal use; stables 	Communication towers, satellite dishes, and related equipment, as principal use; parking decks; recycling collection centers 	Telecommunication towers 
 
NOTE: Uses with drive-through service or facilities increase impact one level. 
(d)  Overcoming presumption of discontinuation of use. A presumption that a nonconforming use of the land has ceased, based solely on the length of time the use of the land has remained vacant or inactive, may be rebutted if the use of the land has not ceased for more than two years. Such a presumption may be overcome, upon demonstrating that substantial good faith efforts have been made to re-establish the use during this period. Obtaining permits to maintain the existing use or providing documentation that shows continuous marketing of the property for sale or lease for the existing use (e.g. MLS listing, realtor contract, etc.) shall be regarded as substantial good faith efforts. 
(e)  Conforming uses becoming nonconforming. No use may be established if it renders another conforming use to become nonconforming. 
(f)  Nonconforming short-term vacation rentals. All lawfully existing nonconforming lodging facilities which would now be classified as a "short-term vacation rental" may continue in operation until such time that the lodging use is discontinued for a period greater than 180 consecutive days. In addition, the short-term vacation rental annual permit will be required for all nonconforming short-term vacation rentals and failure to renew said permit before its expiration will also constitute a conclusory presumption that the lawful nonconformity has ceased for more than 180 consecutive days, and will result in the voluntary forfeiture of all rights and claims to operate a short-term vacation rental at the address noted on the permit under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 3478, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 3700, § 1o, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 3791, § 1j, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 3793, § 1f, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 4448, § 1c, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 4560, § 1q, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4637, § 1v, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 7-17-4. - Maintenance and repair. 
In the interest of the public safety and health, structural alterations or remodeling of nonconforming structures or conforming structures on nonconforming lots which are required by any public law, and so ordered by a public officer in authority, shall be permitted. Routine maintenance shall also be permitted for nonconforming situations so long as no expansion of the nonconformity occurs as a result of the maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 3478, § 1, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 7-17-5. - Replacement of manufactured homes. 
Dimensional or use nonconformities associated with manufactured homes shall be addressed in the following manner. 
(a)  Replacement of one manufactured home with another manufactured home in a lawfully established manufactured housing park or area covered by a manufactured housing zoning overlay. Such replacement shall be permitted without regard to dimensional nonconformity provided that the replacement manufactured home is no older and no smaller than the existing manufactured home, the replacement home is placed in the same location as the original home, and such replacement occurs within 180 days of the removal of the original manufactured home. In all other situations, replacement shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Replacement of one manufactured home with another manufactured home in areas other than a lawfully established manufactured housing park or area covered by a manufactured housing zoning overlay. Such replacement shall be permitted provided that new dimensional nonconformities are not created, the replacement manufactured home is no older and no smaller than the existing manufactured home, the replacement home is placed in the same location as the original home, and such replacement occurs within 180 days of the last day of occupancy of the original manufactured home. In all other situations, replacement shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3478, § 1, 5-22-07)  
ARTICLE XVIII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 7-18-1. - Duties regarding enforcement. 
(a)  Unless specifically set forth otherwise in this chapter, the City of Asheville Planning and Development Director is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The planning and development director may enter any building, structure, or premises as provided by law, to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this chapter. 
(b)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, resist, or obstruct a city employee while the city employee is carrying out any duty created under this chapter. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor as set forth in N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3467, § 1(a), 5-8-07)  
Sec. 7-18-2. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Liabilities for violations. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-175, any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, repairs, converts, or maintains any building, structure, sign or sign structure or develops, grades or otherwise alters property in violation of this chapter, any person who uses any building, structure, sign or sign structure or land in violation of this chapter or owns the property where a person erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters, repairs, converts, or maintains any building, structure, sign or sign structure or develops, grades or otherwise alters property in violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  General. Violations of this chapter, except as otherwise stated herein, including violations of sections 7-5-13, 7-12-1, 7-12-2 and article XV, shall subject the offender to a penalty in the amount of $100.00 per day for each day the violation continues, to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has been cited for the violation. 
a.  There shall be a civil penalty for damaging or destroying trees and vegetation for use in landscaping and buffering as set forth in section 7-11-2 of the chapter. This section is also applicable to trees and vegetation destroyed from a historic landmark or property in a Historic District without a certificate of appropriateness as set forth in section 7-5-11. The additional one time fine shall be set forth in Appendix B - Schedule of Civil Penalties subsection I. The replacement schedule will not be applicable for violations of section 7-5-11. This civil penalty is in addition to the civil penalty issued in subsection 7-18-2(b)(1). 
b.  There shall be an additional civil penalty for altering, damaging or destroying the exterior of a historic landmark or structure in a Historical District without a valid certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to section 7-5-11 as set forth in Appendix B - Schedule of Civil Penalties subsection J. This civil penalty is in addition to the civil penalty issued in 7-18-2(b)(1). 
c.  There shall be a penalty of $500.00 per day for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the use of a residential structure for a Lodging use, including: 
1)  The renting or leasing of a dwelling unit for less than one month in districts which do not allow lodging facilities; and 
2)  The use of property as a homestay. 
(2)  Stormwater control, soil erosion and sedimentation control, illicit discharge and connection. 
a.  Violation of soil erosion and sedimentation regulations: Any person who violates any of the provisions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements of section 7-12-2 and/or who initiates a land-disturbing activity for which an erosion control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, shall be subject to a civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $5,000.00. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
b.  Violation of stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection regulations: Any person who violates the stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection regulations of section 7-12-2, shall be subject to a civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $25,000.00; however; for a continuing violation the maximum per day per violation penalty shall be $10,000.00, unless a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the current violation. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
c.  Assessment of penalty: The amount of the civil penalty shall initially be determined and assessed by the stormwater administrator in strict accordance with the table of penalties as set forth herein. 
Table of Penalties 
Erosion and Sediment Control 
	Grading 
without 
permit 	Site/Plan not in accordance with approved plan 	Failure to maintain erosion control measures 	Offsite 
Sedimentation 	Buffer zone violation 	Graded slopes or fills not in compliance 	Lack of ground cover 	Improper fill material 	Failure to file/falsification of inspection report 	Other Violations of Erosion and Sediment Laws 
Immediate Fine 	$100 per 2,000 SF disturbed max of $5,000 
NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	Slight-$0—$500 
Moderate $501—$2,000 
Severe $2,001—$5,000 
NOV Issued 	$100 per 5 SF disturbed, max of $5,000, 
NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	NOV Issued 	$2,000 for falsification of report 	Possible $0—$5,000 
On Going Violation (Failure to Comply with NOV) 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty 	$500 per measure not installed correctly or $1,000 per measure not installed, max of $5,000 (every 100 L.F. of silt fence or diversion shall be counted as 1 measure) 	$500 per measure not maintained correctly, max of $5,000 (every 100 L.F. of silt fence or diversion shall be counted as 1 measure) 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty 	Per day penalty equal to or greater than immediate penalty $100 per 100 SF not compliant max of $5,000 	$100 per 100 SF not compliant max of $5,000 	$0—$5,000 (To be based on amount of improper fill and possible hazard for failure or leeching of pollutants) 	$200 per reporting period for each report not filed 	Possible $0—$5,000 	
 
d.  Guidelines for penalty assessment: In determining the amount of the penalty to assess, the stormwater administrator shall be guided by the following: 
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation regulation: The stormwater administrator shall be guided by the degree and harm caused by the violation; the cost of rectifying damage, the amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance, whether the violation was committed willfully and the prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with referenced subsection. 
2.  Stormwater control, illicit discharge and connection regulations: The stormwater administrator shall be guided by the degree and extent of harm to the natural resources of the city, to the public health, or to private property resulting from the violation; the duration and gravity of the violation; the effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; the cost of rectifying the damage; the amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance, whether the violation was committed willfully and the prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with referenced subsection. 
e.  Notice of civil penalty assessment: The stormwater administrator shall provide notice of the civil penalty amount and basis for assessment to the person assessed. The notice of assessment shall be served by any means authorized under G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4, and shall direct the violator to either pay the assessment or contest the assessment in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the notice of assessment. 
f.  Appeal to erosion control plan review committee: Any aggrieved party may file an appeal of the penalty assessment made by the stormwater administrator to the erosion control plan review committee (committee) within 30 days of receipt of the penalty assessment. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the stormwater administrator and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The stormwater administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Committee all documents constituting the record on which the decision appeal was taken. A hearing for the appeal shall be held within 30 working days after the receipt of the written appeal. The hearing shall be quasi-judicial with the right of the aggrieved party to have counsel present, to confront and examine witnesses and to review all documents. In the absence of an appeal to the committee, the penalty assessment of the stormwater administrator shall be final. The committee may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the penalty appealed from along with the associated findings made therein to support the penalty. To this end, the committee shall have all the powers of the stormwater administrator from whom the appeal is taken. 
g.  Appeal to superior court: Every decision of the committee shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the decision of the committee is filed in the office of the stormwater administrator or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with the committee at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The decision of the committee may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service, by registered mail or certified mail returned receipt requested or by any means authorized under G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4. The appeal shall be limited to the record before the committee. 
h.  Failure to appeal and/or pay: Any civil penalty assessed a person who violates the provisions of section 7-12-2 of this chapter shall be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, to be brought in the Buncombe County Superior Court if the offender fails to give notice of timely appeal and fails to pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has been cited for the violation. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Stormwater control, soil erosion and sedimentation control, illicit discharge and connection: Any person, who knowingly or willfully violates provisions of section 7-12-2 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which may include a fine not to exceed $5,000.00. 
(2)  Flood protection: Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 7-5-12 or section 7-12-1 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. Failure to remove any artificial obstruction or enlargement or replacement thereof that violates any of the provisions of section 7-12-1 shall constitute a separate violation for each ten days that such failure continues after written notice from the city. 
(3)  Subdivisions: Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the planning and regulations jurisdiction of the city, subdivides his/her land in violation of the requirements of section 7-15 of this chapter or who transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under the requirements of this chapter and recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Buncombe County shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument or transfer of other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. 
(d)  Each day a separate violation. Except as indicated in subsection 7-18-29(b)(3) above, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2902, § 1(t), 3-12-02; Ord. No. 3467, §§ 1(b)—(d), 5-8-07; Ord. No. 3522, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 3812, § 1, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 3877, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 4445, § 1a, 8-25-15)  
Sec. 7-18-3. - Notice of violation and citation procedure. 
(a)  Notice required before penalty. No penalty shall be assessed pursuant to section 7-18-2 above unless and until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation in accordance with this section. Provided however, for purposes of section 7-12-2 of this chapter, notice shall be deemed sufficient to comply with this paragraph if the notice of violation is issued simultaneously with the penalty assessment. 
(b)  Notice of violation; opportunity to cure. 
(1)  Recipient of notice of violation. Whenever any city official charged with the duty of enforcing regulations in this chapter has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any permit, plan, order, or condition issued pursuant to this chapter, that official shall notify that person of the violation. If the violator cannot be ascertained, then the notice of violation shall be sent to the record owner of the land on which the violation occurs. 
(2)  Service requirements. Notices of violation shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. In addition, service hereunder may be made in accordance with Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice of violation may include, but not be limited to, an order to discontinue the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; require removal of illegal buildings, structures, or uses or removal of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinue the illegal work being done; or require any other action to insure compliance with or prevent violation of this chapter. The notice of violation shall include an opportunity to cure the violation within a prescribed period of time. 
(3)  Notification of owner upon violator noncompliance. Where the person violating a provision of this article is not the owner of the property, the city shall send a notice of violation to both the tenant and the owner of the property. 
(c)  Extension of time to cure. Upon receipt of a written request from the alleged violator or the property owner for an extension of time to cure or correct the violation, the city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations(s) being violated may grant a single extension of time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, in which the alleged violator may cure or correct the violation before the city issues a citation pursuant to subsection 7-18-3(d) below. 
(d)  Citation for violation. Any person who, after being given a notice of violation pursuant to subsection 7-18-3(b) above, does not comply with this chapter within the time period set forth in the notice of violation or within any extension of time granted pursuant to subsection 7-18-3(c) above, and who continues such violation, shall be subject to the enforcement remedies set forth in this article. The city shall serve a written fine citation on the alleged violator and/or property owner by personal delivery or by first class U.S. mail with delivery conformation or similar service offered by the U.S. Postal Service. The citation shall specify the amount of any civil penalty which shall be levied against the alleged violator or the type of criminal penalty applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2618, § 1(a), 9-28-99; Ord. No. 3204, § 1, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 3467, §§ 1(e), (f), 5-8-07; Ord. No. 3522, § 3, 8-21-07; Ord. No. 3877, § 3, 6-8-10)  
Sec. 7-18-4. - Action for recovery of civil penalty; action for institution of criminal process. 
(a)  If payment of a civil penalty is not made, or violations are not cured or corrected, within the time specified in the citation, then the matter may be referred to the city attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  If a violation which constitutes a criminal penalty is not cured or corrected within the time specified in the citation, then a criminal action may be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2618, § 1(c), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 7-18-5. - Summary removal of signs/sign structure; remove orders for signs/sign structure. 
(a)  Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-193, the city shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate, or remedy a sign or sign structure which the city determines to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety. The expense of the action shall be paid by the sign owner, or if the sign owner cannot be ascertained, by the property owner, and if not paid, there shall be a lien placed upon the land or premises where the nuisance arose, and it shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(b)  Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. §§ 160A-193 and 160A-296, any signs or sign structures prohibited under subsections 7-13-3(1) and (2) are hereby declared to be a public health nuisance in that they are dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety and the sign administrator shall have the authority to remove summarily the sign and/or sign structure. 
(c)  The sign administrator shall have the authority to issue a remove order for any sign not repaired or brought into compliance within the time prescribed by a notice of violation. Remove orders shall be issued to and served upon the sign/sign structure owner, or if the sign/sign structure owner cannot be ascertained, to and upon the property owner by the means set forth in subsection 7-18-3(b). The sign or sign structure shall be removed 30 days after the service of the remove order at the expense of the offender. The remove order shall describe with particularity the location of the sign or sign structure to be removed and the reason(s) for issuance of the remove order, including specific reference to the provisions of article XII of this chapter which have been violated. 
(d)  In the event of failure to comply with the requirements of a remove order, the sign administrator may cause such sign or sign structure to be removed. The sign owner and property owner may be jointly and separately liable for the expense of removal. Notice of the cost of removal shall be served as set forth in subsection 7-18-3(b). If said sum is not paid within 30 days thereafter, said sum may be collected by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, which shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. § 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 2618, § 1(d), 9-28-99)  
Sec. 7-18-6. - Injunctive relief and other remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive or other relief. In addition to, or in lieu of, the other remedies set forth in this article, the planning and development director or other city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations of this chapter, in the event of a violation of this chapter, may request that the city attorney institute in a court of competent jurisdiction an injunctive action, mandamus action, or other appropriate proceeding to prevent the completion or occupation of such building or structure, or use of land. Upon determining that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, a court hearing an appeal for relief, shall enter such orders and/or judgments as are necessary to abate or prevent the violation. The institution of an action for injunctive or other relief under this section shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed by this article for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Revocation of permits. In the event of a violation of any regulation of this chapter, the planning and development director, or any other city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations of this chapter, may stop any development of, use of or activity on property by the revocation of applicable permits. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2618, § 1(b), 9-28-99)  
Appendix 7-A. - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3466, § 2, adopted Apr. 24, 2007, deleted App. A in its entirety. Former App. A pertained to map and plan standards.  
Appendix 7-B. - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3466, § 2, adopted Apr. 24, 2007, deleted App. B in its entirety. Former App. B pertained to checklists for applications.  
APPENDIX 7-C. - RECOMMENDED SPECIES LIST 
Appendix 7-C 
Recommended Species List 
Name 	Description 	Mature Height 	Growth Rate 	Comments 
Shrubs for Buffer Areas 
Euonymus alatus 
Winged Euonymus 
"Burning Bush" 	D 	5-8' 	Moderate 	Dense winged twigs; red fall color 
Forsythia intermedia 
Border forsythia 	D 	8-10' 	Rapid 	Several varieties; yellow flowers 
Ilex cornuta 'Burfordii' 
Burford Holly 	Broadleaf E 	8-12' 	Fast 	May wind burn during winter, but is hardy 
Ilex crenata 
Japanese Holly 	Broadleaf E 	10-12' 	Moderate 	Many varieies are low growing 
Rhododendron hybrida 
Hybrid Rhododendron 	Broadleaf E 	10-12' 	Slow to Moderate 	Many varieties available; verify height and flower color 
Viburnum plicatum tomentosum 
Doublefile 				
Vibernum 	D 	8-10' 	Moderate 	Horizontal branching; white flowers 
Viburnum rhytidophyllum 
Leatherleaf Viburnum 	Broadleaf E 	6-10' 	Moderate 	Prefers shelter from wind 
Small Trees 
Acer palmatum varieties 
Japonese Maple 	D 	15-20' 	Slow 	Some varieties are dwarf 
Crataegus phaenopyrum 
Washington Hawthorn 	D 	20-25' 	Medium 	Thorny, but handsome 
Ilex opaca 
American Holly 	E 	25-35' 	Slow 	Plant female tree for berries 
Koelreuteria paniculata 
Golden Raintree 	D 	25-30' 	Slow 	Yellow flowers, brown seed pods 
Magnolia soulangiana 
Suacer Magnolia 	D 	15-25' 	Slow 	Spreading: "Speciosa" and "Verbanica" are late-blooming varieties 
Malus hybrida 
Flowering Crab Apple 	D 	15-25' 	Medium 	Many varieties; check for disease resistance 
Medium Trees 
Ilex x Fosteri 
Foster No. 2 Holly 	Columnar E 	25-35' 	Medium 	Plant female tree for berries 
Pinus nigra 
Austrian Pine 	E 	20-40' 	Medium 	Use for buffering 
Pyrus calleryana 
Bradfordi Bradford Pear 	D 	35-45' 	Fast 	Capitol & Whitehouse' cultivars 
Tillia cordata 
Little Leaf Linden 	D 	35-45' 	Slow to 	Chancellor' is upright variety 
Large Trees 
Acer rubrum 
Red Maple 	D 	40-50' 	Moderate 	Columnare' & Armstrong' have columnar form 
Acer saccharum 
Sugar Maple 	D 	50-75' 	Slow 	Temple's Upright' is a columnar form 
Gleditsia triacanthos 
Thornless Honeylocust 	Large 	45-60' 	Medium 	Various varieties, avoid Sunburst', because of fireblight 
Liquidambar styraciflua 
Sweetgum 	Large 	45-55' 	Medium 	Good fall color; will tolerate damp soils 
Quercus rubra maxima 
Eastern Red Oak 	D 	50-7-' 	Rapid 	For an oak, relatively easy to transplant 
Tsuga canadensis 
Canadian Hemlock 	Large 
E 	30-80' 	Medium 	If sheared, can be used for hedge 
Pinus Strobus 
White pine 	Large 	80-100' 	Fast 	With effort, can be kept sheared in hedge form 
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova 	Large 	40-50' 	Medium 	Village Green' similar to form of American Elm 
 
Trees and Shrubs for Damp Sites and River District 
Common Name 	Description 	Size 	Location 
Trees: 	D = Diciduous 
E = Evergreen 		
Ilex opaca 
American Holly 	E 	Sm./Med. to 25' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Amelanchier arborea 
Serviceberry 	D 	Medium to 20' 	Part shade 
Amelanchier canadensis 
Serviceberry 	D 	Medium to 20' 	Part shade 
Carpinus caroliniana 
Musclewood 	D 	Medium to 20' 	Shade/Pt. sun 
Asimina triloba 
Paw Paw 	D 	Medium to 25' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Resculus pavia 
Red Buckeye 		Medium 20-25' 	Sun 
Alnus glutinosa 
Black Alder 	D 	Medium 20-25' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Magnolia tripetala 
Umbrella Magnolia 	D 	Medium 30-40' 	Shade/Pt. sun 
Magnolia virginica 
Sweetbay Magnolia 	D 	Medium 30-40' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Betula nigra 
River Birch 	D 	Med/Lg. 30-50' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Nyssa aquatica 
Water Tupelo 	D 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Nyssa sylvatica 
Black Tupelo 	D 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Picea glauca 
White Spruce 	E 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun/Pt. sun 
Quercus lyrata 
Overcup Oak 	D 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun 
Taxodium ascendens 
Pond Cypress 	D 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun 
Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress 
White Cedar, Eastern 	D 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun 
Thuja occidentalis 
Arborvitae 	E 	Med./Lg. 30-50' 	Sun 
Dlospyros virginica 
Persimmon 	D 	Med./Lg. 35-50' 	Sun 
Fraxinus nigra 
Black Ash 	D 	Med./Lg. 40-50' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Fraxinus caroliniana 
Carolina Ash 	D 	Med./Lg. 40-50' 	Sun/pt. shade 
Magnolia macrophylla 
Big Leaf Magnolia 	D 	Med./Lg. 40-50' 	Shade/Pt. sun 
Gleditsia triacanthos 
Honey Locust 	D 	Large to 50' 	Sun 
Quercus phellos 
Willow Oak 	D 	Large 40-50' 	Sun 
Quercus muelenbergii 
Chinkapin Oak 	D 	Large 40-50' 	Sun 
Quercus bicolor 
Swamp White Oak 	D 	Large 40-60' 	Sun 
Quercus palustrus Swamp Oak Pin Oak 	D 	Large 40-60' 	Sun 
Thuja plicata 
Western Red Cedar 	E 	Large 40-60' 	Sun 
Acer rubrum 
Red maple 	D 	Large 50-60' 	Sun 
Fraxinus pennslyvanica 
Green Ash 	D 	Large 50-60' 	Sun 
Fraxinus quadrangulata 
Blue Ash 	D 	Large 50-60' 	Sun 
Liquidambar styraciflua 
Sweet Gum 	D 	Large 50-60' 	Sun 
Quercus nigra 			
Water Oak 	D 	Large 50-70' 	Sun 
Plantanus occidentalis 
American Sycamore 	D 	Large 50-75' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Shrubs for Buffer Areas: 
Hydrangea arborescens 
Smooth Hydrangea 	D 	3' 	Shade/Pt. sun 
Fothergilla gardenii 
Dwarf Fothergilla 	D 	3' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Rhododendron viscosum 
Swamp Azalea 	D 	3' 	Shade 
Rosa virginica 
Virginia Rose 	D 	4' 	Sun/Pt. sun 
Clethra alnifolia 
Summersweet Clethra 	D 	4-8' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Hydrangea quercifolia 
Oakleaf Hydrangea 	D 	5' 	Pt. Sun 
Itea virginica 
Sweetspire 	D 	5' 	Sun 
Rhododendron arborescens 
Sweet Azalea 	D 	5' 	Shade 
Dirca palustrus 
Leatherwood 	D 	5' 	Shade 
Viburnum cassinoides 	D 	5-6' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Rhododendron vaseyi 
Pinkshell Azalea 	D 	5-8' 	Shade 
Ilex cassine 
Dahoon Holly 	E 	6' 	Sun 
Leucothoe fontanesiana 
Drooping Leucothoe 	E 	6' 	Shade/Pt. sun 
Physocarpus opulifolius 
Ninebark 	D 	6' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Ilex verticillata 
Vinterberry Holly 	D 	6-8' 	Sun 
Viburnum alnifolium 
Hobblebush 	D 	6-9' 	Shade 
Aronia arbutifolia 
Red chokeberry 	D 	6-10' 	Sun 
Sambucus canadensis 
Elderberry 	D 	6-10' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Vaccinium corymbosuml 
Highbush Blueberry 	D 	6-10' 	Sun/pt/sun 
Cephalanthus occidentalis 
Button Bush 	D 	6-10' 	Sun/Pt. sun 
Lindera benzoin 
Spicebush 	D 	6-10' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Cornus sericea 
Red Osier Dogwood 	D 	7-9' 	Sun/Pt. sun 
Fothergilla major 
Fothergilla 	D 	8' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Ilex glabra 
Inkberry Holly 	E 	8' 	Sun 
Baccharis halimifolia 
Groundsel Tree 	E 	8-10' 	Sun 
Clethra acuminata 
Cinnamon Clethra 	D 	10-15' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
Cyrilla recemiflora 
Swamp Cyrilla 	D 	10-15' 	Sun/Pt. shade 
 
  
Perennials: 	
Butterfly Weed 	Ascleplas tuberosa 
Swamp Milkweed 	Asclepias spp. 
New England Aster 	Aster noveangliae 
Fall Aster 	Aster spp. 
Coreopsis 	Coreopsis spp. 
Joe Pye Weed 	Eupatorium dubium 
Swamp Sunflower 	Helianthus angustifolius 
Sunflower 	Helianthus spp. 
Rose Mallow 	Hibiscus moscheutos 
Cardinal Flower 	Lobelia cardinalis 
Giant Lobelia 	Lobelia siphilitica 
Loosestrife 	Lysimachia clethroides 
Bee Balm 	Monarda spp. 
Water Forger-Me-Not 	Myosotis scoparius 
Mexican Primrose 	Oenothera speciosa 
Black Eye Susan 	Rudbeckia fulgida 
Hardy Verbena 	Verbena canadensis hybrids 
Iron Weed 	Vernonia noveboracensis 
Bog Plants 	
Sweet Flag 	Acorus calamus 
Flowerinf Rush 	Butomus umbellatus 
Bog Arum 	Calla palustrus 
Marsh Marigold 	Caltha palustrus 
Spike Rush 	Eleocharis acicularis 
Horsetail 	Equisetum hyemale 
Water Iris 	Iris laevigata 
Yellow Flag Iris 	Iris pseudoacorus 
Blue Flag Iris 	Iris vericolor 
Southern Blue Flag 	Iris virginica 
Rush 	Juncus spp. 
Golden Club 	Orontium aquaticum 
Hardy Arum 	Peltandra virginica 
Pickerel Weed 	Pontederia cordata 
Arrowhead 	Sagittaria spp. 
Pitcher Plant 	Sarracenia spp. 
Lizards Tail 	Saururus cernuus 
Soft Stem Bulrush 	Schoenoplectus validus 
Common Threesquare 	Scirpus americanus 
Cordgrass 	Spartina alterniflora 
Cattail 	Typha spp. 
  
APPENDIX 7-D. - DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES FLOW CHART 
Appendix 7-D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
APPENDIX 7-E. - HISTORIC DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Appendix 7-E 
Historic District Boundaries: 
1.  Montford Historic District 
BEGINNING at a point on the northeast corner of the junction of Cherry and Flint Streets; thence north along the east side of Flint Street approximately 200 feet; thence approximately east to a point on the east side of Rankin Avenue approximately 125 feet south of the junction of Starnes and Rankin Avenues; thence continuing east approximately 175 feet to a point in the block bounded by Rankin Avenue, Cherry Street, Starnes Avenue, and Broadway; thence north to a point on the north side of Starnes Avenue midway between Rankin Avenue and Broadway; thence west approximately 100 feet to a point on the north side of Starnes Avenue; thence north to the north side of Elizabeth Street taking in all structures on the east side of Rankin Avenue; thence west approximately 125 feet to a point on the north side of Elizabeth Street; thence north bisecting the block bounded by Woodlawn Avenue, Rankin Avenue, West Chestnut Street, and Elizabeth Street taking in all the houses on the north side of Elizabeth Street west of Rankin Avenue and the east side of Woodlawn Avenue; thence west approximately 50 feet to a point on the north side of West Chestnut Street; thence north along an unnamed alley to a point on the north side of Magnolia Street; thence west along the north side of Magnolia Street to the point on the northeast corner of the junction of Magnolia and Flint Streets; thence north along the east side of Flint Street to a point on the north side of Ocala Street; thence north and east in a curve taking in all houses on the east side of Ocala Street, the Greek Community Center property, and the houses on the west and north sides of Cumberland Circle and Cumberland Avenue to a point on the north side of Catawba Street approximately 100 feet from the junction of Cumberland Avenue and Catawba Street; thence west approximately 100 feet to the northeast corner of the junction of Catawba Street and Cumberland Avenue; thence along the east and north sides of Cumberland Avenue in a curve to the point on the east side of Zillicoa Street at the junction with the line marking the point of elevation 2,100 feet; thence to the north, west and south along the 2,100 feet line to a point on the east side of Montford Avenue approximately 300 feet north of the junction of Montford Avenue and Zillicoa Street; thence north along the east side of Montford Avenue to the point on the northeast corner of the junction of Montford Avenue and Santee Street; thence west along the north side of Santee Street to the point on the northwest side of the junction of Santee Street and Pearson Drive; thence south along the west side of Pearson Drive approximately 800 feet; thence west approximately 300 feet; thence south to a point approximately 200 feet west of the junction of Tacoma Street and Pearson Drive; thence south and east in a curve to a point approximately 100 feet north of Hawthorne Road and 125 feet west of Rosewood Avenue; thence south approximately 600 feet to the Riverside Cemetery property line; thence west, south and east in an irregular line following the property line for Riverside Cemetery to a point approximately 100 feet south of Birch Street; thence east and south in a curve to a point approximately 200 feet west of the junction of Courtland Avenue and Pearson Drive taking in all structures on the south side of Birch Street and the west side of Pearson Drive; thence east approximately 225 feet to a point at the west side of the junction of Courtland Avenue and Courtland Avenue Extended; thence south, east and north in a curve around Arborvale Avenue including all structures on the south, east and north sides of Arborvale Avenue, to a point approximately 150 feet south of Courtland Avenue; thence east to the east side of an unnamed alley behind the William Randolph School to include all structures on the south side of Courtland Avenue; thence in a curve around the William Randolph School following the property line to a point approximately 150 feet west of Montford Avenue; thence south to a point on the south side of Hill Street including all structures on the west side of Montford Avenue; thence approximately 150 feet east to the junction of Hill Street and Montford Avenue; thence approximately 150 feet east to the junction of Cherry Street and Montford Avenue; thence along the south side of Cherry Street to the point of beginning. 
Including a parcel with boundaries described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a stake in the intersection of the southern margin of Courtland Avenue with the western margin of Pisgah Avenue, and runs with the western margin of Pisgah Avenue south 37 Degrees 8 minutes west 50 feet to a stake in he western margin of Pisgah Avenue; thence north 64 Degrees and 40 minutes west 136.7 feet to a stake in the southeastern margin of Long Street; thence with said margin of Long Street north 42 Degrees 11 minutes east 50 feet to a stake in the southern margin of Courtland Avenue; thence south 69 Degrees 48 minutes east with the southern margin of Courtland Avenue 132.45 feet to the beginning, being Lot No. 1 of Block "D" of the plat of lands of Arborvale Park, made by F. J. Fanning(,), Civil Engineer. 
Further, all properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places as part of the Montford Historic District which lie within the above described boundaries shall also be included in the Local Montford Historic District. 
2.  Biltmore Village Historic District 
All lot references herein are to Ward 7, Sheet 2 of the Buncombe County tax maps, unless otherwise indicated, and are identified on maps kept on file in the City of Asheville Planning Department. The lots will be further identified by the lot number for the Buncombe County tax maps of the ward and sheet. 
BEGINNING at the extreme southwest corner of Lot 45, being the northeast corner of the intersection of the department of transportation right-of-way for Hendersonville Road and Lula Avenue; thence in an easterly and southeasterly direction along the northern boundary of Lula Avenue to the extreme southeastern corner of Lot 46-1/4; thence traversing Reed Street in a southeasterly direction to the extreme southwestern corner of Sheet 3, Lot 60; thence northerly along the eastern margin of Reed Street, traversing Warren Avenue, to the southwestern corner of Lot 100-1/4; thence southeasterly approximately 60 feet along the southern boundary of lot 100-1/4 to the southeastern corner of lot 100-1/4 thence southeasterly approximately 163 feet along the southern boundary of Lot 100 to the northeastern corner of Lot 101; thence southerly approximately 124 feet to the southeastern corner of Lot 101; thence easterly approximately 190 feet along the southern boundary of Lot 100 to the southeastern corner of Lot 100; thence northerly approximately 99 feet to the northeastern corner of Lot 100; thence northeasterly traversing Brook Street to the extreme southeastern corner of Sheet 30, Lot 260; thence northerly along the eastern boundary of Sheet 30, Lot 260 to the extreme northeastern corner of sheet 30, lot 260; thence northeasterly traversing Fairview Road to the extreme northeastern corner of Lot 109; thence northwesterly approximately 415.5 feet along the northern boundary of Lot 109 to the northwestern corner of Lot 109; thence northwesterly, traversing an unnamed alley, to the northeastern corner of Lot 115; thence northwesterly along the northern boundaries of Lots 115, 113-1/2, 117, 118, 119-1/4, 119, 129 and 129-1/2 to the northwestern corner of Lot 129-1/2; thence northwesterly traversing Hendersonville Road to the extreme northeastern corner of Lot 2-3/4; thence northwesterly along the northern boundary of Lot 2-3/4 to the extreme northwestern corner of Lot 2-3/4 at the intersection of Lot 2-3/4 with the southern boundary of the Swannanoa River; thence southwesterly following the southern boundary of the Swannanoa River to the extreme southwestern corner of Lot 2-3/4; thence southwesterly, traversing an unnamed alley, to the northwestern corner of Lot 254; thence easterly along the northern boundary of Lot 254 to the intersection of Lot 254 with the McDowell Street Viaduct; thence southeasterly along the western boundary of the McDowell Street Viaduct to a point where the McDowell Street Viaduct, Lodge Street and All Souls Crescent intersect on the southern boundary of Lot 254; thence southerly, traversing Lodge Street, to the northeast corner of Lot 14-1/2; thence westerly approximately 50 feet to the extreme northwestern corner of Lot 14-1/2; thence southerly approximately 100 feet to a common corner of Lots 14-1/2 and 11; thence westerly approximately 50 feet to another common corner of Lots 14-1/2 and 11; thence southwesterly approximately 60.48 feet to another common corner of Lots 14-1/2 and 11, being the extreme southeastern corner of Lot 11; thence southerly approximately 822 feet along the eastern boundary of the town limits of the Town of Biltmore Forest and the western boundary of Lots 14-1/2, 32, 34, 36, 271, 40, and 42, to the southwestern corner of Lot 42; thence, continuing southerly along the western boundary of Ward 7, Sheet 3, Lot 86 to its intersection with Vanderbilt Road; thence northeasterly along the common boundary of Ward 7, Sheet 3, Lot 86 and Vanderbilt Road; thence southeasterly, traversing Hendersonville Road, to the extreme southwestern corner of Lot 49; thence easterly to the northwestern corner of Lot 45; thence southerly approximately 123.5 feet to the southwestern corner of Lot 45, the point and place of beginning. 
3.  Albemarle Park 
All lot references hereinafter are to Sheet 15 of Ward 2 of the Buncombe County tax maps, unless otherwise identified, and are shown on maps kept on file in the City of Asheville Planning Department. 
BEGINNING at the intersection of Charlotte Street and the northern fork of Cherokee Road and being the southwestern most corner of Lot 98 and running thence northerly along the eastern margin of Charlotte Street to the northwestern corner of said Lot 98; thence easterly and northeasterly approximately 608.5 feet along the northern boundaries of Lots 98, Lot 97 and Lot 96 to the northwestern corner of Lot 31-1/2; thence northeasterly and southeasterly approximately 401.55 feet along the northern boundaries of Lots 31-1/2 and Lot 68 and along the southern margin of Canterbury Road to the northeastern boundary of Lot 68; thence crossing Canterbury Road to the northwestern most corner of Lot 101; thence easterly along the northern boundary of Lot 101 to its northeastern corner; thence southerly approximately 33 feet to the intersection of a point on the eastern boundary of said Lot 101 with the northwestern most corner of Lot 52; thence easterly to the northeastern corner of Lot 48; thence southerly along the eastern boundary of said Lot 48 and the western margin of Sunset Drive approximately 168.8 feet to the intersection of Sunset Drive and Cherokee Road at the southeastern corner of said Lot 48; thence southwesterly crossing Cherokee Road to the northeastern most corner of Lot 45; thence along the western margin of Sunset Drive and along the eastern boundaries of Lots 45, 44, 42, and 41 and continuing along the western margin of Sunset Drive to its intersecting with a point in the southern boundary of Lot 39; thence along the southern boundary of lot 39 approximately 75.5 feet to its southwestern corner; thence westerly approximately 386.2 feet along the southern boundaries of Lots 38, 37, 36 and 35-1/4 to the southwestern corner of Lot 35-1/4; thence westerly approximately 544.93 feet along the southern boundaries of Lots 34, 33, 32, 78, 79 and 82 to a point in the southern boundary of Lot 82 which is the northeastern corner of Lot 80; thence southerly approximately 80.7 feet to the southeastern corner of Lot 80; thence westerly approximately 166 feet to the southwestern corner of Lot 77; thence crossing Orchard Road to the southeastern most corner of Lot 93; thence westerly along the southern boundaries of Lots 93, 92 and 94 to the northeastern corner of Lot 72; thence westerly along the northern boundary of Lot 72 to its northwestern corner which is also the southwestern corner of Lot 71; thence northerly along the western boundary of Lot 71 to its northwestern corner; thence easterly along the northern boundary of Lot 71 to its northeastern corner; thence northeasterly traversing Hillside Walk to the southeastern corner of lot 91; thence along the eastern boundary of lot 91 to its northeastern corner; thence westerly along the northern boundary of lot 91 to its northwestern corner; thence northerly along the western boundary of lot 70 to its northwestern corner; thence easterly along the northern boundary of lot 70 to its northeastern corner; thence southerly along the eastern boundary of lot 70 to the intersection of said eastern boundary with the western margin for Orchard Road; thence northeasterly along the western margin for Orchard Road to its intersection with Cherokee Road; thence northwesterly along the southern margin for Cherokee Road and southwesterly along the southern margin of the southern fork of Cherokee Road to its intersection with the eastern margin of Charlotte Street; thence northerly along the eastern margin of Charlotte Street, running along the western boundary of lot 121 and along the terminus of the northern fork of Cherokee Road to the point and place of beginning. This description includes all of the property shown on the plats recorded in Plat Book 198 at pages 178 and 178B and in Plat Book 154 at pages 104B (#2) and 104C (#3) of the Buncombe County Registry, save and excepting therefrom those parcels identified as "Public Garage," "Fir Tree," "Locust," "Rose Bank" and "Club," all shown on the Buncombe County tax maps as lots 73, 72, 91 and 99 of sheet 15 and lot 86-1/2 and a portion of lot 84 of Sheet 16, but specifically including extensions of those lots identified as "Manzanita" and "30" as shown on the above-referenced plats, with said extensions specifically shown on that plat recorded in Plat Book 19 at page 67 of the Buncombe County Registry.  
Chapter 8 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997, repealed former Ch. 8, which pertained to historic preservation and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 8 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Asheville Tree/Greenway Commission, § 2-156; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; floodplain regulations, ch. 7; parks and recreation, ch. 12; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 14; subdivisions, ch. 17; trees, ch. 20; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Historic preservation program, G.S. 121-8; assistance to historical organizations, G.S. 153A-437; power to zone, G.S. 160A-381; historic districts and landmarks, G.S. 160A-400.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Alteration means any change because of construction, repair, maintenance or otherwise to buildings located within a historic district or to buildings designated as a historic landmark. 
Archeological resource means that material evidence of past human activity which is found below the surface of the ground or water, portions of which may be visible above the surface. 
Building means any structure, place or any other construction build for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels or any part of such structure when subdivided by division walls or party walls extending to or above the roof and without openings in such separate walls. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic resources commission for work proposed in a historic district or to or on a historic landmark. 
Commission means the historic resources commission of Asheville and Buncombe County, as established in Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
Commissioners means the members of the Historic Resources Commission of Asheville and Buncombe County. 
Construction means the erection of any onsite improvements on any parcel of ground located within a historic district or on or to a historic landmark, whether the site is presently improved, unimproved or becomes unimproved by demolition, destruction of the improvements located thereon by fire, windstorm or other casualty after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
Demolition means the complete or constructive removal by an applicant of a building on any historic landmark or in any historic district. 
Department means the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, or its successor. 
Designation means the creation of an historic district or an historic landmark through the passage of an ordinance by the appropriate governing body. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, exterior architectural features shall be construed to mean the style, material, size and location of all such signs. 
Governing body or body means the city council and the county board of commissioners, as their authority applies. 
Historic district means an overlay district established by the Asheville City Council for an area deemed to be of special significance in terms of its history, prehistory, architecture, and/or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and/or association. 
Historic landmark means any building, structure, site, artifact above or below ground, area or object which is designated as a historic landmark by ordinance of either the city council or the board of commissioners of Buncombe County due to its special significance in terms of its historical, pre- historical, architectural or cultural importance and its possession of integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
Local planning board means the planning and zoning commission of the City of Asheville or a similar agency to be named for Buncombe County. 
Ordinary repairs and maintenance means work done on a building to prevent it from deterioration or to replace any part thereof in order to correct any deterioration, decay or damage to a building or any part thereof in order to restore such building as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-2. - Historic districts 
(a)  Role of governing body. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Until and unless the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners adopts a zoning ordinance, the provisions of this section shall apply only to the City of Asheville and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. 
b.  On recommendation by the historic resources commission and on completion of the procedure stated in this section, the governing body may enact an ordinance designating an historic district. No historic district may exist without an ordinance designating it as such. 
c.  The Buncombe County Board of Commissioners shall enact ordinances pertaining to its jurisdiction and the City of Asheville shall enact ordinances pertaining to its jurisdiction. If the recommended district lies partially in both jurisdictions, then the city and the county must act together in passing the ordinance. 
(2)  Ordinance procedure. 
a.  The city council may designate by ordinance and from time to time amend by ordinance one or more historic districts. Such ordinance may treat historic districts either as a separate use district classification or as use districts which overlap other zoning districts. Where historic districts are designated as separate use districts, the ordinance may include among permitted uses those uses found by the historic resources commission to have existed during the period sought to be restored or preserved or to be compatible with the authentic restoration or preservation of the district. 
b.  No historic district or districts shall be designated until: 
1.  The planning and zoning commission shall have made an investigation and report on the historic significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings, evidence of which is above or below the surface of the ground or water, included in any such proposed district, and shall have prepared a description of the boundaries of such district. 
2.  The department, acting through such agent or employee as may be designated by its secretary, shall have made an analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the department to submit its analysis and recommendations to the city within 30 days after written request for such analysis has been mailed to it shall relieve the city of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the city may at any time, thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its ordinance. 
3.  The city council may also in its discretion refer the report of the planning and zoning commission and proposed boundaries to the commission or other interested body for its recommendations prior to taking action to amend the ordinance. 
4.  On receipt of these reports and recommendations, the city council may proceed in the same manner as would otherwise be required for the adoption or amendment of any appropriate ordinance provisions. 
(b)  Role of commission. 
(1)  The commission may initiate proposals to the governing body pertaining to the designation of any historic district. 
(2)  The commission shall work with the local planning board in its effort to investigate and report on the historic significance of any proposed historic district. 
(3)  The commission may supplement the report of the local planning board as the commission desires. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-3. - Historic landmarks; role of governing body. 
(a)  Generally. The designation of an historic landmark shall be effected through an ordinance adopted by the city council or by the board of commissioners for Buncombe County. 
(b)  Adoption of ordinance; criteria for designation. Upon complying with Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, the city council may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal an ordinance designating one or more historic landmarks on the following criteria: 
(1)  Historical and cultural significance; 
(2)  Suitability for preservation or restoration; 
(3)  Educational value; 
(4)  Cost of acquisition, restoration, maintenance, operation or repair; 
(5)  Possibilities for adaptive or alternative use of the property; 
(6)  Appraised value; and 
(7)  Administrative and financial responsibility of any person or organization willing to underwrite all or a portion of such costs. 
In order for any building, structure, site or, area or object to be designated in the ordinance as an historic landmark, it must be deemed and found by the commission to be of special significance in terms of its history, architecture or cultural importance and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling or association. 
(c)  Ordinance requirements. The ordinance shall describe such landmark designated in the ordinance, the name of the owner of the landmark and any other information the governing body deems necessary within the authority of this ordinance necessary within the authority of this ordinance and Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. For each building, structure, site, area or object designated as an historic landmark, the ordinance shall require that a 365-day waiting period be observed prior to its demolition. For each designated historic landmark, the ordinance shall also provide for a suitable sign on the landmark stating that the landmark has been so designated. If the owner consents, the sign shall be placed upon the landmark. If the owner objects, the sign shall be placed on a nearby public right-of-way. 
(d)  Acquisition and financing. Within the limits of its jurisdiction, the city council is authorized under Part 3A of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes to acquire property designated by ordinance as a historic landmark and may pay therefor out of any funds which may be appropriated for that purpose. 
(e)  Management and disposition. The city council, pursuant to Part 3A of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, may acquire, maintain, manage, repair, restore, exchange or dispose of any building or structure designated as a historic landmark under this chapter. 
(f)  Museum use. If a historic landmark is acquired pursuant to the authority referred to in subsection 8-4 (d), but is not used for some other governmental purpose, it shall be deemed to be a museum under the provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-488, or its successor, notwithstanding the fact that the historic landmark may be or remain in private use, so long as the historic landmark is made reasonably accessible to and open for visitation by the general public. 
(g)  Appropriations. The city council may make appropriations to the historic resources commission in any amount that it may determine necessary for the expenses of the operation of the historic resources commission and may make available any additional amounts necessary for the acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation and management of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects designated as historic landmarks or of land on which historic buildings or structures are located or to which they may be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-4. - Historic landmarks; role of commission. 
(a)  Powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Recommend to the governing body of the City of Asheville or Buncombe County structures, sites, areas or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic landmarks. 
(2)  Within budgetary limits, acquire the fee or any lesser included interest to any such historic landmarks; hold, manage, restore and improve such landmarks; and exchange and dispose of such landmarks by sale, lease or otherwise, subject to the rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will conserve the landmark for the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Restore, preserve and operate such historic landmarks. 
(4)  Recommend to the governing body that designation of any building, structure, site, area or object as an historic landmark be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Conduct an educational program on historic landmark within its jurisdiction. 
(6)  Cooperate with the state, federal and local governments in pursuance of the purposes of this chapter. The governing body or the commission, when authorized by the governing body, may contract with the state or the United States or any agency of either or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law. 
(7)  Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee or agent of the commission may enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
All meetings or hearings of the commission shall be open to the public and reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given to the public in accordance with North Carolina law. 
(b)  Required procedures. No ordinance designating an historic building, structure, site, area or object as a historic landmark, nor any amendment thereto, may be adopted nor may any property be accepted or, acquired by the commission or the governing body of the city or county, until the following procedural steps have been taken: 
(1)  The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and report on the historic, architectural, educational or cultural significance of each historic landmark proposed for designation or acquisition. 
(2)  The department or another agent or employee of the department designated by the secretary shall make an analysis of any recommendations concerning the report of the commission. This requirement is waived if the department fails to submit its analysis and recommendations to the governing body within 30 days after written request for the analysis has been mailed to the department by the clerk of the city or county governing body. This requirement is also waived with respect to any building, structure, site, area or object of national, state and local historical significance that is currently listed, as certified by the secretary of cultural resources, on the National Register of Historic Preservation Act of 1966, PL 89-655, 16 USC 470a, as amended. 
(3)  The commission and the governing body shall hold public hearings, jointly or separately, on the proposed ordinance. Notice of each hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper generally circulated within the city or county, and written notice of each hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of properties whose identity and current mailing address can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
(4)  Following the required public hearing, the governing body may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with amendments it deems necessary or reject the proposal. 
(5)  Upon adoption of the ordinance, the owner and occupant of each designated historic landmark shall be given written notification of such designation by the governing body insofar as reasonable diligence permits. One copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be filed by the commission in the office of the register of deeds of the county. Such historic landmark designated in the ordinance shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property, in the grantee and grantor indexes in the register of deeds office, and the commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. For any property lying within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, a second copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be given to the city or county building inspector. The fact that a building, structure, site, area or object has been designated an historic landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by the county or city for such period as the designation remains in effect. 
(6)  Upon the adoption of the historic landmarks ordinance or any amendment thereto, it shall be the duty of the commission to give notice thereof to the tax supervisor of the county. The designation and any recorded restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the tax supervisor in appraising it for tax purposes. 
(7)  From and after designation, no local historic landmark not any associated advertising sign shall be materially altered, restored, moved or demolished without issuance of a certificate of appropriateness indicating approval of such action or change. This subsection applies to stone walls, fences, exterior light fixtures, steps, pavement, doors and windows and any other features of the property specifically designated as significant to its historic or architectural character. The governing body shall require such a certificate to be issued by the commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other permit granted for purposes of construction or altering structures. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required. The fee for a certificate of appropriateness shall be as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(8)  Prior to issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such steps as may be reasonably required in the ordinance and rules of procedure to inform the owner of any property likely to be materially affected by the application and shall give the applicant and such owner an opportunity to be heard in cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. Notification of such public hearing shall be given to all parties having interest no later than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public in accordance with North Carolina law. An appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment from the commission's action in granting or denying the certificate and the appeal shall be in the nature of certiorari. The board shall not have the authority to vary any guidelines adopted by the U.S. Department of the interior which are used by the commission to evaluate applications for certificates. Any appeal from the board of adjustment's decision in any such case shall be heard by the Superior Court of Buncombe County, North Carolina. 
(9)  The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, published by the U.S. Department of the interior, shall be the standard for reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness for historic landmarks. 
(10)  The department, acting through any agent or employee designated by its secretary, or the state advisory council on historic preservation shall, either upon the request of the department or at the initiative of the commission, be given an opportunity to review, make comment and make recommendations upon the substance and effect of any application for a certificate of appropriateness on any local historic landmark established pursuant to this chapter and Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. Its comments and recommendations may be provided in writing to the commission or made orally at any public hearing held in connection with the application. The commission shall consider these comments and recommendations prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness if any certificate is issued contrary to the recommendations of the department, the commission shall enter the reasons there for in the minutes of the meeting at which such action is taken, and a copy of the minutes shall be forwarded to the department by the commission's secretary. 
(11)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any portion or architectural feature of a local historic landmark which does not involve a change in design, material, color or general appearance thereof, nor to prevent construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature which the building inspector shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-5. - Delay in demolition of historic landmarks. 
(a)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the relocation, demolition or destruction of a designated historic landmark may not be denied except as provided in subsection (c) hereinafter. However, the effective date of such a certificate of appropriateness may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay authorized by this subsection shall be reduced by the commission where it finds that the property owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from such historic landmark by virtue of the delay. During such period the commission shall negotiate with the owner and any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the historic landmark. 
If the commission has voted to recommend designation of a property as a historic landmark, and final designation has not been made by the local governing board, the demolition or destruction of any historic landmark may be delayed by the commission for a period of up to 180 days or until the local governing board takes final action on the designation, which ever occurs first. 
(b)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a historic landmark which has been determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied except where the commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-6. - Permitted alterations and uses for historic landmarks. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic landmark that does not involve a change in design, material or outer appearance thereof nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any such feature when a building inspector or similar official certifies to the historic resources commission that such action is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-7. - Commission's acquisition authority. 
The commission may, with the approval of the governing body, acquire property designated by ordinance as historic landmark and may pay there for out of any funds which may be appropriated for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-8. - Designation of ownership. 
All historic landmarks acquired by funds appropriated by the city or county shall be acquired in the name of the city or county, unless otherwise provided by the governing body. So long as such property is owned by the city or county, historic landmarks may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city or county. However, all historic landmarks acquired by the commission from funds other than those appropriated by the city or county may be acquired and held in the name of the commission, the city or county or both. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-9. - Relevance to state-owned property. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the regulation or acquisition of historic landmarks owned by the state or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities. in the regulation of historic landmarks owned by the State of North Carolina, the current edition of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings shall be the sole principles and guidelines used in reviewing applications of the State of North Carolina for certificates of appropriateness. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to interiors of buildings or interiors of structures owned by the State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-10. - Authority to prevent demolition, alteration or violation of ordinance. 
If any building, structure, site, area or object designated an historic landmark is about to be demolished, whether as the result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled or removed, except in compliance with the ordinance enacted under authority of this chapter, the city or county or the commission may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal, to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any legal act or conduct with respect to such historic landmark. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-11. - Civil penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville or in State law, persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty as provided in Appendix B to the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 8-12. - Historic landmarks listing. 
The list of historic landmarks which have been designated by the city council or by the Buncombe County Board of Commissioners and now located within the corporate limits of the city is set forth in Appendix D to the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Chapter 9 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Asheville Downtown Commission, § 2-76; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; alarm systems, § 13-31; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 14; selling and entertaining in public places, § 16-141; subdivisions, ch. 17; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 9-1—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-211. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business includes each trade, occupation, profession, business and franchise taxed under this article. 
Seasonal means a business that is conducted for profit six months out of the year or less. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 6-16-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-27. - Purpose; construction of article. 
This article is enacted for revenue purposes only. Therefore, it should be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms. In addition, issuance of a license in accordance with this article does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This article does not prevent the city from imposing license taxes on additional businesses, from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax or from regulating any business taxed. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 2, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-28. - Levy. 
An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business conducted within this city listed in appendix A of Ordinance No. 1855, as amended, which is attached to such ordinance and made a part of such ordinance in the amounts set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 3, 6-16-90; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 5-21-91) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to G.S. 160A-77, the privilege license tax schedule, referred to in this section as appendix A, is compiled and published separately by the city as a list of the various trades, occupations, professions, agencies and businesses, together with the amount of tax due. An official copy is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 9-29. - Persons required to pay tax. 
Each person who conducts a business within the city is subject to this article. A person "conducts a business" when he engages in one act of business taxed under this article. He conducts the business "within the city" if he maintains a business location within the city or if, either personally or through agents, he: 
(1)  Solicits business within the city limits; or 
(2)  Picks up or delivers goods or services within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 4, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-30. - Period of license. 
(a)  Annual licenses. Unless the section of this article levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular business provides otherwise, a license issued in accordance with this article is good for the 12-month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The tax is due on July 1 of each year. However, if a person begins a business after July 1 of a year, the tax for that year is due before the business is begun. 
(b)  Periods shorter than one year. If the section of this article levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular business so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one week or some comparable period of less than a full license year. A person may not commence a business conducted within the city and taxed under such a section until the privilege license tax due is paid and may not continue such a business beyond the period for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 5, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-31. - Proration of tax. 
If a business is begun after January 31 and before July 1, the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise due. If a business is seasonal in nature and if the amount of tax is not based on gross receipts, the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise due. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 6, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-32. - Refunds. 
If for any reason a licensee discontinues the licensed activity during the license year, the licensee is not authorized to a refund; provided, that if discontinuance or cessation of the licensed activity is the direct result of a state statute being adopted after the commencement of the license year that prohibits or makes illegal the licensed activity such that the licensee is required to cease the activity at any point during the license year, then the licensee shall be entitled to a partial refund of taxes paid for the licensed activity, prorated based on the number of months for which the operation was not prohibited by statute. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 7, 6-16-90; Ord. No. 3909, § 1, 10-26-10)  
Sec. 9-33. - Separate businesses. 
A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax must be paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business under common ownership are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open into each other and are operated as a unit. In addition a separate privilege license tax must be paid for each business taxable under this article conducted by the taxpayer at any one location; however, the tax collector may issue a single license for all taxable businesses conducted at one location by a single taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 8, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-34. - Computation of tax based on gross receipts. 
(a)  Whenever this article levies a privilege license tax computed on the basis of gross receipts, gross receipts means the amount reported as gross receipts on a business's state income tax return or on the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. It shall be the duty of a person applying for the license to render to the finance director or his designee a sworn statement of such gross receipts during the preceding year. 
(b)  If a business has not been in operation long enough for the information required in subsection (a) of this section to be available, the tax collector shall estimate gross receipts for the business on the basis of gross receipts of comparable businesses or any other information the tax collector considers useful. On or before July 31 immediately after the license year, each licensee who paid the tax for the past license year based on estimated gross receipts shall submit to the tax collector a sworn final report showing the amount of gross receipts for the license year. If the amount shown is more than the estimated gross receipts, the licensee shall pay the amount of the additional tax that would have been due had the estimate been accurate. If the payment shown is less than the estimated gross receipts, the city shall refund to the licensee the difference between the actual tax paid and the amount of tax that would have been due had the estimate been accurate. 
(c)  All affidavits or other proof of gross receipts furnished to the finance director or his designee pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall remain privileged and confidential and shall not be disclosed. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 9, 6-16-90; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 5-21-91)  
Sec. 9-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by state law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license tax levied by this article. 
(b)  Charitable organizations. A person who operates a business for a religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable or fraternal purpose, when the entire gross income of the business is used for such a purpose, is exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this article. 
(c)  Blind persons and members of armed forces and merchant marine. Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed forces or the merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this article to the extent provided by G.S. 105-249 and 105-249.1. 
(d)  License required. A person exempt from paying a privilege license tax levied by this article shall nevertheless obtain a license from the tax collector. The license shall state that the licensee is exempt from paying the privilege license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 10, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-36. - Tax on gross receipts of automobile rental business. 
(a)  Definitions. In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be applicable herein: 
(1)  Customer shall mean any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease or rental basis. 
(2)  General Statutes shall refer to the North Carolina General Statues and any reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded. 
(3)  Gross receipts shall mean the amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on a business's state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in gross receipts. 
(4)  Lease or rental shall mean a transfer, for consideration, of the use but not the ownership of property to another for a period of time (G.S. § 105-164.3(7a)). 
(5)  Long-term lease or rental shall mean a lease or rental made under a written agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at least 365 continuous days (G.S. § 105-187.1(3)). 
(6)  Person shall mean any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or other legal entity. 
(7)  Short-term lease or rental shall mean any lease or rental of a vehicle that is not a long-term lease or rental (G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(2) and G.S. § 105-187.1(4)). 
(8)  Tax collector shall refer to that individual appointed by the governing body pursuant to G.S. § 105-349 to collect taxes on behalf of the City of Asheville and any other person authorized to carry out the duties and functions of such individual. 
(9)  Taxpayer means any person liable for the taxes imposed by this section. 
(10)  Vehicle shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including a passenger van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle. 
b.  A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo van, pickup truck or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or less used predominantly in the transportation of property for other than commercial freight, and that does not require the operator to possess a commercial drivers license. 
c.  A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds or less (G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(1)). 
(b)  Levy of tax. A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to one and one-half percent of the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211. 
(c)  Collection of the tax. Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect at the time of the lease or rental the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a segregated account, and thereafter remit such tax to the tax collector in accordance with the provisions of this section. The taxpayer shall include a provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement stating that the percentage amount enacted by this section of the total lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer's records. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the City of Asheville. The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to the tax collector and the taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect said tax from the customer shall not affect such liability. 
(d)  Report and payment of tax. Tax levies under this section are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a return to the tax collector on the form prescribed by the tax collector. A return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the tax collector each month on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and information contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance therewith. 
(e)  Taxpayer to keep records. The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received by such taxpayer in the conduct of business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this section. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the tax collector or his duly authorized agent. 
(f)  Tax collector to provide forms. The tax collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the City of Asheville forms and instructions for filing returns to insure a full collection of and an accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner provided. 
(g)  Situs. The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer takes delivery of the vehicle (G.S. § 160A-215.1(b)). 
(h)  Penalties and remedies. The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105 thereof, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this section, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the City of Asheville may exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales and use taxes (G.S. § 160A-215.1(f)). 
(i)  Administration. In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as the Sales and Use Tax as provided in Article 5, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105 of the General Statutes (G.S. § 160A-215.1(d)). 
(Ord. No. 2713, § 1, 6-20-00)  
Sec. 9-37. - Tax on gross receipts of heavy equipment rental business. 
(a)  Definitions. In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be applicable herein: 
(1)  "Customer" shall mean any person that leases or rents heavy equipment or a short-term lease or rental basis, 
(2)  "Finance officer" shall refer to that individual appointed pursuant to G.S. § 159-24, to serve as chief financial officer or other reasonable descriptive title for the City of Asheville and any other person authorized to carry out the duties and functions of such individual. 
(3)  "General Statutes" shall refer to the North Carolina General Statutes and any reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded. 
(4)  "Gross receipts" shall mean the amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on a business's state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes-collected hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in gross receipts. 
(5)  "Heavy equipment" shall mean earthmoving, construction, or industrial equipment that is mobile, weighs at least 1,500 pounds, and is either: 
a.  A self-propelled vehicle that is not designed to be driven on a highway; or 
b.  Industrial lift equipment, industrial material handling equipment, industrial electrical generation equipment, or a similar piece of industrial equipment. 
The term includes an attachment for heavy equipment, regardless of the weight of the attachment. 
(6)  "Lease or rental" shall mean a transfer of possession or control of tangible personal property for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration. The term does not include any of the following: 
a.  A transfer of possession or control of property under a security agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the transfer of title upon completion of the required payments. 
1.  A transfer of possession or control of property under an agreement that requires the transfer of title upon completion of required payments and payment of an option price that does not exceed the greater of $100.00 or one percent of the total required payments. 
2.  The providing of tangible property along with an operator for a fixed or indeterminate period of time if the operator is necessary for the equipment to perform as designed. For the purpose of this subparagraph, an operator must do more than maintain, inspect, or set up the tangible personal property. 
(7)  "Long-term lease or rental" shall mean a lease or rental made under a written agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at least 365 continuous days. 
(8)  "Person" shall mean any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, soles proprietorship, company, firm, or other legal entity. 
(9)  "Short-term lease or rental" shall mean any lease or rental that is not a long-term lease or rental. 
(10)  "Tax collector" shall refer to that individual appointed by the governing body pursuant to N.C.G.S. 105-349, to collect taxes on behalf of the City of Asheville and any other person authorized to carry out the duties and functions of such individual. The Buncombe County Tax Office is designated as the city's "tax collector" for this ordinance. 
(11)  "Taxpayer" means any person liable for the taxes imposed by this section. 
(b)  Lew of tax. A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to eight tenths percent of the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment at retail. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211. 
(c)  Collection of the tax. Every person whose principal business is the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment at retail shall collect at the time of the lease or rental, or at the time of the payment of the consideration therefore, the tax herein levied. A person is not considered to be in the short-term lease or rental business if the majority of the person's lease and rental gross receipts are derived from leases and rentals to a person who is a related person as defined under G.S. § 105-163.010. 
(1)  The tax so collected shall be placed in a segregated account, and thereafter remitted to the tax collector in accordance with the provisions of this section. The taxpayer shall include a provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement, or other documentation evidencing the transaction, stating that the percentage amount enacted by this section of the total lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer's records. 
(2)  The tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the City of Asheville. The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to the tax collector and the taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect said tax from the customer shall not affect such liability. 
(d)  Report and payment of tax. Taxes levied under this section are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a return to the tax collector on the form prescribed by the tax collector. A return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the tax collector for each calendar quarter on or before the last day of the month following the end of the quarter in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and information contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance therewith. 
(e)  Taxpayer to keep records. The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received by such taxpayer in the conduct of business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this section. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at ail reasonable hours during the day by the tax collector or the tax collector's duly authorized agent. 
(f)  Tax collector to provide forms. The tax collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the City of Asheville forms and instructions for filing returns to insure a full collection of and an accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner provided. 
(g)  Situs. Gross receipts from the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment are subject to the tax imposed by this section if the place of business from which the heavy equipment is delivered is located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Asheville. 
(h)  Penalties and remedies. The provisions with respect to penalties and collection remedies that apply to the payment of sales and use taxes under Article 5 of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this section, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The finance officer may exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in imposing these penalties and remedies. 
(Ord. No. 3660, § 1, 11-11-08)  
Secs. 9-38—9-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 9-46. - Application. 
A person shall apply to the tax collector for each license required by this article no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due. The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the tax collector, shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation or some other entity. 
(2)  The nature of the business. 
(3)  Where the business is conducted. 
(4)  An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as required by this article. 
(5)  Whether the business is regulated by a state occupational licensing board subject to G.S. ch. 93B and, if so, the serial number of the state license the applicant currently holds. 
(6)  Any other information the tax collector determines to be necessary to compute the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 11, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-47. - Refusal or revocation. 
The tax collector shall refuse to issue a license required under this article or shall revoke such license for either of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax due or his qualifications for a license. 
(2)  The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 12, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-48. - Unqualified applicants. 
(a)  After receipt of the completed application, if the tax collector believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under section 9-47, the tax collector shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall not issue the license. At the applicant's request, the tax collector shall, in accordance with section 9-57, give the applicant a written statement of the reason for refusing the license. The applicant may, within ten days after the date the statement is received, request a conference to discuss the refusal. In the request the applicant shall specify why the application for a license should not be refused. The tax collector shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time. 
(b)  If the collector refuses to issue a license, the applicant may reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the application was refused no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to issue a license, the tax collector shall issue the license in compliance with section 9-49. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 13, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-49. - Issuance; payment of tax. 
After receipt of the completed application, if the tax collector believes that no reason exists for refusal of a license under section 9-47, the tax collector shall determine the amount of tax due and notify the applicant of that amount. The tax collector shall not issue a license until the tax is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 14, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-50. - Amount of tax disputed. 
If disputes arise over the amount of the privilege license tax the tax collector determines to be due, the applicant may either refuse to pay and request a conference with the tax collector to discuss the determination or pay the amount and request a conference to discuss the right to a refund. If a conference is requested, the tax collector shall arrange it within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 15, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-51. - Revocation. 
(a)  The tax collector shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke it as set forth in section 9-47. Before revoking a license, the tax collector shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation, in accordance with section 9-57. The licensee may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served, request a conference with the tax collector in writing. The request shall specify the reasons why the license should not be revoked. The tax collector shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time. 
(b)  If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days after the day on which notice is served, the tax collector shall revoke the license. If the licensee requests a conference, the tax collector may not revoke the license until after the conference. 
(c)  If the tax collector revokes a license, the former licensee may apply for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to issue a license, the tax collector shall issue the license in accordance with section 9-49. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 16, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-52. - Form and contents of license. 
A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the business is conducted, if it is to be conducted at one place, the nature of the business licensed, the period for which the license is issued and the amount of tax paid. In addition if a machine is licensed, the license shall show the serial number of the machine. The tax collector shall keep a copy of each license issued. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 17, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-53. - Assignments. 
A license may be assigned if: 
(1)  A business licensed under this article and carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person; and 
(2)  The purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. 
Such a change shall be reported to the tax collector in accordance with section 9-54. Otherwise, each license issued under this article is a personal privilege and is not assignable. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 18, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-54. - Changes in business conducted by licensee during tax year. 
(a)  Report of change. A licensee or an assignee shall report a change in the information contained in the license application to the tax collector within ten days after the change occurs. If information shown on the license itself is affected, the licensee or assignee shall surrender the license to the tax collector when reporting the change. 
(b)  Changes affecting amount of tax due. If there are no reasons for revoking the license under section 9-47 and the change results in the imposition of a separate or additional tax, the tax collector shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of the separate or additional tax. 
(c)  Changes not affecting amount of tax due. If there are no reasons for revoking the license under section 9-47 and the change does not result in an imposition of a separate or additional tax, the tax collector shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of a fee as established in the fees and charges manual on file with the city clerk. 
(d)  Change requiring refusal of license. If there is reason for revoking the license under section 9-47, the tax collector shall refuse to reissue a license and shall instead begin proceedings to revoke the license in accordance with section 9-31. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 19, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-55. - Duplicates. 
Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the tax collector shall furnish a duplicate for a fee as established in the fees and charges manual on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 20, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-56. - Record of conferences. 
The tax collector shall maintain for three years a record of each conference held in accordance with this article. The record shall contain the applicant's or licensee's name, the date of the conference and a brief statement of the issues discussed and the result reached. After three years, the tax collector shall dispose of the record in accordance with G.S. 121-5. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 21, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-57. - Procedure for providing notice to applicant or licensee. 
Whenever this article requires the tax collector to give a written statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee, the tax collector may do so in one of the following ways: 
(1)  By personally delivering the statement or notice to the applicant or licensee; 
(2)  By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified mail and returning the receipt requested to the address specified for that purpose in the license application; or 
(3)  By causing the statement or notice to be served on the applicant or licensee in accordance with the procedures for service of process under rule 4, state Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 22, 6-16-90)  
Secs. 9-58—9-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 9-71. - Duty to determine whether tax due. 
Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he conducts is taxed under this article and, if so, whether that tax has been paid for the current tax year. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 23, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-72. - Investigations. 
If the tax collector has reason to believe that a person is conducting a business in the city in violation of this article, the tax collector shall conduct an investigation to determine the person's tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 24, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-73. - Keeping books. 
Each person who conducts a business taxed under this article shall keep all records and books necessary to compute the tax liability. If a person fails to keep books and records as required, the tax collector shall make a determination of that person's tax liability from the information available. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 25, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-74. - Inspections. 
Each person who conducts business in the city shall permit the tax collector to inspect the business premises during normal business hours to determine the nature of the business conducted there and to examine the books and records to determine the nature and amount of business transacted. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 26, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-75. - Posting license. 
A licensee shall post the privilege license conspicuously in the place of business licensed. If the licensee has no regular place of business, the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper city officials. If a machine is licensed, the license shall be affixed to the machine. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 27, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-76. - Notice of deficiency. 
If the tax collector determines that a person has not paid the full amount of tax due under this article, either for the current license year or for a prior license year, the tax collector shall give the person written notice of the deficiency, in accordance with section 9-57. The notice of deficiency shall specify the following: 
(1)  The total amount of tax due; 
(2)  The section of this article upon which the tax is based; 
(3)  The amount of tax paid; 
(4)  Any interest due; 
(5)  The balance owed; 
(6)  The manner and time period in which the person may respond to the notice of the deficiency; and 
(7)  The consequences of failing to respond as specified. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 28, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-77. - Request for conference. 
The person receiving notice of the privilege license tax deficiency may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served, request a conference in writing. The request shall specify the person's objections to the notice of deficiency. By way of illustration but not limitation, the person who receives notice of a deficiency may object on the following grounds: 
(1)  The tax due has already been paid; 
(2)  The tax collector miscalculated the amount of tax due; 
(3)  The tax collector based his calculations on incorrect or insufficient information concerning either the nature or the amount of business conducted; or 
(4)  The tax collector based the determination on an erroneous interpretation of a section of this article that establishes a category of business subject to a particular tax. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 29, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-78. - Finality of deficiency determination. 
If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under section 9-77, the privilege license tax deficiency becomes final and the tax collector shall proceed to collect the deficiency. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 30, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-79. - Conference. 
If the taxpayer requests a conference, the tax collector shall not proceed to collect the privilege license tax deficiency until hearing the taxpayer's objections and determining that the deficiency should become final. The tax collector shall maintain a record of each conference held for three years in accordance with section 9-77. The record shall contain the name of the taxpayer, the date of the conference, a brief statement of the issues discussed and the results of the discussion. After three years, the tax collector shall dispose of the record in compliance with G.S. 121-5. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 31, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-80. - Collection of deficiency. 
(a)  The tax collector may use any of the following methods to collect a privilege license tax deficiency: 
(1)  Criminal prosecution in accordance with section 9-81(a); 
(2)  Equitable relief in accordance with section 9-81(b); 
(3)  The remedies of levy, sale, attachment and garnishment in accordance with G.S. 160A-207; or 
(4)  The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal property of the taxpayer within the city in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 105-109. 
(b)  Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business taxed under this article without payment of the tax is liable for the additional tax of five percent every 30 days as imposed by G.S. 105-109. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 32, 6-16-90)  
Sec. 9-81. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this city without having paid the privilege license tax imposed by this article or without a valid license issued in accordance with this article or without posting a license in compliance with section 9-75 is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. 105-109. Each day that a person conducts business in violation of this article is a separate offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings in accordance with this section does not relieve a person of the liability for taxes imposed under this article. 
(b)  Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section and in compliance with G.S. 160A-175(d), the city may seek an injunction against any person who conducts a business in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 33, 6-16-90)  
Secs. 9-82—9-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPY REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4170, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 9-131—9-149, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2218, § 2, adopted June 13, 1995; and Ord. No. 2314, adopted Aug. 27, 1996. 
 
Sec. 9-131. - Purpose and objective. 
The City of Asheville recognizes that the improper practice of massage and bodywork therapy is potentially harmful to the public. In the interest of public health, safety, welfare and morals, the following provisions and regulations are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(a), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-132. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Massage and bodywork therapy means systems of activity applied to the soft tissues of the human body for therapeutic, educational, or relaxation purposes. The application may include: 
(1)  Pressure, friction, stroking, rocking, kneading, percussion, or passive or active stretching within the normal anatomical range of movement. 
(2)  Complementary methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubricants, and other topical preparations. 
(3)  The use of mechanical devices that mimic or enhance actions that may possibly be done by the hands. 
Massage and bodywork therapist means a person licensed pursuant to Article 36 of Chapter 90 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
Massage and bodywork therapist establishment/business means any establishment or business wherein massage and bodywork therapy is offered or practiced, including, but not limited to, establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical culture studios, massage studios, massage parlors, or similar establishments by whatever name designated. 
Practice/profession of massage and bodywork therapy means the application of massage and bodywork therapy to any person for a fee or other consideration. This does not include any of the procedures, practices or activities listed in N.C.G.S. sec. 90-623(d). 
Private parts means the anus, penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva or vaginal area. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(b), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-133. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-134. - License. 
Any person practicing the profession of massage and bodywork therapy shall have a current state massage and bodywork therapy license issued pursuant to Article 36 of Chapter 90 of the North Carolina General Statutes, unless exempted pursuant to N.C.G.S. sec. 90-624. 
Any person practicing the profession of massage and bodywork therapy who has a current state massage and bodywork license issued pursuant to Article 36 of Chapter 90 of the North Carolina General Statutes is exempt from a city privilege license tax. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(c), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-135. - Hours of operation. 
No massage and bodywork therapist or massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall engage in massage and bodywork therapy on any person or engage in the practice or profession of massage and bodywork therapy before 5:00 a.m. or after 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(d), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-136. - Massage of private parts for hire prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or to offer to massage the private parts of another for hire. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(e), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-137. - Patronage of massage businesses by minors; employment of minors. 
(a)  No massage and bodywork therapist or massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 years, or permit or condone such treatment, except when the parent or guardian of the person under 18 accompanies the person under the age of 18 during the massage treatment or upon written order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, podiatrist, or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the person giving the massage or treatment. 
(b)  No massage and bodywork therapist or massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall employ any person under the age of 18 years in the practice or profession of massage and bodywork therapy. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(f), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-138. - Display of licensure. 
Every massage and bodywork therapist shall display the current state massage and bodywork therapy license issued pursuant to Article 36 of Chapter 90 of the North Carolina General Statutes in a prominent place at his or her primary place of business/establishment so as to be visible for inspection. Massage and bodywork therapists providing massage and bodywork therapy outside their primary business/establishment location or at the location of clients, shall have a copy of the license available for inspection upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(g), 3-12-13)  
Sec. 9-139. - Penalties. 
Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in N.C.G.S. sec. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 4170, § 1(h), 3-12-13)  
Secs. 9-140—9-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2176, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 1995, repealed Art. IV, §§ 9-171—9-181, which pertained to topless establishments and enacted provisions designated as a new Art. IV, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Adult establishments, G.S. 14-202.10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-171. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to set forth the regulatory licensing requirements for adult establishments located within the city. Adult establishments, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics. Studies and experiences have shown that lower property values and increased crime rates tend to accompany and are brought about by adult establishments. The city council finds that regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse secondary effects do not contribute to the blighting of surrounding neighborhoods and to regulate acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to the health, safety or welfare and the peace and dignity of the city. Regulation to achieve these purposes can best be accomplished by the licensing procedure set forth hereinafter. 
The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. This article represents a balancing of the legitimate ends of the community by imposing an incidental, content neutral place, time and manner regulation of sexually oriented businesses, without limiting alternative avenues of communication, and at the same time, requiring the business to carry its share of financing administrative and enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-172. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means a bookstore: 
(1)  Which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar month from the sale of publications (including books, magazines, and other periodicals) which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section; or 
(2)  Having as a preponderance of its publications, books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Adult establishment means an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theatre, adult mini motion picture theatre or adult live entertainment business as defined in this section. 
Adult live entertainment means any performance of or involving the actual presence of real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
Adult live entertainment business means any establishment or business wherein adult live entertainment is shown for observation by patrons. 
Adult motion picture theatre means an enclosed building or premises used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. "Adult motion picture theatre" does not include any adult mini motion picture theatre as defined in this section. 
Adult mini motion picture theatre means an enclosed building with viewing booths designed to hold patrons which is used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within or at an adult establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided by that person as an employee or an independent contractor. 
Revenue manager means the city employee who is assigned by the city manager as being responsible for enforcement of this article. 
Sexually oriented devices means without limitation any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or their device or paraphernalia that is designed principally for specified sexual activities but shall not mean any contraceptive device. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, 
b.  Buttock, or 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touchings of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-173. - Application for licenses. 
(a)  Business license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult establishment in the city unless the owner or operator thereof has obtained an adult establishment license from the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city or has expired. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any entertainer to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult establishment within the city. 
(3)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any adult establishment that fails to have posted, in the manner required by this article, an adult establishment license, has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer who performs any service or entertainment in an adult establishment in which an adult establishment license is not posted, in the manner required by this article, had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(b)  Entertainer license. It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer at an adult establishment without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, or to work as an entertainer at an adult establishment after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended by the city or has expired. 
(c)  License classification and fees. 
(1)  The term of all licenses required under this article shall be for a period of 12 months, commencing on the date of issuance of the license. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fees referred to in this article and established in the fees and charges manual. Payment shall be made by certified or cashier's check or money order. No application shall be considered complete until all such fees are paid. 
(2)  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and/or person and shall be nonrefundable and nontransferable; however, entertainers may obtain a permit, without paying an additional fee, to transfer to another adult establishment. 
(3)  The license fees shall be as set by the city council from time to time and posted in the fees and charges manual. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-174. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Adult establishment business license. All persons desiring to secure a license to conduct, operate or maintain an adult establishment under the provisions of this article shall make a verified application to the revenue manager. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct, operate or maintain the adult establishment. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the revenue manager and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and the residence addresses for the past two years, the business and home telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the adult establishment, a description of the adult entertainment to be performed on the licensed premises, the name of the owner of the premises where the adult establishment will be located, and the business address and Buncombe County parcel identification number of the adult establishment. 
(3)  The names, residence addresses for the past two years, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors. 
(4)  A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from each corporate officer and director, that each such person has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application, or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act within two years immediately preceding the application, 
where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the laws of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of existence issued by the North Carolina Secretary of State. 
(6)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating adult establishments. 
(7)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to investigation of his/her background by the city. 
Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete. 
(b)  Adult entertainer license. All persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this article to be an entertainer shall make a verified application to the revenue manager. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be an entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the revenue manager and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and the residence addresses for the past two years, the home telephone number, date and place of birth, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining. 
(2)  The name and address of each adult establishment where the applicant intends to work as an entertainer. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant, that the applicant has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application, or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act within two years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the laws of the State of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state. 
(4)  Photographs shall be taken of the applicant by the revenue manager and the revenue manager shall process and retain the copies. 
(5)  The applicant shall present to the revenue manager for copying documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 21 years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
e.  Any other form of picture identification issued by a governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the revenue manager; or 
f.  Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the revenue manager. 
(6)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to investigation of his/her background by the city. 
Failure to provide the information required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete. 
(c)  Application processing. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult establishment license or for an entertainer license, the revenue manager shall immediately commence investigation of the application as follows: 
(1)  In the case of an application for a license for an adult establishment, the revenue manager shall: 
a.  Transmit a copy of the application to the planning director and to the police chief. 
b.  The planning director shall report to the revenue manager no later than 30 working days after the receipt of the application by the planning director whether or not a proposed adult establishment complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance regarding location of the adult establishment. In the event that the planning director fails to report to the revenue manager within this time period, the revenue manager shall proceed with processing the application. 
c.  The police chief shall report to the revenue manager no later than ten working days after the receipt of the application by the police chief the results of his/her investigation of the applicant. In the event that the police chief fails to report to the revenue manager within this time period, the revenue manager shall proceed with processing the application. 
d.  Upon completion of his/her investigation, payment of the applicable license fee, and upon receipt of the report of the planning director and the police chief (or upon expiration of either or both time periods referenced above without receiving a report), the revenue manager shall determine whether or not a license shall be issued. In no event shall the time period for determination by the revenue manager exceed 45 days from the date the application is received by the revenue manager, unless consented to by the applicant. 
(2)  In the case of an application for a license for an entertainer, the revenue manager shall: 
a.  Transmit a copy of the application to the police chief. 
b.  The police chief shall report to the revenue manager no later than five workings days after receipt of the application by the police chief the results of his/her investigation of the applicant. In the event that the police chief fails to report to the revenue manager within this time period, the revenue manager shall proceed with processing the application. 
c.  Upon completion of his/her investigation, payment of the appropriate license fee, and upon receipt of the report of the police chief (or upon expiration of either or both time periods referenced above without receiving a report), the revenue manager shall determine whether or not a license shall be issued. In no event shall the time period for determination by the revenue manager exceed 15 days from the date the application is received by the revenue manager, unless consented to by the applicant. 
(d)  Reasons for disapproval. The revenue manager must deny the license application for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all information required by this article. 
(2)  The applicant (including any partners, corporate officers and directors, where applicable), has been convicted of a crime in the local, state or federal court systems for any violations listed in this section 9-174. 
(3)  The applicant (including any partners, corporate officers and directors, where applicable), has made false or fraudulent statements in the application, evidence of which is disclosed by a city background investigation or by any other lawful means. 
(e)  Notice of approval or disapproval. 
(1)  Upon a determination by the revenue manager of the disapproval or approval of the application, the revenue manager shall notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the applicant as shown on the application. In the event that the application is disapproved, the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. 
(2)  In the event an application is disapproved, the applicant shall have 30 days from the receipt of the notice of disapproval to appeal that determination to the Superior Court of Buncombe County. 
(f)  Changes to application. All applicants shall notify the revenue manager of any changes to the application within five working days of the date the change occurs. 
(g)  Police authority regarding criminal history information for applicants for adult establishment and entertainer licenses. The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI Criminal History Record Information to obtain criminal history information on all persons applying for an adult establishment license and an adult entertainer liscense to assist the revenue manger in determining the suitablity of each applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 3639, § 1, 7-22-08)  
Sec. 9-175. - Prohibited acts and conduct. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted on the premises of any adult establishment. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be granted a license for an adult establishment business or as an entertainer. 
(c)  No owner, operator, manager, employee or entertainer, nor any customer or patron, shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined in this article, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities, as defined in this article, or participate in any act of prostitution while on the premises of the adult establishment. 
(d)  No owner, operator, manager, employee, entertainer, customer or patron of an adult establishment shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of his or hers, whether such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed, while on the premises of the adult establishment. 
(e)  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult entertainment premises shall knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of 21 years of age to be in or upon the premises or knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article. 
(f)  Where any adult establishment provides or contains booths designed for individual or private viewing of adult motion pictures, adult live entertainment, specified anatomic areas, or specified sexual activities, said booths must be designed and situated so that the area occupied by the patron is visible at all times from a central location within the establishment, and may not have a door, curtain or other device that shields the patron from view. 
(g)  Any entertainer as defined herein, must keep his or her pubic region and genital area fully and opaquely covered at all times during any adult live entertainment, exhibition, show, or performance in an adult establishment. Other employees of adult establishments, including servers of alcoholic beverages, must keep their specified anatomic areas fully and opaquely covered while in the public areas of the adult establishment. 
(h)  No person in an adult establishment who is not engaged in adult live entertainment, or an exhibition, show or performance may expose any specified anatomic areas in any public area of an adult establishment. 
(i)  No entertainer in an adult establishment may touch a patron unless the entertainer's specified anatomic areas are fully and opaquely covered. 
(j)  No other activity associated with an adult establishment may be conducted on the same premises as the adult establishment unless said activity is conducted within the same permanent enclosure housing the adult establishment. This limitation shall not apply to such activities as parking, building maintenance and other common incidents of premises use and occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2580, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 9-176. - License; posting and display. 
(a)  Every person, corporation or partnership licensed under this article as an adult establishment shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult establishment premises. 
(b)  Every person holding a license as an entertainer shall post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult establishment premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by city authorities responsible for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-177. - Inspections. 
All adult establishments shall permit representatives of the city finance and police departments, acting in their official capacity, to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure that the business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-178. - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
(a)  The revenue manager shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not a license should be suspended or revoked, with the hearing conducted within ten working days of his/her knowledge that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of an adult establishment or the holder of a license as an entertainer has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of an adult establishment knew or should have known that such violations were committed; or 
(3)  The license was obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
(4)  The license has been materially altered or defaced or is being or was used by a person other than the license holder or at a location other than that identified on the license or for a use or type other than that for which the license was issued; or 
(5)  The licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or 
(6)  The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director holding an adult establishment license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this article; or 
(7)  The holder of an entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this article. 
(b)  At the hearing, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard, to present evidence and to be represented by an attorney. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the revenue manager shall take, within five working days after the hearing, any of the following actions: 
(1)  Suspend the license for up to 90 days; or 
(2)  Revoke the license; or 
(3)  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of this article occur during the period of probation; or 
(4)  Take no action. 
(c)  The revenue manager shall provide written notice of his/her decision to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall be sent immediately after the revenue manager determines what action to take, as described above. 
(d)  In the event of suspension or revocation of the license or the placement on administrative probation, the licensee shall have the right to appeal that determination to the Superior Court of Buncombe County within 30 days of receipt of the notice of suspension, revocation or probation. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-179. - License renewal. 
(a)  A license may be renewed by making application to the revenue manager on application forms provided for that purpose. Any license issued under this article shall expire as of the end of the 12-month period from the date of its issuance, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be submitted no sooner than 45 days prior to expiration and no later than the city business day immediately preceding the date of expiration of the license. 
(b)  Upon timely and proper application for renewal and the payment in full of the license fee, the revenue manager shall issue to the applicant a receipt showing the date of the renewal application and granting to the applicant a temporary extension of the license for a period of 45 days or until the application for renewal is approved or disapproved. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed by issuance of a new license for an additional 12-month period. All applications for renewal of licenses shall be processed in the manner provided for the issuance of the initial license, including the requirements for photographs, and must comply with and satisfy the qualifications for licenses specified in this article. 
(c)  If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided in subsection (a) herein, then the license shall expire upon the effective expiration date, and a new license application shall then be required to re-issue any expired license. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Sec. 9-180. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 1-24-95)  
Secs. 9-181—9-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Consumer finance act exemption, G.S. 53-191; regulation of precious metal businesses, G.S. 66-163 et seq.; pawnbrokers, G.S. 91-1 et seq.; privilege license tax for pawnbrokers, G.S. 105-50. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawn or pawn transaction means a written bailment of personal property as security for a debt, redeemable on certain terms within 180 days unless renewed, and with an implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods and who may also purchase merchandise for resale from dealers and traders. 
Pawnshop means the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property which is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction. 
Purchase means any item purchased from an individual for the purpose of resale, whereby the seller no longer has a vested interest in the item. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-1), 2-12-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-202. - Authority of pawnbroker. 
A pawnbroker licensee is authorized to: 
(1)  Make loans on pledges of tangible personal property; 
(2)  Deal in bullion stocks; 
(3)  Purchase merchandise for resale from dealers, traders and wholesale suppliers; and 
(4)  Use capital and funds in any lawful manner within the general scope and purpose of the license. 
No pawnbroker has the authority enumerated in this section unless he has fully complied with the laws regulating the particular transactions involved. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-2), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-203. - Records; pawn tickets. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep consecutively numbered records of each and every pawn transaction, which shall correspond in all essential particulars to a detachable pawn ticket or copy thereof attached to the record. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall, at the time of making the pawn or purchase transaction, enter upon the pawn ticket a record of the following information, which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language: 
(1)  A clear and accurate description of the property, including model and serial number if indicated on the property; 
(2)  The name, residence address, phone number and date of birth of pledgor; 
(3)  Date of the pawn transaction; 
(4)  Type of identification and the identification number accepted from pledgor; 
(5)  Description of the pledgor, including approximate height, weight, sex and race; 
(6)  Amount of money advanced; 
(7)  The date due and the amount due; 
(8)  All monthly pawn charges, including interest, annual percentage rate on interest and total recovery fee; and 
(9)  The agreed upon stated value between the pledgor and pawnbroker in case of loss or destruction of the pledged item. Unless otherwise noted, the stated value is the same as the loan value. 
(c)  The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets: 
(1)  The statement: "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of 60 days past maturity date of the original contract. No further notice is necessary."; 
(2)  The statement: "The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, has no liens or encumbrances, and is the pledgor's to sell or pawn."; 
(3)  The statement: "The item pawned is redeemable only by the bearer of this ticket or by identification of the person making the pawn."; and 
(4)  A blank line for the pledgor's signature and the pawnbroker's signature or initials. 
(d)  The pledgor shall sign the pawn ticket in the designated space. The pledgor shall receive an exact copy of the pawn ticket which shall be signed or initialed by the pawnbroker or any employee of the pawnbroker. These records shall be available for inspection and pickup each regular workday by the chief of police or his designee. These records shall be correct copies of the entries made of the pawn or purchase transaction and shall be carefully preserved without alteration and shall be available during regular business hours. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person presenting a pawn ticket to a pawnbroker is presumed to be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described on the ticket. 
(Code 1965, § 18-13; Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-5), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-204. - Fees; interest rates. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall demand or receive an effective rate of interest greater than two percent per month, and no other charge of any description or for any purpose shall be made by the pawnbroker, except that the pawnbroker may charge, contract for and recover an additional monthly fee for the following services, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Title investigation; 
(2)  Handling, appraisal and storage; 
(3)  Insuring a security; 
(4)  Application fee; 
(5)  Making daily reports to local law enforcement officers; and 
(6)  For other expenses, including losses of every nature, and all other services. 
(b)  In no event may the total of the monthly fees on a pawn transaction listed in subsection (a) of this section exceed 20 percent of the principal up to a maximum of the following: 
First month ..... $100.00 
Second month ..... 75.00 
Third month ..... 75.00 
Fourth month and thereafter ..... 50.00 
(c)  Pawnbrokers may also charge fees for returned checks as allowed by G.S. 25-3-512. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-6), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-205. - Transactions. 
In every pawn transaction: 
(1)  The original pawn contract shall have a maturity date of not less than 30 days, provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the pledgor from redeeming the property before the maturity date; 
(2)  Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of 60 days past maturity date of the original contract, unless the pledgor and the pawnbroker agree to a renewal of the contract; 
(3)  Every pawn ticket or receipt for such pawn shall have printed thereon the provisions of subsection (1) of this section which shall constitute: 
a.  Notice of such sale or disposal; 
b.  Notice of intention to sell or dispose of the property without further notice; and 
c.  Consent to such sale or disposal. 
The pledgor thereby forfeits all right, title and interest of, in and to such pawned property to the pawnbroker who thereby acquires absolute title to the property, whereupon the debt is satisfied and the pawnbroker may sell or dispose of the unredeemed pledges as his own property. Any sale or disposal of property under this section terminates all liability of the pawnbroker and vests in the purchaser the right, title, and interest of the borrower and the pawnbroker; 
(4)  If the borrower loses his pawn ticket he shall not thereby forfeit his right to redeem, but may, before the lapse of the redemption period, make an affidavit with indemnification for such loss. The affidavit shall describe the property pawned and shall take the place of the lost pawn ticket unless the pawned property has already been redeemed with the original pawn ticket; and 
(5)  A pledgor is not obligated to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-7), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-206. - Prohibitions. 
A pawnbroker shall not: 
(1)  Accept a pledge from a person under the age of 18 years; 
(2)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor in connection with a pawn transaction; 
(3)  Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of any right or protection accorded a pledgor under this article; 
(4)  Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or damage; 
(5)  Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker on the pawn transaction. If such pledged goods are lost or damaged while in the possession of the pawnbroker, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to replace the lost or damaged goods with merchandise of like kind and equivalent value. If the pledgor and pawnbroker cannot agree as to replacement, the pawnbroker shall reimburse the pledgor in the amount of the value agreed upon pursuant to section 9-203; 
(6)  Take any article in pawn, pledge or as security from any person, which article is known to such pawnbroker to be stolen, unless there is a written agreement with local or state police; 
(7)  Sell, exchange, barter or remove from the pawnshop any goods pledged, pawned or purchased earlier than 48 hours after the transaction, except in case of redemption by the pledgor or for items purchased for resale from wholesalers; 
(8)  Operate more than one pawnshop under one license, and each shop must be at a permanent place of business; or 
(9)  Take as pledged goods any manufactured home, recreational vehicle or motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-8), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-207. - Penalties. 
(a)  Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 91A-11, every person, their guests or employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this article shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and at the discretion of the court, may be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed six months. If the violation is by an owner or major stockholder or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is knowingly committed by the owner, major stockholder or managing partner of the pawnshop, the license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to violations of section 9-206(6), which shall be prosecuted under the state criminal statutes. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, violation of any of the provisions of this article shall also result in revocation of the license. 
(d)  Any contract of pawn, the making or collecting of which violates any provision of this article, except as a result of accidental or bona fide error of computation, shall be void, and the licensee shall have no right to collect, receive or retain any interest or fee whatsoever with respect to such pawn. 
(Code 1965, § 18-15; Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-9), 2-12-91)  
Secs. 9-208—9-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 9-221. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish or conduct a business of pawnbroker unless such a person has procured a license to conduct business in compliance with the requirements of this article. The license required by this article is in addition to the privilege license required in this chapter. The application fee for the license required shall be as established by the city's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-3), 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2242, § 8, 9-26-95)  
Sec. 9-222. - Qualifications of licensee. 
(a)  To be eligible for a pawnbroker's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be of good moral character; and 
(2)  Not have been convicted of a felony within the last ten years. 
(b)  In order to establish evidence of good moral character, an applicant shall, among other things, provide references from two or more local citizens. In addition, the applicant shall not have been convicted of a misdemeanor which is related to offenses against property, including but not limited to misdemeanor offenses of larceny and receiving stolen goods. In order to determine whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the last ten years, a criminal record check from the clerk of court of every county where the applicant has resided during the past ten years shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-4(a)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-223. - Application. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of pawnbroker within the corporate limits of the city shall make application to the collections division of the finance department for a license to conduct such business. Such application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person, and, in case of a firm or corporation, the names and addresses of the persons composing such firm or of the officers, directors and stockholders of such corporation, excluding shareholders of publicly traded companies; 
(2)  All previous addresses for the past ten years; 
(3)  The name and address of all current and prospective pawnshop employees. Addresses shall be furnished for the past ten years. The city may then conduct a local record check to determine whether or not any such employees have been convicted of a felony within the last ten years or of a misdemeanor related to offenses against property, including but not limited to a misdemeanor conviction for larceny or a misdemeanor conviction for receiving stolen goods, within the last ten years; 
(4)  The name of the business and the street and mailing address where the business is to be operated; 
(5)  A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital proposed to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business; this statement shall be accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant or certified public accountant verifying the information contained in the accompanying statement; 
(6)  An affidavit by the applicant that he has not been convicted of a felony within the last ten years or of a misdemeanor related to offenses against property, including but not limited to a misdemeanor conviction for larceny or a misdemeanor conviction for receiving stolen goods, within the last ten years; 
(7)  A certificate from the chief of police or sheriff of the county or the state bureau of investigation that the petitioner has not been convicted of a felony in the state within the last ten years; and 
(8)  A photograph, taken within the past three years. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-4(b)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-224. - Bond. 
Every person licensed under this article shall, at the time of receiving the license, file with the city a bond payable to the city in the sum of $5,000.00, to be executed by the licensee and by two responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do such business in this state, to be approved by the city, which shall be for the faithful performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. The city may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon a breach thereof. Any person who obtains a judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond to satisfy the judgment. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2, 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-225. - Renewal. 
Any license issued pursuant to this division shall be for a period of one year. The license may be renewed for additional periods of one year upon compliance with the requirements of sections 9-222 and 9-223. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-10), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-226. - Revocation. 
Any license granted under this division may be revoked by the city, after a hearing, for substantial abuse of this article by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-4(c)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 9-227. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  If, after reviewing an application for a pawnbroker's license, the revenue collector determines that the applicant is not eligible, the revenue collector shall give the applicant written notice that his application has been denied. The notice of denial shall specify the reason for the denial and shall give the applicant ten days in which he may respond to the notice. The notice shall be delivered in one of two ways: 
(1)  By personally delivering the letter to the applicant; or 
(2)  By mailing the letter by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address specified in the license application. 
(b)  The applicant may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served, make a written request for a conference. The request shall specify the applicant's objections to the denial. If the applicant fails to request a conference within the time period specified, the denial shall become final. 
(c)  If the applicant requests a conference, the conference shall be held within ten days of the date the request is received. If, after hearing the applicant's objections, the revenue collector still finds the applicant to be ineligible for a pawnbroker's license, the denial shall become final. 
(d)  At such time as there is a change in the condition on which the denial was based (e.g., if ten or more years have passed since the applicant's conviction of a felony), the applicant may submit a new application. 
This appeal procedure shall also apply in case of revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1888, § 2(18A-12), 2-12-91)  
Secs. 9-228—9-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRICIANS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2104, § 1, adopted May 3, 1994, repealed former Art. VI, which pertained to electricians and motion picture operators, and enacted provisions designated as a new Art. VI to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Electrician's license, G.S. 105-91; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194. 
 
Sec. 9-251. - Licenses. 
Licenses issued hereunder by the board of electrical examiners shall be designated as "Class I journeyman electrician's license." 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-252. - Required. 
No person shall operate as a journeyman electrician within the city unless he has a valid Class I journeyman electrician's license and photo identification card on the job site. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-253. - Examining board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of electrical examiners, which shall consist of five members appointed by the city council as follows: one representative of an electrical contractor, one journeyman electrician, one representative of a utility, one licensed architect or licensed engineer, and one layman. The director of building safety and the senior electrical inspector shall serve as ex officio members of the board. 
(b)  The board shall hold regularly scheduled meetings for the purpose of transacting business in accordance with the rules of the board. The board shall adopt rules that shall among other things provide for regular meetings, special meetings and emergency meetings. The board's rules may also provide for special examination upon a stated set of circumstances similar to a need for compliance with the American with Disabilities Act. In any event however, all examinations shall be fairly and equally administered and substantially identical in content and requirement. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the board and the electrical inspectors to proctor the examinations on the third Tuesday of January, April, July and October between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(d)  Appointment to the board shall be made by the city council at the beginning of the fiscal year for terms of three years, but any member may, for cause, be removed from office by the city council at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2368, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-254. - Application. 
Every person desiring a license required by this article shall file a written application with the applicable fee at the City of Asheville Building Safety Department. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-255. - Age of applicant. 
No license required by this article shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 9-256. - Examination of applicant. 
(a)  The board of electrical examiners shall examine each applicant for a license under this article as to their knowledge of the rules and regulations of the installation of electrical wiring devices, applications, and equipment; as set forth in the NC statutes, City of Asheville ordinances and the National Electrical Code. Examination results shall determine the general qualifications of such applicant for executing or performing the class of work covered by the license applied for. Such examination shall be written, and a complete record of every examination given shall be kept on file for three years. 
(b)  The fee for each examination shall be paid when the application for the license is filed, and the fee shall be in an amount as established in the fees and charges manual. 
(c)  If an applicant fails in his examination, the fee paid by him shall not be returned to him. After a period of 90 days shall have elapsed he shall be entitled to reexamination after paying full fee. A grade of 75 percent is required for passing grade. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-257. - Issuance. 
If the applicant for a license under this article passes the examination provided for in section 9-256 and thereby shows himself or herself to be competent and qualified to perform the work authorized, the applicant shall be issued the license, and a photo identification card. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-258. - State contractor's license. 
A contractor's license issued by the North Carolina State Board of Examiners of Electrical Contractors shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of securing permits for the installation, alteration or repair of any electrical wiring devices or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-259. - Journeyman electrician's license. 
A class I journeyman electrician's license issued under this article shall entitle the holder thereof to personally perform the work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing wiring, devices or equipment. He or she shall be allowed two helpers or apprentices who shall not be required to pass an examination to secure a license. All journeyman electricians, helpers, or apprentices shall only engage in work under the employment of a licensed North Carolina electrical contractor. A helper or apprentice is anyone using or handling any tools or materials of the electrical construction trade. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-260. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-261. - Display of certificate. 
Every holder of a license issued under this article shall carry the license certificate upon his person or keep the certificate displayed in a conspicuous place in his place of employment while person performing any work under the provisions of this article, and shall exhibit such certificate upon request of the electrical inspector or any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 9-262. - Transferability. 
No licenseand certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 9-263. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Generally. Each license issued under this article shall expire on June 30 no more than three years following the date of its issuance. Renewal may be made at any time within 30 days before the date of such expiration by submitting to the board the following: (1) The current non-expired license; and (2) Payment of the renewal fee, as listed in the city's fees and charges manual; and (3) fulfilling eight hours of continuing education courses as approved by the North Carolina Board of Examiners for Electrical Contractors (NCBEEC). If licenses are not timely renewed, a fee will be charged for the lapsed license upon renewal. After one year has elapsed without renewing a license, the license applicant shall be subject to reexamination. 
(b)  Inactive license. Any journeyman who will be working outside the city limits may turn in their card to the journeyman board of examiners via any electrical inspector and request inactive license status. Returning journeyman will be subject to re-examination. Renewal may be made without re-examination by meeting the continuing education requirement and providing employment verification in the electrical trade for the inactive/lapsed time period. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 9-264. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any license issued under this article may, after hearing and/or by special meeting, be suspended or revoked by the board. The license shall be revoked if the person holding such license willfully or by reason of incompetence repeatedly violates any statute of the state or any ordinance or rule or regulation of the city relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, devices and equipment. Violations and public complaints shall be documented by the chief electrical inspector and presented to the board for action. It shall be the duty of the board to revoke a license for good and sufficient cause as set forth in this action. Journeymen shall have the right to appeal in writing to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-22-08)  
Secs. 9-265—9-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 9-301—9-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS 
 
Sec. 9-400. - Police authority regarding criminal history information for applicants for precious metal and special precious metal permits and employees working for dealers required to obtain precious metal permits. 
(a)  The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI Criminal History Record information to obtain criminal history information on all persons applying for a precious metal permits and special precious metal permits so as to assist the chief of police or his designee in determine the suitability of each applicant. 
(b)  The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI Criminal History Record Information to conduct criminal background checks for all employees of dealers required to obtain a precious metal permits in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 66-165 or as amended so as to assist the chief of police or his designee in determine the suitability of each employee. 
(Ord. No. 3813, § 1, 12-15-09)  
Chapter 10 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 3; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; police, ch. 13; solid waste management, ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 16; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Abatement of public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193, 130A-19; abatement of an imminent hazard, G.S. 130A-20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Creation of nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his lot or on a lot occupied by him or to allow a nuisance to remain on his lot or a lot occupied by him. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables and fruits, filthy privies and stables and anything causing an offensive odor or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person is declared a nuisance. 
(Code 1965, § 14-2)  
Secs. 10-2—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2373, § 1, adopted June 10, 1997, repealed Art. II, §§ 10-26—10-42, which pertained to abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles. Said section also enacted provisions designated as a new Art. II to read as herein set out in §§ 10-26—10-43. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Title. 
This article shall be entitled "abandoned or junked motor vehicles." 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-27. - Administration. 
(a)  Responsibilities of city departments. The chief of police and the planning and development director for the city shall be responsible for the overall administration and enforcement of this article. The chief of police shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the city and on property owned or operated by the city and shall further be authorized to designate such vehicles as abandoned vehicles as described herein. The chief of police shall further be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles designated as abandoned motor vehicles on private property, junked motor vehicles and aesthetic junked motor vehicles. The planning and development director shall be responsible for designating a motor vehicle as an abandoned motor vehicle located on private property, a junked motor vehicle, or an aesthetic junked motor vehicle as defined in this article. 
(b)  Right to contract. The city may contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses, to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned, junked and aesthetic junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority or power of officers of the city's police department and fire department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(c)  Right to inspect on private property. Duly authorized officials of the city shall have the right, upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, to enter any premises within the jurisdiction of this article during daylight hours to determine if any vehicle violates the provisions of this article and post said vehicle with a notice as authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-28. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as herein indicated: 
Abandoned motor vehicle: An abandoned motor vehicle is one that: 
(1)  Has been left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(2)  Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days; or 
(3)  Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than 24 hours; or 
(4)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours. 
Aesthetic junked motor vehicle: As defined in N. C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-303.2, a motor vehicle on public or private property that does not display a current license plate and that: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.00. 
Authorizing official: The chief of police or the planning and development director or their respective designee. 
City: City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Junked motor vehicle: As defined in N. C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-303, the term junked motor vehicle is a vehicle that is an abandoned motor vehicle that also: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(2)  Cannot be self propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five years old and worth less than $100.00; or 
(4)  Does not display a current license plate. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle: All machines designed or intended to travel over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-29. - Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined herein. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the proper authorizing officials as defined herein may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle pursuant to the provisions set forth in this article and order the vehicle removed. 
(c)  Once a motor vehicle has been designated as an abandoned motor vehicle on the public streets and highways within the city and on property owned or operated by the city, such designation shall be a valid determination for a 12-month period and shall require no additional notice beyond the initial notice to cause its immediate removal. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-30. - Junked motor vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a junked motor vehicle by the proper authorizing official as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the planning and development director may determine and declare that a motor vehicle is junked. If the planning and development director determines that the vehicle is junked, the planning and development director may then determine that the vehicle is a health or safety hazard and order the vehicle removed if one or more of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, insects, snakes, rats or other pests, or being used for storage in a manner which may attract such pests; or 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height; or 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(4)  A point of concentration or source of leaking of concentrated gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials; or 
(5)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it failing or turning over; or 
(6)  One which is a source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of confinement that cannot be opened from the inside, or from exposed surfaces of metal, glass or other jagged materials; or 
(7)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-31. - Aesthetic junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of an aesthetic junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which an aesthetic junked vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the planning and development director may order the removal of an aesthetic junked motor vehicle as defined herein after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss to the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other relevant facts may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic developments opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety which may be indicated when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, insects, snakes, rats or other pests, or being used for storage in a manner which may attract such pests; or 
b.  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height; or 
c.  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
d.  A point of concentration or source of leaking of concentrated gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials; or 
e.  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or 
f.  One which is a source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of confinement that cannot be opened from the inside, or from exposed surfaces of metal, glass or other jagged materials; or 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-32. - Removal of abandoned, junked or aesthetic junked motor vehicle; pre-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 10-33 below, an abandoned, junked or aesthetic junked motor vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only, after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. 
(b)  Notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. In the case of an aesthetic junked motor vehicle, pre-towing notice shall be effectuated in the same manner as for abandoned or junked motor vehicles, except the notice shall further advise the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the right to a pre-towing hearing as described hereinafter in section 10-36 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-33. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement. 
Prior notice need not be given to remove an abandoned or junked motor vehicle if the police chief or the planning and development director determine there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the police chief or the planning and development director in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of such vehicles without prior notice includes: 
(1)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets: For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the city council hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
a.  Obstructing traffic; or 
b.  Left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
c.  Parked in a no stopping or standing zone; or 
d.  Parked in loading zones; or 
e.  Parked in bus zones. 
(2)  Other abandoned or junked motor vehicles: With respect to abandoned or junked motor vehicles left on city-owned property other than the streets or highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the police chief or the planning and development director make written findings that a special need exists for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles that represent an imminent threat to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-34. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Except as set forth herein, any abandoned, junked or aesthetic junked motor vehicle which has been removed may, as directed by the police chief, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the police chief shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle of the following: 
(1)  A description of the vehicle; and 
(2)  The place where the vehicle is stored; and 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any, or the reason(s) for removal; and 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to have the vehicle returned to him; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the towing. 
(b)  The authorizing official as set forth herein shall, if feasible, give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
(c)  If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
(d)  Whenever a motor vehicle is towed under the provisions of this article, and such vehicle has neither a valid registration nor registration plates, the police chief shall make reasonable efforts including checking the vehicle identification number to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle. Provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to aesthetic junked motor vehicles for which the owner has exercised the right to appeal prior to the towing of the vehicle in accordance with section 10-36 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-35. - Prerequisites to removal of abandoned or junked vehicles on private property. 
(a)  In the case of abandoned or junked motor vehicles left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee, the vehicle may be removed by the city only after the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner, occupant or lessee of the real property upon which the vehicle is located submit to the city a written request that the vehicle be removed, which written request shall contain a certification that the vehicle has remained on said property without consent in excess of seven days. 
(2)  The owner, occupant or lessee pay any required pre-towing fees or charges at the time of removal. 
(3)  The owner, occupant or lessee agree to indemnify the city against any loss, expense (including attorney fees) or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(b)  This section shall apply only in those instances when an abandoned or junked vehicle remains on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee of the real property. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-36. - Right to pre-towing hearing. 
With respect to aesthetic junked motor vehicles, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is an aesthetic junked motor vehicle, such appeal shall be made to the chairperson of the towing appeals committee as hereinafter defined, in writing, within seven days of the posting of the notice required in section 10-32 of this article. Further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. Written appeals may be hand delivered to the assistant city manager's secretary in Room 202 located on the second floor of the city building and having the written appeal stamped with a notice of receipt, with a copy of the receipt provided to the appealing party. Notice may also be mailed to the chairperson at the following address: 
City of Asheville 
City Manager's Office 
Towing Appeals Committee Chairperson 
Post Office Box 7148 
Asheville, North Carolina 28802 
The date of postmark shall be utilized in determining the timeliness of the appeal. The chairperson of the towing appeals committee shall notify the owner or the person entitled to possession and the planning and development director of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be held within seven days of receipt of the written appeal. The issues before the committee are: (1) whether the vehicle in question is an aesthetic junked motor vehicle and (2) if the vehicle is an aesthetic junked motor vehicle, is removal warranted under the provisions of the ordinance. The committee shall render a written decision within three days after hearing the case. The committee's written decision shall order the planning and development director to proceed with the removal of the vehicle or return the vehicle to the owner or person entitled to possession. Any aggrieved party may appeal the committee's written decision to the Buncombe County District Court within ten days of the date of the written decision. In the absence of a timely appeal, the committee's decision is final and the authorizing official may proceed to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-37. - Towing appeals committee. 
There is hereby created a three-member towing appeals committee for the City of Asheville. The committee shall consist of the assistant city manager and two other city department directors appointed from time to time by the city manager, whose department has had no prior contact or involvement in the matter appealed to the committee. The assistant city manager shall serve as the chairperson of the committee and have overall responsibility for the proper functioning of the committee, the committee's jurisdiction shall be limited to hearing appeals from the planning and development director that a vehicle is an aesthetic junked motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-38. - Right to probable cause hearing; post-towing. 
When a vehicle is removed pursuant to the provisions of this article and for which there has been no appeal for a pre-towing hearing, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the Buncombe County Small Claims Magistrate within seven days of the date shown on the notice required in section 10-34 of this article. The magistrate shall set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request and shall otherwise proceed in accordance with N. C, Gen. Stat. sec. 20-219.11. The only issue at this hearing is whether probable cause existed for the towing. If the magistrate finds probable cause did exist, the tower's lien continues. If no probable cause is found, the tower's lien is extinguished. Any aggrieved party may appeal the magistrate's decision to the appropriate Buncombe County Court within ten days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-39. - Redemption of vehicle during proceedings. 
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or the towing business having custody of the vehicle. If no probable cause is found as set forth in section 10-38 above, then the owner shall be entitled to a full refund of any funds paid by the owner to the tow truck operator or the towing business. Upon regaining possession of such vehicle, the owner or person entitled to possession of such vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-40. - Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle. 
Any abandoned, junked or aesthetic junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession may be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-41. - Protection against criminal or civil liability. 
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, junked or aesthetic junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this article and by North Carolina law. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-42. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter pertaining to abandoned or junked motor vehicles shall apply to any motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Is located in an enclosed building; or 
(2)  Is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or 
(3)  Is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner in the city. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter pertaining to aesthetic junked motor vehicles shall apply to any motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard as defined in N. C. Gen. Stat. sec. 136-43; or 
(2)  Is used on a regular basis for business or personal use. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 10-43. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Secs. 10-44—10-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKYARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-56. - Purposes and objectives. 
The purposes and objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the citizens and residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the city from possible injury at automobile graveyards and junkyards. 
(2)  Preserve the dignity and aesthetic quality of the environment in the zoning jurisdiction of the city. 
(3)  Preserve the physical integrity of land in close proximity to residential areas. 
(4)  Protect the economic interests of the citizens and residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the city who are dependent on tourism. 
(5)  Achieve responsible economic growth in areas of the zoning jurisdiction of the city which is compatible with growth and development in nearby areas. 
(Ord. No. 1766, § 1, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 10-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auto repair shop or garage means an establishment which is maintained and operated for the primary purpose of making mechanical or body repairs to motor vehicles and which receives 50 percent or more of its gross income from charges made for such repairs. This definition shall include the term "garage, public" as defined in section 30-2-1 of appendix A of this Code. 
Automobile graveyard means any establishment which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying and selling two or more wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles, manufactured homes, boats or trailers and which are not being restored to operation, regardless of the length of time the individual motor vehicles are stored or kept at the establishment. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and designed or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels. 
Establishment means any place, land, building or structure on which or in which there is operated or maintained a business or going concern for profit. 
Fence means a continuous, opaque, unperforated barrier extending from the surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than six feet from the ground at any given point and constructed of dirt, wood, stone, steel or other metal or any substance of a similar nature and strength. 
Gate means a door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened, provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things for which it was intended and which, when closed, forms a continuous barrier as a part of the fence to which it is attached. 
Junk means old or scrapped copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or other types of motor vehicles, boats, manufactured homes or trailers or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials. 
Junk dealer means and includes every person within the city engaged in buying or selling junk, old lead, brass or other metal or any article usually found in junk shops. 
Junkyard means any place of storage or deposit or any vacant lot, whether or not in connection with another business, in or upon which there are displayed, to view from a public highway, two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways or used parts of other motor vehicles, boats, manufactured homes or trailers or parts thereof or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part or intended to be a part of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles. The term "junkyard" shall include "used car junk area" referred to in section 30-5-14 of appendix A of this Code. 
Public road means any road or highway which is designated and maintained by the city or the state department of transportation as part of the city or the state highway system, whether primary or secondary, hard-surfaced or other dependable highways. 
Residential areas means areas which contain a house, an apartment or condominium unit, a group of rooms or a single room occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters or a dwelling unit as defined in the state building code. 
School means any public or private institution for the teaching of children under 18 years of age which is recognized and approved by the state board of education. 
Service station means any establishment which is maintained and operated for the primary purpose of making retail sales of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other items for the operation and routine maintenance of motor vehicles or for making mechanical repairs, servicing or washing of motor vehicles and which receives more than 50 percent of its gross income from the retail sale of such items or from the making of mechanical repairs, servicing or washing of motor vehicles. This definition shall include the term "filling station" as defined in section 30-2-1 of appendix A of this Code. 
Substantial means ample to satisfy the purpose for which an object is intended. 
Vegetation means evergreen trees, including, but not limited to, white pine or hemlock, evergreen shrubs or plants with a minimum height of six inches when planted, which reach a height of at least six feet at maturity. 
Visible means capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Wire fence means a continuous, translucent, perforated barrier extending from the surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than six feet from the ground at any given point, constructed of wire, steel or nylon mesh or any substance of a similar nature and strength, but which perforations or openings are no larger than six square inches. 
(Code 1965, § 15-1; Ord. No. 1766, § 2, 6-6-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-58. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity to operate or maintain a junkyard or automobile graveyard except in accordance with the fencing requirements set forth in this article. This article shall not apply to service stations, auto repair shops or garages located within the appropriate commercial or industrial zoning districts or operating as a nonconforming use as defined by section 30-3-3 of appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1766, § 3, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 10-59. - Fencing. 
(a)  Junkyards or automobile graveyards shall be fenced at all points where the fencing shall be necessary to screen the view of persons from public roads, schools or residential areas and where such screening is not already substantially provided by natural vegetation or other natural barriers as approved by the planning director. This subsection shall apply to conforming and nonconforming uses. The fence shall be a fence or wire fence, as described in section 10-57 and, if a wire fence, it shall be used in conjunction with vegetation as described in this section. 
(b)  If a wire fence with vegetation is used, the plants shall be planted on at least one side of the wire fence and as close as practical to the fence. Vegetation shall be of a type that will reach a minimum height of six feet at maturity and shall be planted at intervals evenly spaced according to the standards specified in section 30-3-14(B) of appendix A of this Code so that a continuous, unbroken hedgerow will exist to a height of at least six feet along the links of the wire fence surrounding the junkyard or automobile graveyard when the vegetation reaches maturity. The height of any plants used must be at least 12 inches at the time of planting. 
(c)  Each owner, operator or maintainer of a junkyard or automobile graveyard to which this article applies and who chooses to use vegetation with wire fence shall utilize good nursery/horticulturist techniques with respect to vegetation, including but not limited to proper pruning, proper fertilizer and proper mulching, so that the vegetation will reach maturity as soon as practical and will have maximum density in foliage. 
(d)  Dead or diseased vegetation shall be replaced at the next appropriate planting time, and the fence or wire fence and vegetation shall be maintained in good condition. 
(e)  The fence or wire fence shall have at least one gate for the purpose of ingress and egress. 
(f)  It is the intent of this section to complement and not conflict with the requirements of section 30-3-14 of appendix A of this Code. Where there is a conflict or are different requirements, the stricter requirements shall apply so that the intent of this section and of the buffering/landscaping requirements are both met. 
(g)  Automobile graveyards or junkyards in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived which would be in violation of this section shall be granted a grace period of 12 months commencing upon such effective date to conform with the fencing requirements of this section; thereafter they shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1766, § 4, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 10-60. - Register of dealers' purchases and sales. 
Every junk dealer shall keep a register of the name and residence of every party from whom junk or any other article mentioned in section 10-57 is purchased or received and to whom such junk or article is sold. Such register shall be open at all times during business hours for the examination and inspection of any police officer or other officer of the city or of any resident therein. 
(Code 1965, § 15-2) 
State Law reference— Failure of junk dealers to keep record of purchases, G.S. 66-10.  
Sec. 10-61. - Purchases from minors. 
No junk dealer shall, directly or indirectly, knowingly buy or receive, by way of barter, exchange or otherwise, any junk or other article mentioned in section 10-57 from any minor, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor, which written consent shall be carefully preserved by the junk dealer as evidence of his right to buy or receive such article from such minor. 
(Code 1965, § 15-3) 
State Law reference— Purchasing from minors, G.S. 66-11.  
Sec. 10-62. - Permit for establishment or enlargement of junkyard. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish any junkyard or to enlarge any existing junkyard in the city without first obtaining from the city council, by at least a two-thirds vote of that body, a special permit. 
(Code 1965, § 15-5) 
State Law reference— Permit required for junkyards, G.S. 136-149.  
Sec. 10-63. - Removal of gas and oil from motor vehicles. 
No gas or oil shall be permitted to remain in any motor vehicle stored at any junkyard, it being hereby directed that, upon the storing of any motor vehicle in such yard, all gas and oil shall be drained and removed. 
(Code 1965, § 15-6)  
Sec. 10-64. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The planning director, as the zoning administrator for the city, is hereby empowered to administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  Violation of this article shall be enforceable as set forth in this subsection in addition to the enforcement provisions as set forth in section 30-10-8 of Appendix A of this Code. 
(1)  Notice of violation. The planning director shall have the authority to issue a notice of violation for any violation of this article. A copy of the notice of violation shall be delivered to the person violating this article by hand delivery or by certified mail. In all other cases, a copy of the notice of violation shall be posted on the property where the violation is occurring and a copy shall be delivered by hand delivery or certified mail to the property owner as shown on the county tax records. In addition, service under this subsection may be made in accordance with Rule 4 of the State Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(2)  Time to remedy violation. The person violating this article shall have 15 days to remedy all violations set forth in the notice of violation. The 15-day period shall commence upon the earlier of the posting of the notice of violation on the property or the delivery of a copy of the notice of violation. 
(3)  Extension of time for compliance. The planning director shall have the authority to grant a single 30-day extension of time within which the person violating this article must comply with the notice of violation. The single extension of time may be issued based upon a written request for extension of time which sets forth valid reasons for not complying with the original 15-day period. 
(4)  Remedies for failure to comply. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-175(f) the planning director may choose from the remedies as set forth in chapter 7, article 18 of this Code to enforce this article when there is a failure to comply with the notice of violation. 
(Code 1965, § 15-7; Ord. No. 1766, § 5, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 2242, § 9, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 3467, § 1(g), 5-8-07)  
Secs. 10-65—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE REGULATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2726, § 1, adopted June 27, 2000, amended the art. IV in its entirety, including its title. See the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances and regulations to promote and protect the health, welfare and safety of its citizens, G.S. 160A-174; authority to regulate, restrict or prohibit the production or emission of noises or amplified speech, G.S. 160A-184. 
Cross reference— Quiet zones, § 19-8. 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all sound, sound vibration, and noise originating within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or prevent the city or any person from pursuing any other legal remedies for damages or the abatement of noises in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Sec. 10-82. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless otherwise clearly required by the context: 
Amplified sound means any sound or noise, including the human voice, that is increased in volume or intensity by means of electrical power. 
Construction means erection, repair, assembly, alteration, landscaping, or demolition of any building or building site. 
Daytime hours: 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time. 
Motorized vehicles means: 
Generally—Any vehicle as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(49) including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Excursion passenger vehicles as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)a. 
(2)  Common carriers of passengers as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)c. 
(3)  Motorcycles and mopeds as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)d. and d.1. 
(4)  Truck tractors as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(48). 
(5)  Farm tractors as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(11). 
Nighttime hours: 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time. 
Noise means any sound or combination of sounds which, because of its volume or quality, tends to disturb reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or to interfere with normal human activity. 
Noise disturbance means any unreasonably loud and raucous sound or noise which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the health or safety of humans or animals; 
(2)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(3)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
To determine whether a noise or sound constitutes a noise disturbance, the following factors incident to such noise are to be considered: whether the noise occurred during daytime or nighttime hours, proximity to residential areas, whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; the volume and intensity; whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of mechanical means; and the nature and zoning of the area. 
Person means any individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or business entity. 
Residential areas: Any area in the city that is zoned the following: RS-2 Residential Single-Family Low-Density District, RS-4 Residential Single-Family Medium Density District, RS-8 Residential Single-Family High Density District, RM-6 Residential Multi-Family Low Density District, RM-8 Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District, RM-16 Residential Multi-Family High Density District. 
Sound means any disturbance of the air or other medium that is detectable by the unaided human ear or which produces vibrations detectable by reasonable persons of normal sensitivity. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 4136, §§ 1(a), (b), 11-13-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-83. - General regulation. 
Except as allowed in this article, no person shall willfully engage in any activity on any premises or public area in the city, which activity produces or constitutes a noise disturbance on occupied neighboring premises or public area. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Sec. 10-84. - Noise producing activities; frequent sources of complaint; noise sensitive areas. 
In addition to the general prohibition set forth above, the following activities are recognized as tending to produce unreasonably loud and raucous noises and as tending to constitute noise disturbances when conducted or permitted in an unreasonable manner. No person shall engage in any of the enumerated activities so as to cause a noise disturbance on neighboring premises. 
(1)  Operation of radios, televisions, or other personal sound reproduction devices in such a manner as to be plainly audible by persons other than those for whose use the device is being operated, including the operation of automobile sound systems in such a manner as to be plainly audible by pedestrians or the occupants of other vehicles. 
(2)  Playing of any amplified or nonamplified musical instrument; 
(3)  Keeping of any animal or bird that frequently or for long periods of time makes noises that tend to annoy or disturb others; 
(4)  Operation of domestic power tools or mechanical devices; 
(5)  Repair or testing of any motor vehicle, however fueled or powered; 
(6)  Operation of any motor vehicle with an improper muffler system in violation of G.S. 20-128(a) and (b); 
(7)  Operation of any motor vehicle so as to cause the tires to squeal or screech unnecessarily; 
(8)  Operation of model cars, boats, or airplanes, go carts, mini bikes, or all-terrain vehicles or other unlicensed toy or recreational vehicles or devices powered by an internal combustion engine; 
(9)  Street vending or peddling; or 
(10)  Sounding of any automobile horn except as a warning or danger signal, or as required by law. 
(11)  The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or other structure within 500 feet of a residential district as established pursuant to the city zoning ordinance, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, except by permit from the building inspector when, in his opinion, such work will not adversely affect other persons. Following the issuance of such a permit, if the building inspector shall determine that the building operations are adversely affecting others, he shall be authorized to modify or revoke the permit. The building inspector may permit emergency work in the preservation of public health or safety at any time. This subsection shall not apply to activities associated with street and highway construction. 
(12)  The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police, fire, ambulance or other official emergency vehicle. 
(13)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except as a warning of danger. 
(14)  The operation of machinery in connection with loading or unloading any vehicles or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(15)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale or display of merchandise. 
(16)  The firing or discharge of firearms in the streets or elsewhere, except by permit from the police department, or otherwise as permitted by law. 
(17)  Yelling, shouting. 
(18)  Parties. 
(19)  The sounding of a security alarm for more than 20 minutes after the owner or responsible party has been notified by law enforcement personnel. 
It is further recognized that certain uses, including churches, synagogues and other places of worship, medical and convalescent facilities, schools and courthouses are particularly sensitive to sound and noise. Noise-producing activities, including those specified above, may become noise disturbances when conducted in the immediate vicinity of those uses during their hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 4136, § 1(c), 11-13-12)  
Sec. 10-85. - Exceptions. 
The following are excepted from the application of this article: 
(1)  Construction activity performed by an agency of government provided that all equipment is operated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and is equipped with all noise-reducing equipment in proper condition; 
(2)  Sound or noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves, church bells, and the bells or chimes of the Asheville City Building and Municipal Building between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and midnight. 
(3)  Sound or noise emanating from street fairs, festivals, or celebrations conducted by or with the city; 
(4)  Sound or noise emanating from film and video production activities for which permits have been issued by the city; provided all equipment such as generators are properly muffled; 
(5)  Sound or noise emanating from properly equipped aircraft operated in accordance with applicable federal rules and regulations; 
(6)  Sound or noise from lawful fireworks; 
(7)  Lawnmowers and agricultural equipment operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when operated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noise reducing equipment in place and in proper condition; 
(8)  Musical accompaniment to parades or military ceremonies; 
(9)  Sound emanating from regularly scheduled athletic events at city or county parks, athletic facilities, public or private schools and McCormick Field; 
(10)  Governmental emergency vehicles in the course of performing their official duties; 
(11)  Railroad operations, to the extent said operations are in furtherance of interstate commerce; and 
(12)  Unamplified noncommercial speeches made from a fixed location in non-residentially zoned areas; and 
(13)  Sound or noise emanating from construction or repair work and regulated activities of utilities regulated by the North Carolina Utilities Commission. 
(14)  Commercial refuse collection vehicles operating between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(15)  Sound or noise emanating from aircraft flight activity at the Asheville Regional Airport, provided said activities are conducted in accordance with FAA regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 4136, § 1(d), 11-13-12)  
Sec. 10-86. - Noise ordinance appeals board; powers and duties. 
(a)  Composition of board; terms. There is hereby established a Noise Ordinance Appeals Board (herein "board") to consist of five members and two alternates as follows: 
Members: 
One city zoning or building safety enforcement officer; 
One city police officer; 
One city animal control officer (or employee of contracted animal control agency); 
Two city residents. 
Alternates: 
One city employee; 
One city resident. 
The city employees will be designated by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager; the residents will be appointed by the city council for three-year terms, and will serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  Purpose. The board will advise the city on matters related to noise and noise control, and will hear and decide appeals and complaints from citizens as set forth below. 
(c)  Appeals. Persons receiving civil citations may appeal the citations to the board in writing within 15 days of issuance. After due consideration of said appeal, the board may direct that said civil citation be withdrawn or that the penalty be reduced by the issuing agency. 
(d)  Complaints. Upon the written and verified complaint of two or more individuals from at least two separate households that a person or persons are violating provisions of this article, and after said person or persons have had notice and opportunity to be heard on the complaint, the board may find that a violation of this article has occurred, and such finding shall be a sufficient basis for issuance of a civil citation as provided in section 10-86. 
(e)  Procedure; appeal. 
(1)  Filing; hearing. Appeals or complaints pursuant to paragraphs (c) and (d) above may be delivered to the city manager or an office or official designated by the city manager. Hearing of a complaint shall occur within 15 days of receipt thereof. If appellant or at least two of the complainants who filed the complaint fail to attend the hearing, the appeal or complaint shall be dismissed. Board decisions shall be issued and served within ten days of the hearing. The times for conducting hearings and issuing decisions may be extended by order of the board. 
(2)  Appeal. Appeals from decisions of the board may be made to the city manager, but must be in writing and delivered to the city manager within ten days of issuance. The manager may consider such appeal with or without a hearing, and shall issue and serve a decision on such appeal within ten days of its receipt; which time may be extended by the city manager. 
(3)  Manner of service; computation of time. Whenever delivery or service of a notice, order or decision is required by this section, such delivery or service shall be as provided in Rule 5(b) of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure for pleadings subsequent to original complaint. The times prescribed in this section for taking any action in response to a notice, order or decision delivered or served as provided herein shall be computed in accordance with Rule 6(a) of North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(4)  Finality of decisions. Board decisions that are not appealed to the city manager are final upon expiration of the time for taking an appeal. Decisions of the city manager are final upon issuance. 
(f)  Rules. Prior to consideration of any appeal or complaint under this section, the board shall adopt rules of procedure consistent with this section, which rules shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 3042, § 1, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 4136, § 1(e), 11-13-12)  
Sec. 10-87. - Non-exclusivity. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or limit any person from seeking any remedy available in law or equity for activities that are or may be subject to regulation by this chapter, or from pursuing said remedy simultaneously with proceedings under this chapter, nor shall any of the procedures specified herein be a condition precedent to the initiation of any legal action. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Sec. 10-88. - Violations; owner and occupant responsibility. 
Violations of this article shall subject the offender to penalties as set forth in section 10-89, subject to the limitations set forth below. 
(1)  Penalties for violations of this article may be assessed against persons responsible for the premises or device producing or causing the noise disturbance. 
(2)  An owner of any premises subject to this article who is not also an occupant of the premises shall be responsible for any actions by tenants, guests, or other licensees that constitute second or subsequent violations of this article; provided, that no absentee owner shall be liable unless notified of first or previous violations of the article, and further provided that such first or previous violations shall have occurred within the previous 12-month period. Notice of any first or previous violations pursuant to this paragraph shall be effected by registered or certified mail. No absentee owner may be subjected to criminal liability under this section, but shall be subject to civil penalties and equitable relief as provided in herein. This section shall in no way relieve any other person from responsibility for violations of this article. 
(3)  The person responsible for any premises shall be responsible and liable for any violations of this article by tenants, guests, or licensees on the premises if the person responsible is actively or constructively present at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Sec. 10-89. - Enforcement; penalties for violation; remedies; additional civil penalty for subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth in City Code section 1-5(c). In addition to the penalties set forth therein, second or subsequent violations of the provisions of this article by the same person for the same activity occurring within one year of the first such violation shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
First violation (per City Code section 1-5) ..... $50.00 
Second violation ..... 100.00 
Third violation ..... 200.00 
Fourth or subsequent violation, per offense ..... 300.00 
The penalties set forth above shall be incorporated into appendix B, Schedule of civil penalties. 
(b)  In addition to the civil penalties provided for above, the city may enforce the provisions of this article by appropriate equitable remedies as set forth in section 1-5(d). 
(c)  This article may be enforced by employees of the city police department as designated by the chief of police, and by other employees of the city as designated by the city manager. Animal control officers employed by the city, or employees of an animal control agency working under contract with the city for the enforcement of animal control ordinances, and who have been designated by the chief of police may enforce the provisions of this article relating to animals and animal noises. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Secs. 10-90—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF SNIPE SIGNS 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to provide a method to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing an effective means for the regulation of snipe signs, as defined herein, thereby reducing visual clutter along roadway corridors and reducing the potential for driver distraction. This article is intended to supplement City Code section 7-18-5, but does not replace it. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-102. - Definition of snipe sign. 
For the purpose of this artcile, the term "snipe sign" shall have the following meaning: 
A temporary sign which is not permitted or authorized under any provision of this code, and which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glazed, or otherwise affixed to a tree, pole, stake, fence, traffic control device, or any other object, or the ground. 
This definition does not include signs within occupied buildings, located in residentially-zoned areas (including single-family and multi-family designations), or signs affixed to kiosks, bulletin boards or other structures permitted or constructed by the city, and intended for general community use. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-103. - Legislative findings. 
The city council expressly makes the following legislative findings in support of this article. 
(1)  While signage along roadways, if properly regulated, provides a public benefit in advising motorists, cyclists and pedestrians of road conditions, traffic safety information, the identification and location of businesses and other destinations, among other things, a proliferation of unregulated signage near or within the traveled right-of-way can result in visual clutter leading to driver confusion and distraction. 
(2)  This public safety concern necessitates a careful balancing of competing interests, including business identification, driver awareness of traffic choices, and the avoidance of visual clutter. 
(3)  The City of Asheville has addressed this balancing of interests and the preservation of public safety by enacting the sign regulations contained in article 7 of the City Code. 
(4)  Snipe signs, as defined herein, are temporary in nature, inexpensive, and easily and quickly placed in the public view. In recent years, the city has experienced a proliferation of snipe signs within or near the right-of-way of public streets and roads, especially in commercial areas, which has greatly increased visual clutter along roadways and threatened traffic safety. 
(5)  Snipe signs are also detrimental to the public health and safety in that they result in litter, obstructions and hazards within and adjacent to the traveled portion of the right-of-way, especially in windy conditions. The problems are especially acute in commercial areas. 
(6)  There is considerable evidence that driver distraction is a major contributory factor in road accidents. Snipe signs contribute to driver distraction and, therefore, threaten the public safety and welfare. 
(7)  Existing enforcement options available under the Unified Development Ordinance have proven ineffective in ensuring compliance with the sign regulations contained in article 7 of this Code as they relate to snipe signs. By the time a violation is observed, a notice of violation drafted, mailed and received, and the violation is corrected, the illegal sign could be in place for seven to ten days, which is often the effective life span of a snipe sign. 
(8)  The enforcement provisions set forth in this article are deemed reasonable and necessary to curtail this illegal activity and protect the public safety while guaranteeing the rights of property owners to the due process of law. 
(9)  Accordingly, snipe signs, as defined herein, are hereby declared to be a nuisance within the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-104. - Prohibition against snipe signs. 
The placing or posting of a snipe sign, as defined herein, shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the responsible party or parties to the penalties stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-105. - Identification of responsible parties. 
For purposes of this article: 
(1)  The record owner of the property on which a snipe sign is located; 
(2)  The entity or person identified in the sign, if different from the property owner or if the sign is not on private property; and 
(3)  The person placing or affixing the sign, shall all have joint and several responsibility for compliance with this article as follows: 
Each is presumed to be the owner of the sign and to have directed or permitted its placement, and shall be a responsible party; 
Each responsible party shall individually be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth herein, regardless of whether another party is also a responsible party. 
The presumptions in this section may be rebutted. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-106. - Enforcement. 
The code enforcement official shall have the option to enforce the provisions of this article in the manner set out in this section. Alternatively, such official may elect to enforce the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance (City Code chapter 7) in accordance with procedures and penalties set forth therein. 
(1)  Any duly authorized code enforcement officer or agent is hereby authorized to remove and confiscate any snipe sign visible from a public roadway, and located within the required zoning setback for the adjacent property or 30 feet of the edge of the traveled portion of a road or street, whichever is less, whether such sign is situated within the right-of-way or beyond it. 
(2)  Any snipe sign confiscated in such manner shall be stored in a secure facility for a period of not less than seven days, after which said confiscated sign may be disposed of. 
(3)  If any responsible party believes that a sign has been erroneously confiscated and/or disposed of, that party may request a hearing before the director of the planning and development department or designee, who shall schedule such hearing as soon as practicable (in any event within 30 days) and render a decision within ten days thereafter. 
(4)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall also be enforceable against responsible parties by civil penalties set forth in [subsection (3)], above. This article shall not be enforceable by criminal proceedings, including proceedings pursuant to G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-107. - Return/disposal of confiscated signs. 
Any sign confiscated hereunder shall be returned to the responsible party upon (1) payment of any fine imposed or (2) entry of a final order finding that the sign was confiscated in error. Confiscated signs that are not returned or with respect to which no request for hearing is filed may be disposed of by the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-108. - Other regulations remain in effect. 
The enactment of this article, including any repealer clause, shall in no way impair the authority of the city to enforce its sign regulations pursuant to the provisions of any other city ordinance, including ordinances contained in c chapter 7 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 10-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 10-110. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. Graffiti is destructive of the rights and values of public and private property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the city council acts to enforce removal of graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to live, work and visit, all to the detriment of the city; and is hereby declared a public nuisance. The city council intends through the adoption of this article to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. 
The city does not intend this article to conflict with existing anti-graffiti state laws, including but not limited to malicious injury to property. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Graffiti: Writings, drawings, inscriptions, figures or marks of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, sidewalks, streets, structures, or places which are not authorized or permitted by the property owner or possessor. For the purposes of this chapter, graffiti shall include drawings, writings, markings or inscriptions regardless of the content or nature of materials used in the commission of the act. Provided however, this definition shall not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water soluble markings which are used in connection with traditional children's activities such as drawings of bases for ball games, hopscotch and similar activities, nor does it include temporary, easily removable markings used in connection with any lawful business or public purpose or activity and markings used to denote the location of underground utility infrastructure and those used in conjunction with establishing survey control data and location points by survey crews. 
Perpetrator: The person who engages in graffiti. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
Property owner: The owner of the property, such property owner's agent or any person in lawful control or possession of the property. 
(c)  Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware of or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the city shall be authorized to use public funds to assist in the removal, painting, obscuring or repairing of the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 10-111. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the surface of any public or private property. 
(b)  Any person who applies graffiti upon the surface of any public or private property is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with G.S. § 14-127 and G.S. § 14-160. In addition to criminal prosecution, such person shall be subject to the additional enforcement provisions set forth herein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced; such property owner shall be subject to the civil enforcement provisions herein. 
(d)  It is the specific intent of this article to regulate the placement of graffiti and the failure to remove graffiti as a civil violation only and not as a criminal violation. Provided however, nothing herein is intended to prevent, restrain or prohibit the criminal prosecution of graffiti perpetrators under the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 10-112. - Removal required. 
(a)  Immediate removal. It is the responsibility of the property owner to immediately remove graffiti from the property owner's property. The property owner should not wait for the city to send a violation notice but shall take immediate and prompt action to remove the graffiti when applied. 
(b)  Removal by property owner. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to remove or effectively obscure any graffiti upon property they own within seven business days after receiving written notice from the city to remove such graffiti ("notice to remove"). Notice to remove shall be served by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested in conjunction with regular mail. If the regular mail is not returned within ten days, service shall be deemed sufficient. Additionally, service hereunder may be made in accordance with Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice to remove shall provide: 
(1)  The street address or other description of the property sufficient for property identification; 
(2)  A description and general location of the graffiti; 
(3)  A statement that the property is a public nuisance due to the existence of the graffiti; 
(4)  Statement that the graffiti must be removed or effectively obscured within seven business days after receiving notice to remove and that if the nuisance is not so abated within that time, the city will abate the public nuisance at the cost of the property owner as set forth herein; 
(5)  Information identifying any graffiti removal assistance available through the city; and 
(6)  Information concerning the procedure for appeal of the notice to remove. 
(c)  Removal by city. If the city has provided notice to remove under subsection (b) above, and property owner fails and/or refuses to take advantage of any graffiti removal resources available through the city, as well as fails or refuses to remove or effectively obscure graffiti upon the property owner's property, the city may, after compliance with the requirements contained herein below, go upon the private property and remove the graffiti at the expense of the property owner. The city shall not clean, paint or obscure or repair any property containing graffiti more extensively than where the graffiti itself is located. The city shall not be required to restore the area that contained graffiti, or any obscured area, to its original condition including conditions of color, texture, and finish. The cost of obtaining compliance with the requirements of this article shall be a lien in accordance with G.S. § 160A-193. Provided however nothing herein shall require the city to remove graffiti from private property or from property designated as historic property under federal or state laws. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 10-113. - Right of entry to private property. 
Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner and a release of the city from any and all claims arising out of the removal. If the property owner fails to remove the graffiti within the time specified in the notice to remove, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the graffiti and the property owner has refused consent and/or refused to grant the city a release of liability, the city may seek remedies as set forth in G.S. § 160A-175, including injunctive relief, an order of abatement or other relief in the appropriate court of law. Provided however, nothing herein shall prevent the city from summarily removing graffiti when there is an imminent threat to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 10-114. - Appeals. 
Any property owner who receives a notice to remove may appeal the notice within seven business days of receipt to a city manager appeals review committee, (herein "committee"), made up of department directors/designees appointed from time to time by the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state with specificity the reasons for the appeal ("appeal notice"). The committee shall hold a meeting within ten days of receipt of the appeal notice, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time after the hearing date. The committee shall have the authority to affirm, modify or reverse the decision from which an appeal was taken, with the final decision vested in the city manager. The city shall not remove or obscure any graffiti during the pendency of an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 10-115. - Enforcement/remedies. 
(a)  Civil penalties—against perpetrator. 
(1)  In addition to the graffiti perpetrator being subject to criminal prosecution under the laws of the State of North Carolina, the perpetrator shall also be subject to the assessment of a civil penalty under the provisions of this article. The graffiti perpetrator, who violates this article, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $200.00. In the event there is more than one violation, then the civil penalty shall be increased for each additional violation as set forth below: 
a.  Second violation: $250.00; 
b.  Third violation: $500.00; 
c.  Fourth violation: $750.00; 
d.  Fifth and any subsequent violation within a 12-month period: $1,000.00. 
(2)  All appeals will be handled in accordance with section 10-114 above. 
(b)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Against the perpetrator. Whenever any city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations in this article has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any of the provisions herein, that official shall notify the violator of the violation and assess the civil penalty set forth hereinabove. The violator shall have seven days to pay the civil penalty or file a notice of appeal with the committee referenced in this article. Failure to pay any assessed civil penalty shall subject the violator to the remedies set forth in G.S. § 160A-175. 
(2)  Against the property owner. Whenever any city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations in this article has reasonable cause to believe that a property owner has failed and refused to remove graffiti from the property owner's property, that official shall notify the property owner of the violation, providing up to seven days to correct the violation. Upon failure to comply with the violation notice or file an appeal with the committee referenced in this article, the violator will be subject to injunctive relief and/or an order of abatement as set forth in G.S. § 160A-175. 
(Ord. No. 4306, § 1, 4-22-14)  
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; cemeteries, ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; nuisances, ch. 10; park regulations, § 12-26; police, ch. 13; solid waste management, ch. 15; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; traffic, ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Criminal law, G.S. 14-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Advertisements—Posting on public or semipublic property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place, post, paint, write, stamp, paste or in any manner affix or cause to be affixed any sign, advertisement, circular, bill or other matter upon any structure of a public or semipublic nature, including but not limited to lampposts, telegraph or telephone poles, electric light poles or supports, trees, fire hydrants, bridges or supports thereunder, pavements, sidewalks, buildings or any other structures or property belonging to the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-1) 
State Law reference— Unlawful posting of advertisements, G.S. 14-145; outdoor advertising control act, G.S. 136-126 et seq.  
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Posting on private property without consent of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place, paint, write, stamp, post, paste or in any manner affix or cause to be affixed any sign, advertisement, circular, bill or other matter to any privately owned property, including but not limited to any house or part thereof, building, wall, fence or part thereof, post, tree or other structure, without first obtaining written permission of the owner or his authorized agent to do so. 
(Code 1965, § 18-2) 
State Law reference— Unlawful posting of advertisements, G.S. 14-145.  
Sec. 11-3. - Same—Evidence in prosecution. 
On the trial of any alleged violation of section 11-1 or 11-2, proof that a sign, advertisement, circular, bill or other matter was attached, placed, posted, painted, written, stamped, pasted or in any manner affixed on any place or structure referred to in such sections shall be prima facie evidence that such was done or caused to be done by the person whose product, services, activity or function was publicized thereon. 
(Code 1965, § 18-3)  
Sec. 11-4. - Advertising by distribution of samples or printed matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise by the distribution of samples or printed matter within the city, except as provided in the annual license and privilege tax ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 18-4)  
Sec. 11-5. - Public solicitation and begging regulated. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Accosting: approaching or speaking to an individual or individuals in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate possession. 
Beg, solicit or panhandle: use of the spoken, written, or printed word, or other acts as are conducted in the furtherance of the purpose of immediately collecting contributions for the use of one's self or others. As used in this ordinance, the word, "solicit," and its forms, includes begging and panhandling. 
Financial Institution: any bank, industrial bank, credit union, or savings and loan. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(1)  Continuing to solicit in close proximity to the individual addressed after the person to whom the solicitation is directed has made a negative response, either verbally, by physical sign, by attempting to leave the presence of the person soliciting, or by other negative indication; 
(2)  Blocking the passage of the individual solicited; or 
(3)  Otherwise engaging in conduct that could reasonably be construed as intending to compel or force a person to accede to a solicitation. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or panhandle, as defined in subsection (a), above: 
a.  By accosting another, or by forcing oneself upon the company of another; 
b.  Within 20 feet of the entrance to any financial institution, or any automatic teller machine; 
c.  At any outdoor dining area permitted pursuant to section 16-146, or outdoor merchandise area permitted pursuant to section 16-147, provided such areas are in active use at the time; 
d.  At any transit stop or taxi stand, or in a public transit vehicle; 
e.  While the person being solicited is standing in line waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
f.  By touching the person being solicited without that person's consent; 
g.  By blocking the path of a person being solicited or blocking the entrance or exit to any building or vehicle; 
h.  By or with the use of profane or abusive language, during the solicitation or following an unsuccessful solicitation; 
i.  By or with the use of any gesture or act intended to cause a reasonable person to be fearful of the solicitor or feel compelled to accede to the solicitation; 
j.  After dark, which shall mean one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise, except in the manner permitted in high traffic zones; 
k.  While under the influence of alcohol or after having illegally used any controlled substance, as defined in the North Carolina Controlled Substance Act. 
(2)  Additional restrictions applicable to high traffic zones: 
a.  For purposes of this subsection (b)(2) only, the following definitions shall apply: 
Beg, solicit or panhandle. The communication, by use of gestures or spoken words, by one person or group of persons directed at another person or group of persons, of a request for the immediate contribution of money, food or goods, to the person or group making the communication, or to others. This definition shall not include transactions between family members or mutual acquaintances. 
High traffic zones. 
1.  Zone 1: Within the area defined by a line drawn along the centerline of the following streets: starting at the intersection of Hilliard Avenue and Market Street, west along Hilliard Avenue to the intersection of Hilliard Avenue and French Broad Avenue; then north along French Broad Avenue to the intersection of French Broad Avenue and Haywood Street; then east Haywood Street to the intersection of Haywood Street and Montford Avenue; then north along Montford Avenue to the intersection of Montford Avenue and Cherry Street; then east along Cherry Street to the intersection of Cherry Street and Broadway Street; then south on Broadway Street to the intersection of Broadway Street and Woodfin Street; then east on Woodfin Street to the intersection of Woodfin Street and College Street; then south on Valley Street to the intersection of Valley Street and Marjorie Street; then west along Marjorie Street to the intersection of Marjorie Street and Davidson Street; then south on Davidson Street to the intersection of Davidson Street and Eagle Street; then west along Eagle Street to the intersection of Eagle Street and Market Street; then south on Market Street to the point of beginning. 
2.  Zone 2: Within Biltmore Village Historic District. 
b.  Prohibited acts. In addition to the restrictions set forth in section (b)(1), above, it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or panhandle, as defined herein, within any high traffic zone. 
(c)  Penalty. A violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor as set forth in North Carolina General Statute Section 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 18-51; Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 12-15-92; Ord. No. 2977, § 1a, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 3023, § 1, 5-13-03) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit or regulate begging, G.S. 160A-179.  
Sec. 11-6. - Damaging or destroying property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface, tear down, injure or otherwise damage or destroy any property, real or personal, belonging to another, whether such property is privately or publicly owned. 
(Code 1965, § 18-6) 
State Law reference— Willful and wanton injury to real property, G.S. 14-127; willful and wanton injury to personal property, G.S. 14-160.  
Sec. 11-7. - Discharge of firearms or weapons. 
No person shall shoot or discharge, within the corporate limits of the city, any firearm, gun, rifle, pistol, air rifle, spring gun or compressed air rifle or pistol or other similar device or weapon which impels or discharges with force any bullet, shot or pellet of any kind, including arrows with metallic tips or sharp tips of any nature, designed to penetrate and propelled by a bow or spring device. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer of any governmental agency or body charged with the duties of protecting life or property or enforcing laws and regulations while engaged in the performance of his official duty. This section shall not apply in defending one's self or property or the safety and property of others nor to a firing or archery range operated or supervised by an individual, club or organization for educational or sporting purposes, if such firing or archery range has first been inspected and approved by the police department. 
(Code 1965, § 18-7; Ord. No. 1654, 10-6-87) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms, G.S. 160A-189; authority to regulate pellet guns and similar devices, G.S. 160A-190.  
Sec. 11-8. - Seizure of firearms or weapons. 
The chief of police or any member of the police department is hereby authorized to seize, hold and confiscate, subject to order of the court, any firearm, weapon, air rifle or similar device mentioned in section 11-7 which is shot or discharged within the city in violation of such section. 
(Code 1965, § 18-8)  
Sec. 11-9. - Profanity in public. 
No person shall engage in loud or boisterous cursing or swearing in any public place in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-16) 
State Law reference— Unlawful use of profane language on passenger trains, G.S. 14-195; using profane or indecent language on public highways, G.S. 14-197.  
Sec. 11-10. - Wells and holes. 
No owner, occupant or tenant in possession of any lot, piece or parcel of ground within the city shall have, make or maintain on such lot, piece or parcel of ground any well, hole or other excavation more than three feet deep, unless the excavation is securely enclosed by railing or otherwise to keep persons or animals from falling into the excavation. 
(Code 1965, § 18-21) 
State Law reference— Leaving unused well open and exposed, G.S. 14-287; removal or destruction of road barriers, G.S. 136-26.  
Sec. 11-11. - Consumption and possession of malt beverages or unfortified wine. 
(a)  Definitions. In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be applicable herein: 
(1)  Malt beverage shall mean beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, and any other brewed or fermented beverage containing at least one-half of one (0.5) percent and not more than six percent, alcohol by volume. 
(2)  Open container shall mean a container whose seal has been broken or a container other than the manufacturer's unopened original container. 
(3)  Public street shall mean any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley, bridge, or other way within and/or under the control of the city and open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street. 
(4)  Unfortified wine shall mean wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet, or dextrose sugar. 
(b)  Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for any person, who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle, to consume malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on the public streets in the city. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields, but excluding specifically locations for which the city manager, civic center director or parks and recreation director have authorized application for and for which an ABC permit has been issued and only according to the requirements of that ABC permit. 
(c)  Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for any person, who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle, to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on the public streets in the city. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields, but excluding specifically locations for which the city manager, civic center director or parks and recreation director have authorized application for and for which an ABC permit has been issued and only according to the requirements of that ABC permit. 
(d)  Possession during community events and festivals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on public streets, alleys, or parking lots which are temporarily closed to regular traffic for community events and festivals, unless the city council adopts a resolution making other provisions for the possession of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine at the community events and festivals. 
(e)  Possession and consumption allowed during certain community events and festivals. A person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle and who is of the age permitted by North Carolina Statute may consume or possess malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public streets and on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied or controlled by the city, if the city council has adopted a resolution making provisions for the possession and consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine at a community event or festival. 
(f)  Possession and consumption allowed in certain outdoor dining areas. A person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle and who is of the age permitted by North Carolina Statute may consume or possess malt beverages and/or unfortified wine in outdoor dining areas for which an ABC permit and a city permit for an outdoor dining area, as set forth in Article V of Chapter 16 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, have been issued. 
(g)  Penalty. Violation of this section, or any subsection, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 18-22; Ord. No. 2281, § 1, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2315, § 1, 9-10-96) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate the consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine on city property, G.S. 18B-300; no prosecution for public intoxication, G.S. 14-447.  
Sec. 11-12. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators or airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind that has an airtight snap lock or other device thereon, without first removing the snap lock or door from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to such icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any person violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be assessed a penalty of $10.00, and each and every day during which such violation continues shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1965, § 18-23) 
State Law reference— Discarding or abandoning iceboxes, etc., precautions required, G.S. 14-318.1.  
Sec. 11-13. - Obstruction of natural drainage; weeds and shrubs on drain banks. 
(a)  No person shall erect any dam or obstruction of any kind which prevents the natural flow of water and causes such water to be dammed or collected in pools upon any lot within the city or in any street or alley thereof or do or cause to be done any work, the effect of which will cause the formation of such a pool. Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner of any lot from filling up such pool as may be convenient, advantageous or desirable, if adequate drainage is provided through or across such lot to care for the surface water thereby collected or diverted from its natural flow, and nothing in this section shall affect the right of the city to change the grade of its streets, alleys or public ways as the public interests may require. 
(b)  Every person owning land through which or through part of which a stream, ditch, gully or any natural drain runs shall keep the bed of such stream, ditch, gully or natural drain free from obstructions and shall not allow any growth of weeds or shrubbery on or along the banks which will prevent sunlight from entering such stream, ditch, gully or natural drain. When water overflows or floods from pools or backwaters therein, the pools shall be promptly drained. 
(Code 1965, § 14-5) 
State Law reference— Noxious weed abatement, G.S. 106-421; sanitation of watersheds, rules, inspections, G.S. 130A-320.  
Sec. 11-14. - Solicitation from streets and median strips. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway or median strip for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway or parking lot. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or loiter in any street or highway, including the shoulders or median strip but excluding sidewalks, and to stop or attempt to stop any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting or accepting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle or for the purpose of distributing merchandise to the occupants of any vehicle. It also shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or loiter in any street or highway, including the shoulders or median strip but excluding sidewalks, and to solicit or accept contributions from the occupants of any stopped vehicle or to distribute merchandise to the occupants of any stopped vehicle. 
(d)  If any person is found to have violated any provision of this ordinance, such person or persons shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2905, § 1, 3-12-02)  
Sec. 11-15. - Public urination. 
(a)  No person shall urinate or defecate upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, walkway, right-of-way or ground, or public property except for properly designated restrooms. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor as set forth in North Carolina General Statute Sec. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 2977, § 1b, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 11-16. - Sleeping on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep outdoors on any of the streets, sidewalks or public parks in such a way, or in such a manner, as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or permitted activities. 
(b)  A violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor as set forth in North Carolina General Statute Sec. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 2977, § 1c, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 11-17. - Loitering. 
(a)  In this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place with the intent to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(3)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(c)  A violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor as set forth in North Carolina General Statute Sec. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 2977, § 1d, 11-12-02)  
Sec. 11-18. - Pre-towing notices on private lots. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Section. 
(1)  Booting service. Any person or business that engages in, or owns or operates a business that engages in, immobilizing or "booting" of motor vehicles for a fee. 
(2)  Trespass towing. The act of towing, removing or storing a motor vehicle that is parked or left on a private parking lot without the private property owner's or lessee's consent, and that is towed, removed or stored without the consent of the motor vehicle operator, i.e., a non-consensual tow. 
(3)  Vehicle operator. Registered vehicle owner, vehicle operator, or other person legally responsible for a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Motor vehicle. The definition of "Class C Motor Vehicle" contained in N.C.G.S. 20-4.01 is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(5)  Private parking lot. A privately-owned area created, designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles. As used herein, a private parking lot does not include driveways, yards of residences, or areas owned or leased by the city or another government entity. 
(6)  Tow service. Any person or business that engages in, or that owns or operates a business that engages in, towing or removing motor vehicles for a fee. 
(7)  Trespass vehicle. Any motor vehicle that is parked or left in a private parking lot without permission or authority from the property owner, lessor, or person in legal control of said lot. 
(8)  Storage facility. A place to which trespass vehicles are transported and stored in connection with a trespass tow. 
(b)  Authority and scope of section. 
(1)  This section is enacted in furtherance of the city's authority, pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-174, to define, prohibit, regulate, or abate acts, omissions, or conditions, detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of its citizens and the peace and dignity of the city. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall apply to private property located within: the Central Business District, the Biltmore Historic District, the River Arts District, and the Haywood Road Districts, as set forth in the official zoning map of the city, upon which a private parking lot is located. The provisions of this section shall also apply to private parking lots located within the city that provide parking spaces for a fee. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no notice shall be required for the towing or removal or immobilization of a vehicle if: 
a.  The vehicle obstructs adequate ingress and egress to businesses or residences; 
b.  The vehicle has been left on the private property for a period of time greater than 48 hours; or 
c.  The vehicle is being removed pursuant to the direction of a law enforcement officer or city employee in accordance with the provisions of the Asheville City Code or state law. 
(4)  This section shall not apply to: 
a.  The towing of vehicles due to statutory parking violations, such as parking in spaces designated for handicap parking, or parking in fire lanes; or 
b.  The authority of the police, fire department or other public officer to direct the towing or immobilization of a motor vehicle, as authorized by other provisions of this Code or state law. 
(5)  This section does not limit other legal remedies that a private property owner may have against a person trespassing on private property, and only applies to and limits the use of trespass towing and booting, as specified herein. 
(c)  Advance notice of trespass towing and booting required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to authorize, direct, engage in, or contract for trespass towing or the booting or immobilization of a trespass vehicle, by the use of a wheel lock or other method, unless advance notice is provided and posted on the private property from which the towing, removal, or immobilization is made, in accordance with the provisions set forth below: 
a.  A notice, in the form of a sign structure, not less than 24 inches by 24 inches in size and not larger than six square feet, shall be prominently placed on the private property at each access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property, within five feet of the street right-of-way line. If there are no curb or access barriers, signs shall be posted not less than one sign each 50 feet of the frontage to the public street. As an alternative, notice, in the form of a sign structure, not less than 12 inches by 18 inches in size, shall be posted at each parking space from which an unauthorized vehicle could be towed, removed, or immobilized. 
b.  The notice shall clearly display the following: 
1.  In not less than one-and-one-half inch high letters on a contrasting background, the words "tow-away" or "tow-away-zone" or "towing enforced." 
2.  In not less than one inch high letters on a contrasting background, a statement indicating that parking by unauthorized vehicles is prohibited by the use of a phrase such as "private property," "leased parking," "no parking," "parking for customers only," "parking for residents only," or a similar phrase. If parking by unauthorized vehicles is prohibited on a 24-hour per day basis, the sign shall so state, and shall state the days of the week during which said prohibition is in effect. If parking by unauthorized vehicles is not prohibited on a 24-hour continuous basis, the sign shall state the days of the week and hours of the day during which unauthorized parking is prohibited. The sign shall also state the cost for the tow and for recovery of the vehicle, which may be stated as a total cost, and shall include any storage fees. 
3.  In not less than one-half inch high letters on a contrasting background, the telephone number at which a person available to release the vehicle that has been towed, removed, or immobilized may be contacted at any time. Calls to the telephone number must be answered by a person, and a person with the authority and ability to release the vehicle must respond to the location of the vehicle within 30 minutes of a call. 
c.  The sign structure displaying the required notices shall be permanently installed with the bottom of the sign not less than one foot above ground level and not more than eight feet above ground level. Pedestrian safety shall be taken into consideration when locating freestanding signs. 
d.  All signs in the Biltmore Historic District shall comply with Chapter 5, Guideline 24, Book 1 of the Biltmore Village Historic District Design Guidelines. 
(d)  Trespass towing and immobilization (booting) practices. 
(1)  Any tow service that has initiated a trespass tow by, at a minimum, positioning a tow truck or wrecker in preparation for securing the trespass vehicle to the tow truck by a hook, chain, cable or similar device, but has not removed the trespass vehicle from the private lot shall upon request of the vehicle operator, release said vehicle upon payment of the release fee. 
(2)  Any tow service that is engaged in a trespass tow shall, upon request of the vehicle operator, permit the vehicle operator to have access to the trespass vehicle for the purpose of retrieving personal property therefrom. 
(3)  Any booting service that engages in the booting or immobilization of a vehicle, or any tow service that engages in a trespass tow shall accept at least two nationally recognized credit or debit cards (such as MasterCard or Visa) in payment for any fee established in this ordinance. 
(4)  The lot or facility to which any trespass vehicle is removed shall be located within a ten-mile radius of the area from which the vehicle was removed, and shall be secured and lighted in such a manner as to keep the vehicle safe from break-ins or damage while in storage. A fenced storage yard with average surface level lighting of two footcandles shall be deemed compliant with this section. 
(5)  Any booting service that engages in the booting or immobilization of a vehicle, or any tow service that engages in a trespass tow shall, within 30 minutes of immobilizing or removing the vehicle from the private lot report, to the Asheville Police Department by telephone communication the fact that a vehicle was towed or booted and shall provide a description of the vehicle including make, color, and license tag number. 
(6)  Any booting service that engages in the booting or immobilization of a vehicle, or any tow service that engages in a trespass tow shall have a person on call 24 hours every day who is capable of acknowledging requests to retrieve a towed vehicle or to remove the immobilization device within 15 minutes of receiving such request, and of releasing said vehicle within 45 minutes of receiving the request. 
(7)  Immobilizing or removing a vehicle that is not a trespass vehicle from a private lot without the consent of the vehicle operator shall be a violation of this section, and shall subject the offender to civil penalties in an amount three times the amount specified in Appendix B. 
(8)  Interference with any booting service that is carrying out the booting or immobilization of a vehicle, or any tow service that is carrying out a trespass tow, except to request release of, access to, or retrieval of the vehicle, is a violation of this section. 
(e)  Penalties. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city manager or his designee, and shall be subject to civil penalties as prescribed in Appendix B, and may be enforced by equitable remedies as set forth in section 1-5. Violations of this section are not subject to criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 3057, § 1A, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 3719, § 1, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3728, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 4329, § 1(a), 8-26-14; Ord. No. 4698, § 1, 8-28-18)  
Sec. 11-19. - Sex offenders prohibited in public parks. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Registered sex offender. An individual who is registered by any state or federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on any state or federal registered sex offender listing, including but not limited to the sex offender registry established in Chapter 14, Article 27A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(2)  Public park. Any publicly owned, leased, operated or maintained land which is designated by the City of Asheville as a park or recreational facility. 
(b)  No registered sex offender shall enter into or upon any public park operated by the City of Asheville. Each entry into a public park, regardless of the time period between such entries, shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor as set forth in G.S. § 14-4. 
(d)  The city manager or his or her designee shall post this regulation at the main entrance of each park within 30 days of passage of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3428, § 1(a), 12-12-06)  
Sec. 11-20. - Sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages on Sunday mornings. 
The sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages shall be allowed within the corporate limits of the city beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays pursuant to the licensed premises' permit issued under G.S. 18B-1001. 
(Ord. No. 4595, § 1(a), 7-28-17)  
Secs. 11-21—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING 
 
Sec. 11-31. - Smoking on buses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco or any other substance or carry lighted cigars, lighted cigarettes, lighted pipes[, or any other lighted tobacco product] including the use of e-cigarettes, on any bus operated as part of the local public transportation system of the city. 
(b)  Signs or posters giving notice of the smoking prohibition shall be installed and prominently displayed in each city bus. 
(Code 1965, § 14-8; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(1), 3-10-15) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, former § 11-14 had been renumbered as § 14-31 in order to accommodate the inclusion of Ord. No. 2050 as Art. II.  
Sec. 11-32. - Regulation of smoking in municipal buildings and on municipal grounds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar, lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product including the use of e-cigarettes, in any park or greenway, now or hereafter owned, leased, or occupied by the city; e-cigarettes means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of heating elements, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that contains or delivers nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, vape pen or under any other product name or descriptor, excluding any product regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, excluding any product regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar, lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product including the use of e-cigarettes, in any building or facility or the grounds of any building or facility, or portion thereof, now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, the Greater Asheville Regional Airport Authority, the Pack Place Education, Arts and Science Center, Inc., the Asheville US Cellular Center or the Housing Authority of the City of Asheville, except in smoking areas which may be specially designated as follows: 
(1)  The Asheville Regional Airport Authority shall have the authority to designate smoking areas in any building or facility owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the Asheville Regional Airport Authority and on the grounds thereof. For the purposes of this subsection only, the term "grounds" shall mean the entirety of the Asheville Regional Airport and all portions thereof upon which no buildings or facilities have been constructed. 
(2)  The board of directors of the Pack Place Education Arts and Science Center, Inc., shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within the Pack Place Education Arts and Science Center and on the grounds thereof. 
(3)  The Asheville Civic Center Commission shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within the Asheville Civic Center, including the Arena, the Thomas Wolfe Auditorium, the Exhibition Hall and the Banquet Hall and on the grounds thereof. 
(4)  The housing authority of the City of Asheville shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each building or facility owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the housing authority of the City of Asheville and the grounds thereof. 
(5)  Except for the areas identified in subsection (a) above, the city manager shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within all other city buildings or facilities owned leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city and on the grounds thereof. 
(6)  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to require that any portion of the buildings or grounds regulated hereby be set aside as smoking areas. Unless a portion of the buildings, facilities, or grounds hereby regulated are designated as a smoking area by the appropriate bodies, smoking shall be totally prohibited in each of the said buildings or facilities and on said grounds. 
(7)  As used in this section, the term "grounds" shall mean an unenclosed area owned, leased, or occupied by the City of Asheville. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 3849, § 1(a), 4-27-10; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(2, 3), 3-10-15)  
Sec. 11-33. - Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar or lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product including the use of e-cigarettes, in any vehicle now or hereafter owned or leased by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 2, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(4), 3-10-15)  
Sec. 11-34. - Regulation of smoking in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar or lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product including the use of e-cigarettes, in a public place, or portion thereof, wherein the owner or operator thereof has designated the premises or portion thereof a nonsmoking area and posted notice as set forth hereinafter. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "public place" shall mean an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 3, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 3849, § 1(b), 4-27-10; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(5), 3-10-15)  
Sec. 11-35. - Notice required. 
Clear and conspicuous signs shall be posted in every building and facility and/or grounds wherein smoking is regulated by this article as follows: 
(1)  "No Smoking" or other signs stating the smoking policy shall have letters of not less than one inch in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol, (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it). 
(2)  Signs shall be conspicuously posted in a position clearly visible on entry into every building, facility and/or grounds wherein smoking is regulated or prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 4, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 3849, § 1(c), 4-27-10)  
Sec. 11-36. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke to include the use of e-cigarettes, in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove to deface any placard or sign erected by or under the authority of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 5, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(6), 3-10-15)  
Sec. 11-37. - Penalties. 
Continuing to smoke including the use of e-cigarettes in violation of this article constitutes an infraction, and the person committing the infraction may be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 6, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 3849, § 1(d), 4-27-10; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(7), 3-10-15)  
Sec. 11-38. - Other laws. 
This article shall not be construed to permit smoking including the use of e-cigarettes where it is otherwise prohibited by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2050, § 7, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 4396, § 1(8), 3-10-15)  
Chapter 12 - PARKS, RECREATION AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Asheville Tree/Greenway Commission, § 2-156; cemeteries, ch. 6; historic preservation, ch. 8; subdivisions, ch. 17; trees, ch. 20; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Recreation Enabling Law, G.S. 160A-350 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK AND PUBLIC BUILDING REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park means any area or space set aside and designated as a public park by the city council and any park owned by the city. 
Recreational facility includes only the following: (1) An athletic field, including any appurtenant facilities such as restrooms, during an organized athletic event if the field has been scheduled for use with the city or municipality responsible for operation of the park or recreational area; (2) A swimming pool, including any appurtenant facilities used for dressing, storage of personal items, or other uses relating to the swimming pool; (3) A facility used for athletic events, including but not limited to, a gymnasium. 
(Code 1965, § 19-11; Ord. No. 4031, § 1a), 11-22-11; Ord. No. 4251, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 12-28. - Unlawful entry. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb over any fence around or in any park or enter any park in any manner except through the regular entrances designated for the admission of persons to the park. 
(Code 1965, § 19-12)  
Sec. 12-29. - Failure to pay admission fee to game. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go, stand, sit or loiter in any park for the purpose of watching any game being played in the park, to which an admission fee is charged, without paying the admission fee provided therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 19-13)  
Sec. 12-30. - Unlawful entry on playing field. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the players, officials, coaches and other authorized persons, to climb over or go over or under any safety fence erected near any baseball diamond, football field or other field on which a game is being played in any park or to stand or go on such field whereon a game is being played or between the safety fence and field whereon a game is being played at any time when a game is being played. 
(Code 1965, § 19-14)  
Sec. 12-31. - Use of amusement or pleasure devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or undertake to ride on any amusement or pleasure device in any park or in any manner interfere with or use any such device, without paying the fee or prescribed charge, or to violate any of the rules and regulations prescribed by the city council in connection with the operation of any such device. 
(Code 1965, § 19-15)  
Sec. 12-32. - Parking and traffic rules. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with any of the parking or traffic rules and regulations prescribed by the director of parks, recreation and public facilities or by the city council in any park or to park or attempt to park any vehicle in any area or space in a park, except in such places as are designated for parking and plainly marked as a parking space. 
(Code 1965, § 19-16)  
Sec. 12-33. - Swimming in designated areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go bathing or swimming in any lake or other body of water, except regularly designated swimming pools, in any park; provided, however, if the city council designates or establishes bathing beaches on any such lakes or bodies of water, then bathing or swimming may be permitted under such rules and regulations as the council may determine. 
(Code 1965, § 19-17)  
Sec. 12-34. - Fishing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish or attempt to fish in any lake or body of water in any park; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from permitting fishing under such rules and regulations as it may determine. 
(Code 1965, § 19-18)  
Sec. 12-35. - Boating. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any boat or canoe or other water conveyance on any lake or body of water in any park; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from operating boats, canoes or other water conveyances on such lakes or bodies of water under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. 
(Code 1965, § 19-19)  
Sec. 12-36. - Damaging property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write on, cut, deface, injure or break any part of any building, grandstand or other structure or any chair, seat or bench or any fence, railing or support of any kind in or around any park. 
(Code 1965, § 19-20) 
State Law reference— Defacing or injuring public building, G.S. 14-132.  
Sec. 12-37. - Damaging vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, break, walk or step on or in any way injure or destroy any shrub, flower or bush in any park. 
(Code 1965, § 19-21) 
State Law reference— Damaging garden or plants of another, G.S. 14-128.  
Sec. 12-38. - Interfering with or annoying birds, animals or reptiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or annoy any birds, animals or reptiles housed or kept in any park. 
(Code 1965, § 19-23)  
Sec. 12-39. - Throwing balls or hard substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or break any bottle or throw any rock, ball or other hard substance in any park. This section shall not prohibit the throwing or using of any ball or substance when thrown or used in the ordinary playing of a game or in practicing therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 19-25)  
Sec. 12-40. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bet or wager on any game of skill or chance or engage in any game of chance in any park. 
(Code 1965, § 19-27) 
State Law reference— Gambling, G.S. 14-292.  
Sec. 12-41. - Closing time. 
All public parks within the corporate limits of the city shall be closed to the general public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or to enter such public parks between such hours, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Employees or those employed by the city to maintain, protect or conserve such public parks in the regular performance of their duties. 
(2)  Any public park or portion thereof where prior permission has been obtained from the director of parks, recreation and public facilities for an activity to extend beyond 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1965, § 19-28)  
Sec. 12-42. - Firearms and weapons. 
(a)  Prohibition. 
(1)  Weapons on city property. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally carry, possess, or have within his or her immediate access any dangerous weapon or firearm while in public-owned buildings, on the grounds or parking areas of those buildings, or in public parks or recreation areas. 
(2)  Weapons on city buses. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally carry, possess, or have within his or her immediate access any dangerous weapon while riding a city bus. 
(3)  Carrying a concealed handgun by permit (CCHP). In accordance with N.C.G.S. § 14-415.23, the prohibition set forth in subsection (a)(1) shall apply to CCHP in all buildings and on their appurtenant premises that are owned, leased as lessee, or otherwise temporarily controlled by the city which are appropriately posted as such in compliance with N.C.G.S. § 14-415.11(c). 
(4)  Posting against CCHP. In the discretion of the city manager, a posting to prohibit CCHP is hereby authorized to be made in all buildings and their appurtenant premises that are owned, leased as lessee, or otherwise temporarily controlled by the city in compliance with N.C.G.S. § 14-415.11(c). 
(5)  Prohibiting CCHP at recreational facilities. In accordance with N.C.G.S. § 14-415.23, the prohibition set forth in subsection (a)(1) shall apply to CCHP at any recreational facility identified in appendix G. The list of facilities in appendix G shall be reviewed regularly by the city manager and updated as necessary 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as set forth below: 
Dangerous weapon: Any object, substance, or device, other than a firearm, designed or intended to be used to incapacitate or inflict serious injury upon persons or property, including any object defined as a deadly weapon by N.C.G.S § 14-269 and also including, but not limited to: 
•  Pellet guns or any other mechanism or device designed or used to project a missile by compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly force; 
•  Bows and arrows, including crossbows or any other device designed to discharge a projectile through any combination of limbs, strings, cables, pulleys, or cams. 
•  Knives of any kind or type having a blade in excess of 3½ inches in length; 
•  Clubs, blackjacks, batons and nightsticks; 
•  Dynamite, bombs, grenades, mines or any other explosive, corrosive, inflammable, or radioactive substance of any kind; 
•  Slingshots and blowguns or any other device designed or used to project a missile through mechanical or physical means; 
•  Electronic weapons of any type including tasers, stun guns, or any other device designed or used to emit current, impulse, wave, beam, sound, vibration, or any form of energy in such a way so as to incapacitate, injure, or affect the behavior of another; 
•  Chemical weapons of any type including mace, pepper spray, or any other device designed or used to emit any substance in such a way so as to incapacitate, injure, or control the behavior of another. 
Firearm : A handgun, shotgun, or rifle which expels a projectile by action of an explosion 
Carrying a concealed handgun by permit (CCHP): The lawful carry of a handgun in a concealed manner in complete accordance with the requirements of N.C.G.S. Chapter 14 Article 54B by a person holding a valid concealed handgun permit issued pursuant to the same Article of law, or such permit issued by another state which is in reciprocity with North Carolina. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to any circumstance or instance of dangerous weapon or firearm possession that has been preempted from local government regulation by N.C.G.S. 14-409.40 or 14-415.23. Additionally, this section shall not apply to the following circumstances or persons while acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority: 
(1)  Officers of the United States federal government, the State of North Carolina, or of any county, city, town, or company police agency charged with the execution of the laws of the state, when acting in the discharge of their official duties. 
(2)  Sworn law-enforcement officers, when off-duty, provided that an officer carries the weapon concealed and does not carry a weapon while consuming alcohol or an unlawful controlled substance or while alcohol or an unlawful controlled substance remains in the officer's body. 
(3)  Officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces of the United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons. 
(4)  Officers and soldiers of the militia and the National Guard when called into actual service. 
(5)  Persons specifically authorized or required by state or federal law to carry firearms in the performance of their jobs. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from possession a knife with a blade in excess of 3½ inches when used solely for preparation of food, instruction or maintenance; or razors and razor blades when used solely for personal shaving. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from storing a firearm within a motor vehicle while the vehicle is on the grounds or parking areas of a public-owned building, public park, or recreation area. 
(8)  Any other person authorized, in writing, by the city manager or his designee to carry or possess dangerous weapons while in or upon specified public property. The city manager may promulgate guidelines for the issuance of permits for the possession of dangerous weapons on public property. The purpose of the guidelines shall be to ensure that permits are issued only for lawful purposes and in circumstances which present no threat to the safety and welfare of any person. 
(9)  This section shall not prohibit the lawful possession or carrying of dangerous weapons on the public streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 4770, §§ 1, 2, 10-22-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4770, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 22, 2019, repealed § 14-42 in its entirety and added a new § 14-42 to read as set out herein. Former § 14-42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2121, adopted June 21, 1994 and Ord. No. 4031, § 1b, adopted November 22, 2011.  
Sec. 12-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4770, §§ 1, adopted October 22, 2019, repealed § 14-43 in its entirety. Former § 14-43 pertained to the posting of signs required and derived from Ord. No. 2244, adopted October 17, 1995 and Ord. No. 4031, § 1c, adopted November 22, 2011.  
Sec. 12-44. - Location of signs. 
Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building. The city manager or his designee shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2244, § 2, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 4031, § 1d), 11-22-11)  
Sec. 12-45. - Safety equipment at skateboard park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate a skateboard at the city-operated skateboard park on Cherry Street without wearing a properly fitted helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. The pads and helmet must be in good condition, and the helmet must meet the current standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any minor child to permit such minor child to use the skateboard park in violation of this ordinance. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty as provided in City Code section 1-5(c), except that the amount of such penalty shall be $20.00. Violations of this section shall not be punishable as criminal violations. If a citation is issued for a violation of this section by a minor child, then the parent or guardian of said minor child shall be responsible for the payment of the penalty. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee is hereby directed to post signs at the skateboard park notifying users of that facility of the requirements of this ordinance and the penalties for violation. 
(Ord. No. 3046, § 1, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 12-46—12-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CAMPING AND OTHER USES OF CITY PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 12-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms listed below shall have the following definitions in addition to their ordinary dictionary definitions, unless a different meaning is required by context: 
Camp or camping means sleeping, making preparation to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), and associated activities, including the storing of personal belongings, making any fire, remaining at or near any tent or other shelter, doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on of cooking or other activities supportive of camping or living accommodation purposes. 
City property means any property owned or controlled by the city, including but not limited to, parks, recreation facilities, streets, sidewalks, plazas, yards, and building curtilage. 
City park or park shall have the same meaning as in section 12-27. 
Tent or shelter means any structure, with or without side walls or drop panels designed or intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, that is supported in any manner except by the contents it protects. This definition shall not include tents, shelters, or structures not regulated by the N.C. State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 4057, 2-14-12)  
Sec. 12-51. - No camping on city property. 
(a)  Except pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to article IV of chapter 16 of the City Code, the use of city property for camping purposes, whether on a regular or intermittent basis, is prohibited. This prohibition is applicable regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging. 
(b)  This article shall not be enforced as to facilities designated for use for temporary housing or other accommodations in an emergency, as declared by the city or other governmental agency or official authorized by law to make such declaration. 
(c)  Other ordinances regulating the use of city property, including section 11-16 prohibiting sleeping on city property, are not repealed or superseded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4057, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 4134, § 1, 11-13-12)  
Sec. 12-52. - No tents or shelters on city property. 
(a)  Except pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to article IV of chapter 16 of the City Code, no tent or shelter of a temporary or permanent nature shall be placed or permitted to remain on city property. 
(b)  Umbrellas or unenclosed tents of a "pop-up" nature may be used in city parks subject to compliance with applicable provisions of the N.C. State Building Code, or park rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4057, 2-14-12)  
Sec. 12-53. - No storage on city property. 
Except pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to article IV of chapter 16 of the City Code, it is prohibited to leave or allow to remain unattended any equipment, packages, bags, or other personal belongings on city property, and any such item is subject to removal by the city. This prohibition does not apply to bicycles, carts, strollers, or other means of personal transportation, secured in such a way as to not obstruct a street or sidewalk, or to interfere with the use of city property. This article shall not apply to offices or other non-public areas assigned to or under the control of city employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 4057, 2-14-12)  
Sec. 12-54. - Designated public forums. 
Council may, by resolution, designate one or more areas within the city as public forums. Where an area within a city park is designated as a public forum, the closing time applicable to city parks shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 4057, 2-14-12) 

Chapter 13 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police department, art. VIII. 
Cross reference— Police officers' and firefighters' disability review board, § 2-111; personnel, § 2-186 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; nuisances, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 16; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; traffic, ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Delegation and exercise of the general police power, G.S. 160A-174 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Chief executive officer. 
The chief of police, subject to the control of the city manager, shall be the chief executive officer of the police department and shall have general supervision and control of all police officers and the department in general. 
(Code 1965, § 21-2) 
Charter reference— General duties of city manager, § 24.  
Sec. 13-2. - Investigation and report of accidents for which city may be liable. 
The chief of police, immediately upon the happening of any accident which may result in injury to person or property within the city, for which the city may be held liable, shall make or cause to be made a thorough investigation of the circumstances surrounding such accident and shall forthwith report, in writing, to the corporation counsel the following: 
(1)  The names of the parties or location of the property injured; 
(2)  The names of the witnesses to the injury and their places of residence; 
(3)  The substance of any statement that he is able to obtain from each one of them; 
(4)  The place of the accident; 
(5)  The cause in his opinion of such accident; 
(6)  The date thereof; and 
(7)  Any other information which may throw light thereon. 
(Code 1965, § 21-5) 
State Law reference— Reports and investigations required in event of collision, G.S. 20-166.1.  
Sec. 13-3. - Disposition of stolen property. 
(a)  Any property, the possession of which is taken by the police force or any member thereof from any person who has stolen such property, shall be disposed of in the manner provided in this section. Such property shall be taken to police headquarters and there safely kept for 60 days. Every reasonable effort shall be made to ascertain the ownership thereof. If at the end of such 60 days no person appears and claims such property or establishes title thereto, the chief of police shall advertise the property for sale by posting notices of such sale, fully describing the property, in three public places in the city and by publication in a daily newspaper published in the city once a week for two successive weeks, such notice to specify when and where such sale will take place. 
(b)  At the time and place provided for in the notice, such property shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash, and the chief of police shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record showing when such property came into the possession of the police force or any member thereof; where found or from whom taken; a description of the property; by whom claimed, if by anyone; when advertised; and when, where, to whom and for what amount sold. The chief shall turn over all the proceeds of such sales to the finance director, taking a receipt for such proceeds, and the finance director shall deposit such proceeds in the reward fund and it shall be disposed of in the same manner as moneys received for rewards, as provided for by state law. 
(Code 1965, § 21-6)  
Sec. 13-4. - Hospital report upon receipt of certain patients. 
It shall be the duty of every person operating or maintaining a hospital within the city or any person in charge of such hospital to report to the police department, within 30 minutes after receiving at such hospital, any patient suffering from injuries sustained in an accident or by assault or from self-inflicted wounds, giving in such report: 
(1)  The name of the patient; 
(2)  His approximate age, sex and residence; 
(3)  The extent of injuries, as near as ascertainable; 
(4)  The person bringing such patient to the hospital; 
(5)  The name of the attending physician; and 
(6)  Any information which may be obtained as to the facts surrounding the injury to the patient. 
(Code 1965, § 21-7)  
Sec. 13-5. - Report of deaths resulting from accidental or violent means to police and medical examiner. 
(a)  Hospitals. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of every hospital or the person actively in charge thereof to report to the medical examiner and the police department, within 15 minutes thereafter, the death of any person within such hospital resulting from accidental or violent means. 
(b)  Physicians. It shall be the duty of every practicing physician attending a case within the city, where death occurs as a result of accidental or violent means, to report the fact of such death to the medical examiner and the police department within 15 minutes after information of such death is received by such physician. 
(c)  Undertakers. It shall be the duty of every person operating an undertaking establishment, by whatever name called, to report to the medical examiner and the police department, within 15 minutes after information of such death is received by such undertaking establishment, where death was occasioned by accidental or violent means. 
(Code 1965, § 21-8) 
State Law reference— Physician's determination of death, G.S. 90-323; notification of death, G.S. 130A-112; postmortem investigation and disposition, G.S. 130A-377 et seq.  
Sec. 13-6. - Police reserve unit. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created within the police department a police reserve unit, each member of which shall be appointed by the chief of police. Each such member shall serve so long as the chief of police shall direct or until such member submits his resignation. Members of such unit shall assist and aid the regular police of the city. 
(b)  Composition; qualifications of members. The police reserve unit shall be composed of police reserves in a number not to exceed 30 qualified volunteers. Such volunteers shall be not less than 21 years of age at the time of their appointment and shall have such other qualifications as the chief of police may determine. At the discretion of the chief, a screening board may be created to determine such qualifications. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The police reserve unit members shall have full police powers while on duty or while under the control and direction of the chief of police. Its members shall perform only such police duties as may be assigned by the chief of police and then only when dressed or uniformed as prescribed by the chief, and shall be available for any departmental emergencies as the chief of police may determine. Such duties shall be performed only within the corporate limits or on property outside the city limits which is owned by the city. 
(d)  Regulations; records; supervision; disciplinary action. The chief of police shall prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct, control and administration of the police reserve unit. Each reserve member's record shall be subject to inspection and review for approval at six-month intervals by the chief of police. Members of the police reserve unit shall obey all lawful orders of any members of the police department. Within the police reserve unit there shall be a reserve leader of such unit who, subject to the orders and control of the chief, shall exercise supervision of the police reserve unit. Such reserve leader shall be appointed by the chief of police. All disciplinary action shall be for cause, shall require notice and hearing and shall be administered by the chief of police. 
(e)  Uniforms and equipment. The chief of police shall prescribe the uniform to be worn by the members of the police reserve unit. The city shall provide uniforms and such equipment as the chief may deem necessary and proper. 
(f)  Oath; bond; benefits. Each member of the police reserve unit shall take the same oath as other police officers and shall be covered by the same bond as, shall have the same privileges and immunities of and shall be entitled to the same benefits as regularly employed police officers, including but not limited to benefits under the state workers' compensation act. 
(Code 1965, § 21-11) 
Charter reference— Appointment of special police authorized, § 38A.  
Secs. 13-7—13-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR POLICE ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2951, § 1, adopted Aug. 29, 2002, repealed Art. II, §§ 13—31—13-36, which pertained to alarm systems and enacted provisions designated as a new Art. II to read as herein set out. Ord. No. 2951 will be effective February 29, 2002. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; subdivisions, ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 13-31. - Definitions. 
Alarm means any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal (electronic, visible, audible, silent, recorded or otherwise), which is designed, intended, or used to detect unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or premises, to signal an attempted robbery or holdup, or the commission of an unlawful act in or around a building, structure, or premises that is intended to elicit a response by the police. 
Alarm business means any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation subject to Chapter 74D of the North Carolina General Statutes engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring of alarms. 
Alarm systems coordinator (herein "ASC") means an employee of the city designated by the chief of police to administer this article. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, governmental or educational entity owning, leasing, or occupying a property utilizing an alarm. 
Asheville Police Department (herein "APD") means a department of the city that receives telephone or signal requests for police, fire, ambulance, rescue, or other emergency service within the city. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device, automatic telephone dialing alarm system or any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Asheville Police Department, a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for police response. 
False alarm means activation of an alarm by any means that elicits a response by police when no situation requiring such a response does, in fact, exist. This includes accidental, avoidable, and unnecessary alarm activation due to user error, equipment malfunction, improper or unsuited equipment, but does not include alarm activation cause by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user or alarm business. 
False alarm day means any 24-hour period that begins with the occurrence of a false alarm. 
Local audible alarm means any alarm owned by an alarm user that, by sound of a whistle, bell, buzzer, siren or other noise generator, alerts those outside the home or building, of a break-in or robbery, but does not transmit a signal by telephone or other communications device. 
Police chief means the chief of police for the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Registered alarm means an alarm that has been listed with the Asheville Police Department in accordance with the application and permitting requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-32. - Requirements for alarm users. 
(a)  Permit and application. 
(1)  Every alarm user shall obtain a permit for each alarm that operates within the city from the ASC. An alarm business must obtain a permit under this section only if an alarm is used to protect the premises in which the business is located. The ASC will provide the permit application form. No other permit application form will be accepted. 
(2)  All alarm businesses doing business in the city shall provide the ASC a current copy of its license pursuant to Chapter 74D of the North Carolina General Statutes and the contact person's name, address and telephone number for the alarm business. The alarm business must have a current privilege license to do business in the city. 
(3)  A permit application shall be submitted within 30 days of installation of an alarm system. The ASC shall approve such application if the application complies with the provisions set forth in this article. During this 30-day period, the alarm user will not be subject to the provisions of section 13-32(e)(1). 
(4)  The person applying for the permit at the time of application shall pay no fee. 
(5)  When a premises with an alarm is transferred, the person obtaining the premises is required to file an application for a new alarm permit. Permits are not transferable. 
(6)  Whenever the information provided on the permit application changes, the alarm user must notify the ASC within 30 days of the change. In addition, on an annual basis, after the issuance of the permit, alarm user will receive from the ASC a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the ASC. 
(b)  Denial and revocation. 
(1)  The ASC may revoke a permit where it is found that the alarm user provided false information on the permit application. 
(2)  The ASC may revoke a permit if the alarm user does not respond to an alarm activation as required in section 13-34. 
(3)  The ASC may revoke a permit if the alarm user fails to comply with the provisions in this article. 
(c)  Permit required. Each permit for a business shall be available at the premises wherein the alarm is installed and shall be available for inspection by the police chief during normal business hours. 
(d)  Multiple systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having difference addresses, a separate permit will be required for each structure. 
(e)  Failure to obtain a permit. 
(1)  Any alarm user who operates an alarm without a permit or who has not applied for a permit under this section as required by this article shall be assessed a civil penalty of as stated below: 
(a)  First alarm to which police respond—$0.00 (a warning will be issued and the alarm holder will have ten working days to secure a permit). 
(b)  Second and subsequent alarms to which police respond—$100.00. 
(2)  The above civil penalty is in addition to those civil penalties listed in section 13-37(b). 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-33. - Automatic dialing protection devices prohibited. 
No automatic dial protection device shall be used to report, or cause to be reported, any recorded message to the APD. Police will not respond to recorded messages. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-34. - Alarm user response to alarms. 
(a)  The alarm user, or a representative thereof, shall be available at all times for the purpose of responding to alarms by personally appearing at the structure designated in the permit following an alarm activation. 
(b)  If, in the event of any alarm, the APD or other agency is unable to notify the alarm user or a representative thereof or if the alarm user or a representative thereof fails to appear at the home or structure designated in the permit within 30 minutes after notification, the permit may be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-35. - False alarms. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm is activated in the city and the APD responds, a police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and determine whether the police response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(b)  If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, the alarm user shall be notified. 
(c)  The ASC may require the inspection of an alarm system for which there have been five false alarm days within a 12-month period. A representative of an alarm business selected by the alarm user must perform the inspection. Any cost associated with the inspection will be born by the alarm user. The ASC must have proof of the inspection within 30 days after the alarm user receives notice. Failure to provide proof of inspection may result in revocation of the alarm permit. 
(d)  All local audible alarms shall be equipped with an automatic reset device that will reset and cease to sound the alarm after 15 minutes of continuous activation. The alarm user shall be assessed an additional civil penalty of $50.00 for each violation of a continuing local audible alarm activation. This penalty is in addition to any false alarm penalty as set forth in section 13-37. 
(e)  Signals or messages transmitted by the alarm during alarm testing procedures shall not be considered false alarms provided the APD is notified of the testing and do not respond. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-36. - Review of false alarm determinations. 
The ASC shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. The ASC shall conduct such review only if the alarm user requests in writing such a review within ten days of the date that the false alarm occurred. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by the ASC shall include the following information: 
(1)  Alarm user name; 
(2)  Address at which alarm is installed; 
(3)  Date of false alarm that is being contested; 
(4)  Alarm user permit number; 
(5)  Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-37. - Service charge assessment for false alarms and reinstatement of alarm user permits. 
(a)  It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarm days within any 12-month period is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  Civil penalties. The alarm user shall be assessed the following civil penalties based on the number of false alarm days in one year. The civil penalties are as follows: 
3—5 false alarm days—$50.00 
6th false alarm—$100.00 
7th false alarm—$100.00 
8th false alarm—$250.00 
9th false alarm—$250.00 
10th and over false alarm—$500.00 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-38. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any alarm user who has been assessed a civil penalty or whose application for a permit has been denied, or whose permit has been revoked under this article may request, orally or in writing, a hearing with the police chief. In such a case, the notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed in the police chief's office within ten days of the issuance of a final decision by the ASC. The police chief shall schedule a hearing on the matter within a reasonable time from the date the notice of appeal is filed. 
(b)  Failure to perfect an appeal within the time and in the manner provided for in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Sec. 13-39. - Notice and hearing. 
Before the ASC revokes a permit pursuant to this article, or if an appeal is taken pursuant to section 13-32 from a decision of the ASC denying an application for a permit, the ASC shall cause a written notice to be sent by first class mail, return postage guaranteed, to the permittee or applicant affected, at the address stated on the permit or application 30 days in advance of revocation or denial. This notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the police chief, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such revocation or denial, or for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted and examine or cross-examining any person providing such evidence. The decision of the police chief shall be final. An administrative fee for each appeal to the police chief, in the amount of $50.00 or as set by the Asheville City Council, will be assessed. Should the appeal be successful, the administrative fee shall be reimbursed to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-29-02)  
Secs. 13-40—13-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABC PERMIT 
 
Sec. 13-60. - Police authority regarding criminal history information for applicants for ABC permits. 
The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI Criminal History Record Information to obtain criminal history information on all persons applying for ABC permits for proposed locations within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3640, § 1, 7-22-08)  
Chapter 15 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3625, § 1, adotped May 27, 2008, repealed ch. 15 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 15 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former ch. 15 see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; nuisances, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 17; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Littering, G.S. 14-399; dumping litter, G.S. 14-399.1; littering or discharge of sewage in waters and lakes, G.S. 75A-10; solid waste management, G.S. 130A-290 et seq.; department of transportation authorized to permit garbage collection containers on state highway rights-of-way, G.S. 136-18.3; authorization to regulate disposal of solid wastes, G.S. 160A-192; authorization to prohibit disposal of trash on city streets, G.S. 160A-303.1. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush trimmings. Waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, bushes, shrubbery, cuttings or clippings usually created as refuse in the trimming or cutting of trees, shrubs or bushes, including parts of trees. 
Brush trimmings containers. Refuse receptacles or two-ply kraft paper bags or polyethylene bags, in a serviceable condition and when full, do not weigh more than 50 pounds, except paper or plastic bags which shall not weigh more than 25 pounds when full. 
Building materials. Any material such as lumber, brick, block, stone, plaster, concrete, asphalt, roofing shingles, gutters or other substances accumulated as the result of repairs or additions to existing buildings or structures, construction of new buildings or structures or the demolition of existing buildings or structures. 
Bulk container. A metal container of not less than two cubic yards capacity nor larger than eight cubic yards capacity, constructed to be watertight but with drain plugs at the lowest point of the container to facilitate the drainage of any liquids that might accumulate in the container or from cleaning the container. Bulk containers shall have doors that open on the top. Bulk containers shall be designed so that they can be emptied mechanically by specially designed trucks. 
Business trash. Any waste accumulation of dust, paper, cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations other than garbage or household trash which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
City. The City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
Collection facility. A center located for the purpose of accepting by donation, redemption, or purchase, recyclable materials from the public. 
Commercial establishment. Any retail, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other establishment or hotel, exclusive of residences, which may generate garbage, business trash or other refuse. 
Corrugated cardboard. Any packaging board consisting of but not confined to craft paper with fluted or wavy middle layer and having one or more flat outer walls. 
Debris. The remains of something broken down or destroyed. 
Detachable container. A container unit that may vary in capacity between 15 cubic yards and 42 cubic yards and which is used for collecting, storing and transporting waste building materials, business trash, industrial waste, hazardous refuse, leaves, or brush. The unit may or may not use an auxiliary packing mechanism for the compaction of the materials into the container and may be of the open or the enclosed type. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is lifted by a specially designed and equipped truck and becomes an integral part of that truck for transporting waste materials to a disposal site. 
Garbage. The waste produced by the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of animal or vegetable products used for human consumption. This definition shall include any other matter that is also subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which before, during or after decay may serve as feeding or breeding material for animals or flies or other insects. 
Household customer. A single residential unit located within the jurisdiction of the city that participates in the city's solid waste collection program. 
Hazardous refuse. Materials such as poisons, acids, caustics, harmful or dangerous chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, highly flammable material and parts of the human anatomy including pathological specimens. 
Household trash. Waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other waste material of any kind, other than garbage, which is attendant to residential housekeeping. 
Industrial waste. All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludge and liquids, created or generated by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter. Any rubbish, waste material, cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description not handled or disposed of as set forth in this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area. Any space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple residential complexes. A single residential unit consisting of any duplex, triplex, quadraplex or apartment used as a dwelling place. 
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional establishments that would normally be collected, processed, and disposed of through a public or private solid waste management service. Municipal solid waste does not include hazardous waste, sludge, or solid waste from mining or agricultural operations. 
Parking lot. Any area, paved or unpaved, the principal function of which is the parking of six or more motor vehicles. This definition excludes those parking spaces on public streets. 
Portable packing unit. A metal container that contains a packing mechanism with an internal or external power unit. 
Public works director. The person appointed by the city manager to be in charge of the operations of the City of Asheville Public Works Department. 
Recyclable materials. Includes, but is not limited to, clear, green, and brown container glass, aluminum cans, steel food cans, no. 1 and no. 2 plastic containers, newsprint and inserts, and corrugated cardboard. 
Recycling. The process by which recovered resources are transformed into new products in such a manner as the original products lose their identity. 
Recycling receptacle. Any container for the purpose of serving for the collection of recyclable materials. 
Refuse. Solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, and business trash. 
Refuse receptacle. means any of the following: 
Automated roll-out container. A specialized container owned by the City of Asheville designed specifically for use with the automated refuse collection vehicles and supplied to residents specifically for collection of municipal solid waste. 
Roll-out container. A plastic container of substantial construction having a capacity of not less than 80 gallons or more than 100 gallons, containing a hinged lid, designed to be emptied mechanically by specially designed lift devices attached to city sanitation trucks. 
Hand-emptied container. A metal or plastic container of substantial construction with a tight fitting lid which shall be provided with wheels and handles for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacle shall have a capacity of not less than ten gallons or more than 32 gallons. Such container shall weigh no more than 50 pounds when full. 
Polyethylene plastic bag. A polyethylene plastic bag that shall weigh no more than 25 pounds when full. Such bag may be used only where dogs, rodents or other animals are not a cause of litter. Use of plastic bags is subject to the approval of the solid waste manager. 
Cardboard boxes. Cardboard boxes, cartons or crates that may be used only to contain other cardboard boxes, cartons or crates and that must be properly secured by tying or taping. Such cardboard boxes shall not exceed a dimension of five feet by six feet by three feet and shall have a volume of at least eight cubic feet. Such boxes shall not exceed a weight of 50 pounds when full. Such boxes shall have a one-time use and shall be collected along with the refuse contained in them. 
Residence. Any structure used as a dwelling place by a single family. A single condominium shall be defined as a residence for purposes of this chapter. 
Small dead animals. Cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Solid waste manager. The person designated by the public work director to enforce and carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
Two-ply kraft paper bags. Paper bags that may be used for leaves and brush shall not weigh more than 25 pounds when full. 
Trash. Includes business trash and household trash. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-2. - Administration. 
(a)  The public works director shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of the administration of this chapter. 
(b)  Fees. The city may establish and revise from time to time schedules of rates, fees and charges for the use of automated containers over the one automated container that has been provided under article II and for curbside recycling under article III of this chapter. Fees and charges shall be set forth in the city's Fees and Charges Manual and billed as set forth below: 
(1)  All recycling charges, as described above shall be charged to the customer's water bill. All payments and partial payments, received from the customer in connection with the water billing statement, shall initially be applied to the enterprise service for recycling; and 
(2)  Secondly, charges will be applied as they pertain to the rented automated containers; and 
(3)  The city may discontinue service to any customer whose account remains delinquent for more than ten days; and 
(4)  In addition, the city has the option to pursue account delinquency in accordance with N. C. Gen. Stat. 160A-314. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-3. - Responsibility for compliance. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees, jointly and separately, of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-4. - Litter, offensive odors, dangerous devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow unsightly litter, foul or offensive odors or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from any property under his control or to discard, abandon or cause such material on any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-5. - Maintenance of sidewalks, alleys and rights-of-way. 
All owners or occupants, jointly and separately, of property shall maintain their property in a clean and litter-free manner, including adjacent sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs, gutters and rights-of-way to the edge of the surface of the vehicular travel-way of any public street. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-6. - Accumulations, removal of weeds, trash, refuse other material. 
(a)  Accumulation prohibited. Every person who is the owner of land lying and situated within the city or who occupies, rents or leases any such land shall keep such land and all appurtenances thereto free and clear of all trash, rubbish, garbage, weeds, grass or other objects that cause such land and appurtenances to become a nuisance or menace to the health and welfare of the citizens who live adjacent or near thereto. 
(b)  Responsibility of owners and agents. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or tenant of such land to keep the weeds, bushes, grass and any other vegetation cut and removed from the land to the extent that the vegetation: 
(1)  Will not afford a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, rats or any other rodents; 
(2)  Is not a menace to the health and welfare of the people living on or near such land; and 
(3)  Such land shall not become a fire hazard or endanger the life or property of others. 
(c)  Failure to remove weeds, trash, garbage, grass or other materials. If the owner, occupant or tenant of such land shall fail to remove such weeds, trash, garbage, grass or other objects that cause such land to be a nuisance in the city, the authorized city official charged with the responsibility of enforcing this chapter, shall have the authority to assess a civil penalty against the respective owner, occupant, or tenant under the provisions stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Secs. 15-7—15-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORAGE AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 15-36. - Receptacles and containers required. 
(a)  Household customers/multiple residential complexes/commercial establishments without city automated trash collection: Every person who is in possession or control of any place in or from which business trash, garbage, household trash or industrial waste is accumulated or produced shall be required to provide, and at all times, keep receptacles and containers in a suitable place. Such receptacles and containers should be readily accessible to city collection crews or private collection agencies. City collection crews will not remove any form of waste which is not readily accessible. Adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all specified waste material, which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections, are required. The solid waste manager is authorized to determine the quantity, type and location of such receptacles or containers; as provided in this chapter, and to determine whether such receptacles and containers are serviceable and sanitary. 
(b)  Household customers/multiple residential complexes/commercial establishments with city automated trash collection: The solid waste manager, subject to the final approval of the director of public works, is authorized to determine if automated trash collection service is applicable to an individual resident or business. Every person who is in possession or control of any place in or for which business trash, garbage, household trash, or industrial waste is accumulated or produced shall be provided, at no cost to the household, with a specialized automated roll-out container designed specifically for use with the automated trash collection truck. The specialized containers are the property of the city and shall be left at the residence/business, should the original owners move. The solid waste manager shall determine the location of such containers as provided in this chapter. The resident/business may rent additional containers over the one automated rollout container provided, subject to the following terms: 
(1)  The city may establish and revise from time to time schedules or rates, fees and charges for the use/rental of automated containers over the one automated container that has been provided. Fees and charges shall be set forth in the city's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(2)  All charges, as described in subsection (b), shall be charged each billing period to the customer's water bill. Once the customer gives consent to assess the aforesaid cost to the customer's water bill, all payments and partial payments, received from the customer in connection with the water billing statement, shall initially be applied to the automated container fee. In lieu of placing the cost on the customer's water bill, the customer may prepay for a period not less than 12 months. The customer has up to six months from the date of prepayment to cancel the written request and receive a partial refund. The city will not honor a refund, partial, or otherwise, after the expiration of six months from the date of prepayment. The city may discontinue service to any customer whose account remains delinquent for more than ten days. In addition, the city has the option to pursue account delinquency in the same manner as delinquent water accounts are collected. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any resident to put household generated trash in any street refuse receptacle or container maintained by the city. All residents must use their own refuse containers for trash disposal. Any resident using city owned street receptacles or containers for their private use shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-37. - Construction and maintenance of refuse receptacles. 
(a)  All refuse receptacles as required in this chapter shall be of safe construction and design. Each refuse receptacle shall be maintained in a good, serviceable and sanitary condition at all times. Any refuse receptacle which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, has ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents, or the public, shall, in most instances, be promptly replaced upon notice. If such refuse receptacle, after due and proper notice, has not been replaced, the solid waste manager may refuse to allow city employees to handle the refuse receptacle until replaced. 
(b)  All automated containers for household customers/multiple residential complexes/commercial establishments on the automated trash collection system shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times by the resident/business. The automated containers are owned by the city and as such, if requiring repair, the resident/business shall contact the sanitation division to provide repairs as needed. It shall be the responsibility of the resident/business to ensure the automated container is not damaged or defaced in any manner other than that which may occur under normal wear. The solid waste manager will determine if the damage is due to neglect of the resident/business, in which case the resident/business will be responsible for the costs incurred to repair/replace the automated rollout container. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-38. - Requirements for certain types of waste material. 
(a)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in refuse receptacles or containers as specified in this chapter. All refuse receptacles and containers shall be kept covered at all times with tight-fitting lids. All automated container lids must be sealed at the lid edges to the automated container body. All residential trash must be placed in plastic bags prior to placing in the refuse container. All plastic bags must be closed with either a tie strap or tie knot. 
(b)  Garbage. All garbage being placed for collection shall have been drained of all free liquid and shall be wrapped, bagged or enclosed in paper or plastic material before being placed in refuse receptacles or containers. Garbage contained in refuse receptacles shall be set out to curbside only on the day of collection. All automated container lids must be sealed at the lid edges to the automated container body. All residential and commercial garbage must be placed in plastic bags prior to placing same in the refuse container. All plastic bags must be closed with either a tie strap or tie knot. 
(c)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all free liquid before being placed in refuse receptacles or containers. Household trash may be combined with garbage. Any items of household trash that are too large for refuse receptacles and cannot be reduced to a size that can be placed in a refuse receptacle may be placed at curbside, provided such items are covered or secured to avoid their dispersal by the elements. Prior to placement at the curbside, household customers shall contact the sanitation division to arrange collection. Household trash contained in refuse receptacles shall be set out to curbside only on the day of collection. 
(d)  Dangerous refuse items. All dangerous refuse and all waste material of any injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television picture tubes, shall not simply be placed in paper or plastic bags but shall instead, be securely wrapped to prevent injury to collection personnel. Additionally, items such as car parts, chicken wire, concrete, metals, pipes or similar type items shall not be placed in any refuse receptacle used for collection by the city nor shall such items be collected by the city. 
(e)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. Hazardous refuse or building materials shall not be placed in any refuse receptacle used for collection by the city nor shall such material be collected by the city. 
(f)  Brush. All brush including but, not limited to tree and shrubbery trimmings, shall be collected by the city when placed at curbside for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the Monday of the collection week as determined by the solid waste manager. If brush is placed in refuse receptacles, such refuse receptacles containing such brush shall not weigh more than 50 pounds. Approved paper or plastic bags containing brush shall not weigh more than 25 pounds. Brush trimming containers shall be kept closed or covered at all times. Plastic bags when used shall be left united to allow easy removal and to allow bags to be left for refuse. No tree trunks, stumps, branches, limbs or shrubbery trimmings larger than six inches in diameter, longer than four feet or weighing more than 50 pounds shall be collected by the city. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches trimmed and may be placed in piles at curbside only if placed separately from loose leaves and thorny vegetation. Thorny vegetation, if placed at curbside for collection, shall be cut in lengths not to exceed two feet and shall be placed in separate piles from other tree and shrubbery trimmings or loose leaves. 
(g)  Contractor work: Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by persons engaged in landscaping or tree service enterprises or by other commercial operations or resulting from land clearing operations shall not be collected by the city. Contractor work shall be defined as any work engaged in for profit, and the removal of such branches, trimmings or land clearing debris shall be performed at the expense of the contractor. 
(h)  Leaves: Leaves shall be stored for collection in marked refuse receptacles designated as "leaves." The contents of such refuse receptacles shall not extend above the rim thereof and shall be contained by tight-fitting lids or a sealed enclosure to prevent the elements from carrying or depositing contents upon any street, sidewalk, public or private property. Leaves can be stored in untied plastic bags, loosely secured to allow easy dumping by sanitation staff. Plastic bags used for leaves will be left at the resident for reuse by the resident/business. Closed refuse receptacles containing leaves clearly marked "Leaves," shall be placed at curbside for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the Monday of the collection week as determined by the solid waste manager. On an annual basis, the solid waste manager will determine and establish the appropriate loose leaf pickup season based on the prevailing weather conditions and other appropriate factors. Loose leaves placed for collection at curbside shall be piled separately from brush and other types of trash, and not mixed with dirt, rocks or other objects harmful to the leaf vacuum machines used for this type of leaf collection. On an annual basis, the city manager may extend the period for collection of loose leaves as he may deem appropriate, giving consideration to prevailing weather conditions and other appropriate factors. 
(i)  Special collection of household furniture and appliances. Upon request the city may collect normal household discarded furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, mattresses, bedsprings, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Furnaces shall not be collected by the city. Persons requesting this service shall contact the solid waste division to schedule collection. Items for collection shall be placed at their appropriate location, curbside. This service shall be available to residences only. 
(j)  Business trash. Business trash (except cardboard boxes, cartons or crates), shall be placed in plastic bags and tied before being placed in refuse receptacles or containers. When full, plastic bags containing business trash shall not weight more than 25 pounds. 
(k)  Commercial establishments. The solid waste manager shall notify all merchants and other commercial users of the schedule of pickup, and the merchants and other commercial users shall comply by setting their refuse receptacles at curbside in accordance with this schedule. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-39. - Location and collection. 
(a)  All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Public streets. No refuse, trash, brush, leaves, tree and shrubbery trimmings refuse receptacle or bulk container shall be placed within the vehicular travel-way, in the gutter of any street, or in the vehicle travel-way in areas not having curbs and gutters. 
(2)  Public sidewalks. Refuse, trash, brush, leaves or tree and shrubbery trimmings contained in approved refuse receptacles may be placed on the sidewalk on the day of collection, so long as it does not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Public alleys. Refuse contained in approved refuse receptacles may be placed in a public alley on the day of collection, so long as it does not unreasonably interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Blockage of storm drains. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacle or container on, upon or over any storm drain opening or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into the drain. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacle or container in a gutter, which results in the blockage of stormwater flows or possible blockage of storm drainage systems if carried by the elements into the drainage system. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct the blockage of storm drain openings and/or obstruction of stormwater flows shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The accumulation and storage of refuse and trash under the following circumstances shall be prohibited: 
(1)  The accumulation of refuse or trash on any lot, property, premises, public street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private place. Failure of the owner or occupant, after notice of violation, to remove and correct any such unauthorized accumulation of refuse or trash shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  To place or store outside any building or dwelling, except as provided in this chapter, any dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials or any other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. This shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or authorized establishments engaged in the business of repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvage. 
(3)  Appliances. To leave outside any building or dwelling, (in a place accessible to children), any appliance, refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight door or cover with a snap lock or latch without first removing the lock/latch, from the door/cover. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-40. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  Household customers, multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments that do not have automated trash collection on the city's automated trash collection system. Every person who is in possession or control of any place in or from which business trash, garbage, household trash, or industrial waste is accumulated or produced shall be required to provide, and at all times, keep receptacles and containers in a suitable place. Such receptacles and containers should be readily accessible to city collection crews or private collection agencies. City collection crews and/or private collection agencies will not remove any form of waste which is not readily accessible. Adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all specified waste material, which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections, are required. Such collection shall be limited to a maximum of six refuse receptacles. The solid waste manager shall determine the quantity, type and location of such receptacles or containers (as provided in this chapter), and shall be authorized to determine whether such receptacles and containers are serviceable and sanitary. 
(b)  Household customers, multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments that receive automated trash collection service. The solid waste manager shall determine if automated trash collection service is applicable to an individual's residence or business. Every person who is in possession or control of any place in or from which business trash, garbage, household trash, or industrial waste is accumulated or produced shall be provided, at no cost to the household, with a specialized automated roll-out container designed specifically for use with the automated trash collection truck. The specialized containers are the property of the city and shall be left at the residence/business should the original owners move. Additionally, the solid waste manager shall determine the location of such containers, as provided in this chapter. The resident/business has an option to rent additional containers over the one automated container provided, subject to the applicable requirements set forth in article II, subsection 15-36(b) of this chapter. 
(c)  The public work director shall review the method and location of refuse storage for new commercial buildings or extensive renovations to existing commercial buildings. If any problems are foreseen during this review, such problems shall be called to the attention of the owner or designer for correction. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial establishment to put business trash in any street refuse receptacle or container maintained by the city. All businesses must use their own refuse containers for trash disposal. Any commercial business using city owned street receptacles or containers for their private use shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments are limited to one collection per week by the city and are considered a single unit subject to the same service as contained in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments shall be provided one specialized container which is owned by the city to the extent the location is serviced by the city's automated trash collection service. If a need exists for additional specialized containers, containers will be available for rent, from the city, on a monthly basis. Rental fees and charges for additional containers shall be set forth in the city's Fees and Charges Manual. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-41. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall, at the direction of the solid waste manager be provided with refuse receptacles or containers for loose papers, debris, packaging materials and other business trash. The number and type of such containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and litter-free premises as directed by the city's solid waste manager based upon the industry's standard. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-42. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking areas. The solid waste manager shall have the authority to determine the number of receptacles necessary to provide adequate containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the person in charge of the parking lot to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in an approved location. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers as provided for the purposes intended, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-43. - Construction and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide onsite refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, waste building materials, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working on the site. All such materials shall be containerized by the end of each workday, and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition. The number and type of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the solid waste manager based on the size of the project. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolition activities shall be immediately removed by the contractor and in all cases by the end of the workday. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-44. - Points of collection. 
(a)  On the day of collection, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to place refuse receptacles at curbside or at the edge of the vehicular travel-way. It is also the responsibility of the owner or occupant to place receptacles or containers in front of their respective residence (i.e. curbside of their property) for collection unless otherwise specified by the solid waste manager/designee. Receptacles, containers, or other material for pickup will not be collected unless these specifications are met. No refuse receptacles or containers, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be stored in front of a building or dwelling except on the day of collection. 
(1)  Household customers, multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments not receiving automated trash collection must place their trash at curbside not being blocked by parked cars or any other objects in order to allow for easy access to the refuse receptacles by 7:00 a.m. the day of collection. 
(2)  Household customers, multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments receiving automated trash collection service shall place the city owned automated rollout container: 
(i)  At least five feet from any obstacle (including cars, trees, utility poles, and/or mailboxes). 
(ii)  Within two feet of the curb edge. 
(iii)  Away from low hanging utilities. 
(iv)  Automated rollout containers must be turned so the handle faces away from the street. 
(v)  At curbside by 7:00 a.m. of their collection day. 
(3)  Household customers, multiple residential complexes and commercial establishments located in the Central Business District must place their trash at curbside not being blocked by parked cars or any other objects in order to allow for easy access to the refuse receptacles by 5:00 a.m. on their collection day. 
(b)  Failure to comply with points of collection of refuse receptacles and automated rollout containers will be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-45. - Collection and hauling procedures. 
(a)  Household customers not on the city's automated trash collection system: Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated at residences shall be collected once each week at curbside or at the edge of the vehicular travel-way. In accordance with a schedule determined by the solid waste manager, such collections shall be limited to six approved receptacles. 
(b)  Household customers and multiple residential complexes on the city's automated trash collection system. Garbage and household trash accumulated at residences shall be collected once each week at curbside or at the edge of the vehicular travel-way. In accordance with a schedule determined by the solid waste manager, no other refuse containers except city owned rollout containers will be collected. 
(c)  Oversize household trash. Oversized household trash shall be collected on a schedule determined by the solid waste manager at curbside, as specified in this chapter. Prior to placement at the curbside, the household customer must contact the sanitation division to arrange collection. 
(d)  Commercial establishments not on the city's automated trash collection system. Such collection shall be limited to six approved receptacles on a weekly schedule determined by the solid waste manager. 
(e)  Commercial establishments on the automated trash collection system. The solid waste manager shall only collect the city owned automated rollout containers on a weekly schedule determined by the solid waste manager. 
(f)  Bulk containers. Bulk containers shall at all times be maintained in a safe, serviceable and sanitary condition as directed by the solid waste manager. Notice shall be given by the solid waste manager of any bulk container not meeting the requirements of this chapter. Every person who shall engage in the leasing, renting or supplying, (by manner other than absolute sale, bulk containers, detachable containers and portable packing units) to persons to whom this chapter applies shall operate and maintain facilities and equipment for servicing, cleaning, repairing and painting such containers and units. In addition, such persons shall maintain such units in a safe, serviceable and sanitary condition as required by this chapter. 
(g)  Roll-out containers. Roll-out containers for sale within the city limits are not acceptable for use with the automated trash collection system. Roll-out containers for sale in the city limits may be acceptable for residents/businesses not on the automated collection system. The solid waste manager shall be responsible for final determination of the acceptability and compatibility of any roll-out containers offered for sale within the city limits of the city, which determination shall include but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Capacity. Capacity of 80 to 100 gallons; 
(2)  Hinged lid. Lid for roll-out container shall be affixed to the container by a hinge-type device; 
(3)  Container design. Container shall be of design that allows container to be easily rolled when filled. 
(h)  Prohibited collections: The solid waste manager shall not collect the following type of waste: 
(1)  Industrial waste. The collection and disposal of industrial waste shall be the responsibility of the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing the waste. 
(2)  Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle, container or unit used for refuse collection by the city. Hazardous liquids or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of in the landfill. 
(3)  Dead animals. Small dead animals will be collected by the city on request, provided that it is during the operating hours of the landfill and the body is in a place easily accessible to the collector and is wrapped or contained in a plastic bag or other suitable container that will be collected with the body. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(4)  Building materials. The city shall not be responsible for the collecting, handling or disposal of building materials that originate from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings or from demolition of existing structures. Such materials or refuse shall be collected and disposed of by the property owner or the person doing the work. If such material or refuse has not been removed and disposed of by the property owner or the person doing the work, the building inspections division shall not issue a certificate of occupancy even though other requirements for such certificate have been met. The certificate of occupancy shall be issued only when the requirements of this subsection, as well as any other requirements, have been met. 
(5)  Corrugated cardboard will not be collected as municipal solid waste in any shape or form. Corrugated cardboard is collected through the city's recycling program only. 
(i)  Hauling vehicles. All collectors or refuse haulers or handlers operating within the city shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tightly fitting cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping there from and refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled. These vehicles shall also be kept in good repair and shall be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent the body of the vehicle from becoming a breeding place for insects or a source of foul or offensive odors. 
(j)  Spilling of vehicle loads. Any person engaged in hauling or transporting dirt, crushed stone, coal or other loose material for any purpose whatever through any street, lane, alley or public way of the city shall haul or transport the material in vehicles with tight bodies and so constructed and equipped that the contents shall not fall on any street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-46. - Post collection procedures. 
Refuse receptacles returned to curbside after collection shall be removed to the approved storage location by 11:00 p.m. of the day of collection. The property owner or occupant shall be responsible for such removal. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-47. - Special refuse or disposal problems. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for city collection and disposal. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device and without safeguarding the disposal thereof by wrapping or securing the device in a suitable manner to avoid the possibility of causing injury to collection personnel. 
(c)  Ashes. Ashes that are to be collected by the city shall have been wetted and shall be cool to the touch prior to collection. Ashes shall be placed in approved containers. Refuse receptacles containing ashes shall not weigh more than 50 pounds. 
(d)  Rubber tires. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place any rubber tire that has not been reduced from its original shape or conformation by a generally accepted and approved manner or method in any refuse receptacle or container from which refuse is collected by the city or by private waste collectors within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-48. - Special service. 
Hardship cases such as age, disability or infirmity, when confirmed by the solid waste manager may be afforded the special service of refuse receptacle carryout and carry-back upon application. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 15-49. - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy. This article has been created pursuant to NCGS §§ 160A-317 and 130A-309.09, and due to the great public interest in preserving the environment by reducing the amount of refuse sent to landfills. Because of solid waste disposal problems and the potential solution to some of these problems provided by recycling, it shall be the policy of the city to require recycling to the fullest extent possible of recyclable materials designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-50. - Administration. 
(a)  Recycling coordinator position. The position of recycling coordinator is hereby established. In addition to the duties of solid waste manager, the solid waste manager or designee shall also serve in the position of recycling coordinator. The collection, removal, and disposal of materials designated as recyclable by the city shall be supervised by the recycling coordinator. 
(b)  Recycling coordinator office. The office of recycling coordinator is hereby authorized, subject to the direction and control of the director, to develop a comprehensive recycling education program and coordinate publicity and educate the household customer in implementing the collection of recyclable materials. 
(c)  Responsibilities of the recycling coordinator: 
(1)  The office of the recycling coordinator is responsible for administratively coordinating the transportation and delivery of recyclable materials from the city's household customers to processing facilities. The office of the recycling coordinator shall, for all purposes, be the liaison for communicating all issues, concerns, requests or inquiries regarding the city's recycling program. 
(2)  The office of the recycling coordinator shall assist business, commercial establishments and multi-family dwellings in setting up recycling programs to be offered by private or public solid waste management services. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 15-51. - Regulations. 
(a)  Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials generated by a household customer shall be separated from municipal solid waste and placed in recycling receptacles for curbside collection or taken to collection facilities. Recyclable materials shall consist of the following: 
Aluminum cans 
Corrugated cardboard 
Glass bottles and jars (clear, green, and brown) 
Newsprint and inserts that are distributed as part of the publication 
Plastic bottles and containers 
Steel cans 
Tin cans 
Mixed paper 
Additional materials as directed by the recycling coordinator 
(b)  Collection of recyclable materials. 
(1)  Only the materials designated for recycling in subsection (a) shall be placed in recycling receptacles provided by the city or its contractor. 
(2)  If the amount of recyclable materials is greater than the recycling receptacle provided, such materials shall be placed in clearly marked reusable containers adjacent to the recycling receptacle on designated collection date(s). 
(3)  Recycling receptacles shall be placed at curbside or other designated spot on the customer's premises for collection on days specified by the office of the recycling coordinator. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any municipal solid waste not designated for recycling in subsection (a) of this section in the recycling receptacles furnished by the city or the city's contractor. 
(5)  After collection, empty receptacles shall be removed promptly by the customer by 11:00 p.m. on the same day as collection. 
(6)  Recyclable materials that are taken to a collection facility owned by the city or provided by the city's contractor shall be placed in the appropriate container at the collection facility. 
(7)  An information package about the recycling program shall be delivered to each household customer upon delivery of the recycling receptacle. 
(c)  Scavenging and unauthorized collection of recyclable materials. 
(1)  Recyclable materials placed at curbside for collection by the city or its contractor or in any recycling receptacle sponsored by the city are the property of the city or its authorized contractor. It is a violation of this article for any person not authorized by the city to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such recyclable materials or receptacles. 
(2)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any occupier of land from donating or selling recyclable material from its own municipal solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 15-52. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  Notice required before penalty. No penalty shall be assessed pursuant to this chapter until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation in accordance with this section: 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever any city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations in this chapter has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or that real property within the city is in violation of this chapter, that official shall notify the alleged violator and/or property owner of the violation, providing for up to 30 days to comply with the requirements of this chapter. If the violator cannot be ascertained, then the notice of violation shall be sent to the record owner of the land on which the violation exists. 
(2)  Service requirements. Notices of violation shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The notice of violation shall specify the violation, what must be done to remedy the violation, an opportunity to cure the violation within a prescribed period of time and the consequences of non-compliance. 
(3)  Extension of time to cure. The city official charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter may upon written request from the alleged violator or the property owner, grant a single extension of time, not to exceed a period of 30 days in which the alleged violator may cure or correct the violation before the city issues a citation as set forth herein. 
(4)  Citation for violation. Any person who fails to comply with a notice of violation issued under this chapter within the time period set forth in the notice of violation or within any authorized extensions granted, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 per day the violation continues with each day of violation constituting a separate and distinct violation. In no event, shall be amount of the civil penalty arising out of the original notice of violation exceed $5,000.00. The city shall serve a written citation on the alleged violator in accordance with the service requirements set forth above for a notice of violation. The citation shall specify the date the penalty commenced, that the penalty is in the amount of $100.00 per day the penalty continues and shall continue to accrue at the rate of $100.00 per day until either the violation is brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the penalty reaches $5,000.00, whichever occurs first. To be deemed in compliance, the owner must give the city written notice of the corrective action taken. The citation shall state that the penalty shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the citation and if not paid, that the matter will be referred to the city attorney to institute a civil action in the nature of a debt owed. If the civil penalty is not paid and/or if the violation is not cured within the time frames set forth in the citation and notice of violation respectively, the matter shall be referred to the city attorney for the institution of a civil action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount owed and to otherwise obtain compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Equitable action. In addition to or in lieu of other remedies as set forth herein, the city attorney may seek injunctive relief, an order of abatement or other appropriate relief in the appropriate court of law. 
(c)  Emergency abatement. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from immediately proceeding in the absence of prior notice to abate an imminent threat to life or property. As soon as the imminent threat is removed, notice shall be given within a reasonable time period thereafter consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Refuse to remove. The director shall not be obligated to cause the retrieval and removal of any required contents from any real property as set forth under this chapter, if after proper notice, the customer and tenant or property owner as applicable, fail and refuse to comply with the provisions of article II for storage and collection under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 5-27-08)  
Chapter 16 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; nuisances, ch. 10; police, ch. 13; solid waste management, ch. 15; subdivisions, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Responsibility for streets inside municipalities, G.S. 136-66.1; authority to establish and control streets and sidewalks, G.S. 160A-296. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Obstruction and deposit of debris. 
(a)  The streets and sidewalks of the city shall be kept free of all obstructions and open to traffic at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any article or do any act which obstructs such streets and sidewalks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or any contractor engaged in construction or improvement of any property abutting upon streets and sidewalks of the city to allow the deposit of any mud, dirt, construction material or other debris upon such streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  If the person responsible for obstructing streets or sidewalks, as prohibited in subsection (a) of this section, or depositing mud, dirt, construction material or debris on streets or sidewalks, as prohibited in subsection (b) of this section, after due notice, fails to remove such obstruction, dirt, mud, construction material or other debris, the director of public works is hereby authorized to effect the removal thereof, and in addition to all other remedies, the city may assess costs incurred by it which shall be a lien against the property from which any obstruction, dirt, mud, construction material or other debris has been removed and deposited upon the streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(d)  In addition to and separate and apart from the other remedies set forth in this section, a violator of any of the provisions of this section may be assessed a civil penalty as set forth in section 1-5, and each and every day during which a violation occurs shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1965, § 25-3) 
State Law reference— Driving motor vehicle on sidewalk prohibited, G.S. 20-160; placing glass or injurious obstruction upon highway prohibited, G.S. 136-91; city's duty to keep public streets free from unnecessary obstructions, G.S. 160A-296(a)(2); authorization to prohibit placing trash on streets, G.S. 160A-303.1.  
Sec. 16-2. - Obstruction of streets, sidewalks by persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in a group, to: 
(1)  Obstruct or cause to be obstructed vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the streets or sidewalks or in parks or other public areas within the corporate limits of the city; or 
(2)  Obstruct or cause to be obstructed corners, stairways or doorways to prevent or hamper free access by members of the public to private buildings fronting streets, sidewalks, parks or other public areas or to public buildings within such corporate limits. 
(Code 1965, § 25-4) 
State Law reference— Standing, sitting or lying upon highways or streets prohibited, G.S. 20-174.1; regulation of mass gatherings, G.S. 130A-251 et seq.  
Sec. 16-3. - Keeping sidewalks, grass strips, drainage swales and gutters clear, clean and unobstructed. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to N.C.G.S., secs. 160A-174 and 160A-296. 
(2)  Purpose: It is the purpose, intent and objective of this section to require property owners to keep the public sidewalks, grass strips, drainage swales and gutters in proper repair, open for travel and free from unnecessary obstructions. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Abut: To be contiguous, or to join at a border or boundary, as where no other private land, road or street intervenes. 
(2)  City: City of Asheville. 
(3)  Responsible party: Includes but not limited to, the owner, occupant, lessee, or tenant, of real property within the city. 
(4)  Street: A paved or unpaved route which provides the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(5)  Weather event: Snow, sleet, ice, rain, heavy winds, flooding, etc. 
(c)  Maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Sidewalk, curb and grass strip: It shall be the responsibility of the responsible party to ensure that the public sidewalk and curb abutting a property owner's property are kept clear of dirt, grass, weeds, mud, trash, debris and vegetation of any kind to prevent a hazard to the public. The vegetation shall be removed, cut or trimmed so as not to require a pedestrian to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the same or otherwise hinder the safe passage of pedestrians. The grass strip between the sidewalk and curb is to be kept mowed to a height not to exceed 18 inches. 
(2)  Drainage swales: The responsible party that has a drainage swale running along the street that abuts the responsible party's property shall mow and otherwise properly maintain such swale so that it can continue to serve its proper drainage function. 
(3)  Ice: The responsible party whose property abuts a paved sidewalk upon which ice may in any manner accumulate from any source other than from a weather event, shall remove such ice from the sidewalk on or before 10:00 a.m. each day in which the temperature exceeds 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)  Weather event: The responsible party whose property abuts a paved sidewalk, shall remove snow, hail, sleet and other similar accumulation from such within 48 hours after the snow, hail, sleet or other similar accumulation ceases to fall. 
(d)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Failure to remove: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person charged with the responsibility to remove ice, snow, sleet, hail or other similar weather event accumulations to fail to remove same within the time limit stated herein. 
(2)  Encroachment into streets: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to cause to be moved, pushed, scraped, shoveled or thrown, any ice or snow from private property into the traveled portion of any street right of way in such a manner as to impede the normal movement of traffic on the street. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Property owner ultimately responsible: With the exception of a violation of subsection (d) of this section, whether vacant, occupied, improved or unimproved, the property owner remains ultimately responsible for compliance with this section. 
(2)  Criminal: A violation of subsection (d) of this section constitutes a misdemeanor and the violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(3)  Civil: With the exception of a violation of subsection (d) of this section, a violation of the remaining provisions of this section shall subject the violator to a civil penalty pursuant to the authority granted by N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-175 and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty provisions of N.C.G.S., sec. 14-4 and section 1-5 of chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. No penalty shall be assessed pursuant to this section until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation as set forth below. 
(4)  Notice of violation: With the exception of a violation of subsection (d) of this section, whenever any city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations in this section has reasonable cause to believe that a person is in violation of the provisions of this section, that official shall notify the alleged violator and/or property owner of the violation, providing for up to ten days to comply with the requirements of this section. If the violator cannot be ascertained, then the notice of violation shall be sent to the record owner of the land on which the violation exists. Nothing herein shall prevent the city official from requiring any lesser period of time to bring the violation into compliance with this section to protect life and/or property. 
(5)  Service of notice of violation: Notices of violation shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The notice of violation shall specify the violation, what must be done to remedy the violation, an opportunity to cure the violation within a prescribed period of time and the consequences of non-compliance. 
(6)  Civil penalty: Any person, who fails to comply with a notice of violation issued under this section within the time period set forth in the notice of violation, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 per day the violation continues with each day of violation constituting a separate and distinct violation. In no event, shall the amount of the civil penalty arising out of the original notice of violation exceed $5,000.00. If the civil penalty is not paid within the time frame set forth in the notice of civil penalty assessment, the matter shall be referred to the city's collection office for debt set-off. 
(7)  Abatement: Nothing herein shall prevent the city from immediately proceeding to abate the violation to prevent a threat to life and/or property. If the city abates the violation, the cost of the abatement shall be borne by the property owner and collected in the same manner as a civil penalty. 
(8)  Equitable action: In addition to or in lieu of other remedies as set forth herein, the city attorney may seek injunctive relief, an order of abatement or other appropriate relief in the appropriate court of law. 
(f)  Appeal process. A responsible party or any other aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal by following the appeals process set forth in section 16-40 of article II of chapter 16 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1965, § 25-15; Ord. No. 3912, § 1, 10-26-10)  
Sec. 16-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2003, repealed § 16-4 in its entirety. Former § 16-4 pertained to use of streets and sidewalks for sermons, lectures or demonstrations and derived from Code 1965, § 25-6.  
Sec. 16-5. - Use of streets, sidewalks and gutters as drains. 
No person shall use a street, sidewalk or gutter of the city as a drain to carry off any noxious fluid of any description whatsoever. 
(Code 1965, § 25-7)  
Sec. 16-6. - Barbed wire. 
No person shall erect, maintain or allow on any premises along any street or alley of the city any barbed wire or barbed wire fence. 
(Code 1965, § 25-9)  
Sec. 16-7. - Gates and doors opening on street or sidewalk. 
No person shall erect or maintain any gate or door which opens outwardly on any street or sidewalk in the city except as follows: The clear and unobstructed width available at all times for passage on the street or sidewalk shall be no less than the minimum width required under Section 28 CFR, Part 36 of the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities, as amended from time to time. Upon the effective date of this ordinance, all gates or doors which open outwardly on any street or sidewalk in the city shall meet the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 25-10; Ord. No. 32230, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 16-8. - Cellar doors and vaults opening into street or sidewalk. 
Every owner of any building which has a cellar door or vault opening into a street, alley or sidewalk shall keep such door or vault opening at all times in good repair. 
(Code 1965, § 25-11)  
Sec. 16-9. - Railing or fence required for certain lots bordering street or sidewalk. 
The owner of every lot, piece or parcel of ground within the city that is more than 18 inches above or below any street, alley or sidewalk and which borders thereon shall erect and at all times maintain along the edge of such lot, piece or parcel of ground next to the street, alley or sidewalk a secure railing or fence sufficiently high and strong enough to keep persons and animals from falling from such lot, piece or parcel of ground into the street, alley or sidewalk or from the street, alley or sidewalk into such lot. 
(Code 1965, § 25-12)  
Secs. 16-10—16-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY CUTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Cities authority to regulate digging in the streets, G.S. 160A-296(6); curb cut regulations, G.S. 160A-307. 
 
Sec. 16-36. - Permit required. 
City streets—No person shall cut into any street, sidewalk, alley, square or other public right-of-way for any purpose, including but not limited to installation of and repair to utility systems, or disturb the right-of-way by removing any dirt, sod, sand or paving material therefrom or otherwise disturb the right-of-way, without first obtaining a cut permit from the city engineer/designee. If trees in the right-of-way are to be removed or if work is to be performed within the drip-line of trees in the right-of-way, no cut permit shall be issued until the permittee submits written approval from the tree/greenway commission. 
(Code 1965, § 25-14; Ord. No. 1693, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 2593, § 1, 7-27-99)  
Sec. 16-37. - Permit application and fee; extension of time; penalty. 
(a)  Each application for a cut permit shall be accompanied by the required permit fee as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. All fees for cuts within the public rights-of-way shall be set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(b)  If the cut work extends beyond ten working days, excluding weather days, a penalty as set forth herein, shall be assessed in addition to the regular permit fee. A permit may be extended without penalty if extenuating circumstances are encountered. Extenuating circumstances may consist of but not be limited to circumstances that could not be planned for nor reasonably anticipated and beyond the control of the permittee. Provided, however, extenuating circumstance shall not consist of failure of a subcontractor to perform. The city engineer/designee may grant extensions provided the extension is requested in writing at least 48 hours prior to the permit deadline. All extensions must be approved in writing. A weather day shall include the following: (i) when the temperature drops below 32 degrees fahrenheit between the hours of 9 a.m. and 6 p.m.; or (ii) any day that the 24 hour rain accumulation for that day exceeds 0.25 inches; or (iii) any other similarly situated circumstance as determined by the city engineer/designee. 
(c)  If a project is scheduled to last more than ten working days, the permittee shall submit detailed information that defines the scope of the project, a map or sketch showing the precise location of the project, the name of the contact person who will be on site at all times, etc., prior to obtaining a cut permit. 
(d)  Any person who cuts into a public right-of-way without first obtaining the cut permit required by this article, shall be charged a penalty as described below. Provided, however, emergency repair cuts to an existing utility may be made without a permit in hand provided the permit is obtained by the close of the next business day after the cut is made. In the event the emergency work cut permit is not obtained within the time period set forth herein, the penalty as well as the regular permit fee shall apply. 
(e)  Any person/permittee who fails to pay permit cost, including permit fees and penalties shall not be granted any further permits for new construction or installation until the outstanding fees/penalties are paid. 
(f)  It shall remain the sole responsibility of the permittee to provide traffic control per the manual of uniform traffic control devices, located in the city's engineering department. If an entire road is to be blocked during a cut, the permittee must obtain a street blocking permit from the city's traffic engineer before issuance of a cut permit. 
(g)  The penalty for any person/permittee who exceeds the time limit set forth in the cut permit or who fails to timely obtain a cut permit following an emergency repair or who cuts into a public right-of-way without a cut permit shall be as shown in Schedule B (Schedule of Civil Penalties) of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 25-14; Ord. No. 1693, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 2242, § 11, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 2593, § 1, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 4333, § 1, 8-26-14)  
Sec. 16-38. - Restoration; costs. 
(a)  Any person who shall cut into any street, sidewalk, alley, square or other public right-of-way within the corporate city limits shall restore the cut in accordance with the standards and specification set forth in the city's standard specifications and detail manual as that manual is interpreted by the city's engineer/designee. In any event, the final cut must be rectangular or square in shape. L- or T-shaped cuts are prohibited. Cuts into city streets shall have a full width overlay for any cuts that extend beyond one travel lane or for those streets that have been resurfaced within three years prior to the date of the permit. The total length of the overlay must be a minimum of 35 feet in length. Projects shall be designed to the extent possible, so as not to locate utility poles, hydrants, valves and manholes on sidewalks. 
(b)  The engineering department shall be responsible for conducting periodic inspections of the project during the progress of the work. The permittee shall notify the city engineer/designee when work has been completed and request a final inspection. The city engineer/designee shall make the final inspection to determine that streets, sidewalks, alleys, squares or other public rights-of-way are restored to city standards, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. All cuts shall be warranted by the person, corporation or company making the cut for a period of two years from the date of final approval which warranty shall include an indemnification clause, agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the city from any such claims during the two-year warranty period. 
(c)  The permittee or person causing the cut shall remain solely responsible for any and all costs incurred in restoring the street, sidewalk or public right-of-way to city standards. 
(d)  Failure to restore. Upon the failure of any person to restore a city street, sidewalk, alley, square or other public right-of-way to city standards, the city will: 
(1)  Provide written notice that the cut is not acceptable. 
(2)  Allow ten days for the person to repair the cut; and 
(3)  Perform a reinspection after ten days. If the work is not completed to city standards, the city engineer/designee will order the completion of the work by the city and recover 120 percent of the actual cost to restore the cut from the permittee in addition to permit fees and penalties already incurred and/or take such other legal action as is necessary to correct the violation. 
(Code 1965, § 25-14; Ord. No. 1693, 6-14-88; Ord. No. 2593, § 1, 7-27-99)  
Sec. 16-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4245, § 1, adopted Oct. 22, 2013, repealed § 16-39, which pertained to permit exclusions and derived from Code 1965, § 25-14; Ord. No. 1693, adopted June 14, 1988; and Ord. No. 2593, § 1, adopted July 27, 1999.  
Sec. 16-40. - Appeal process. 
In the event that an applicant or permittee disagrees with a fee or penalty that is assessed, notice must first be given to the city engineer in writing within ten working days of the fee or penalty being assessed, setting forth the basis of the disagreement. If the response received from the city engineer is not satisfactory, an appeal may be taken to the city Manager or his designee within ten days of receipt of the city engineer's written response. The city manager or his designee may establish an advisory committee made up of city staff to provide an advisory opinion. The city manager or his designee's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2593, § 1, 7-27-99)  
Secs. 16-41—16-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENCROACHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 16-61—16-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Structure includes anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. The word shall include but not be limited to buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels, swimming pools, posts and poles, including basketball goal posts. 
(Code 1965, § 25-17; Ord. No. 1891, § 1(25-17(C)), 2-12-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-72. - Scope. 
(a)  Except as permitted in accordance with this division, it shall be unlawful to erect or construct any structure upon or within any street, sidewalk, alley, square or public rights-of-way of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow, permit, cause, construct or erect any structure upon property owned by him which encroaches upon or within any street, sidewalk, alley, square or public right-of-way of the city in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 25-17; Ord. No. 1891, § 1(25-17(A), (B)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 16-73. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not be applicable to landscaping, mailboxes, receptacles for the delivery of individual newspapers or utility poles. 
(Code 1965, § 25-17; Ord. No. 1891, § 1(25-17(G)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 16-74. - Structures on unopened or untravelled public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Structures may be allowed on unopened or untravelled portions of public rights-of-way only upon the execution of an encroachment agreement between the owner of the property upon which the structure is to be placed and the city manager or his designee. The city manager is hereby authorized to execute such agreements in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Except for electric substations, the procedure for obtaining an encroachment agreement authorizing the placement of such a structure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Written application shall be made to the city manager or his designee, which application shall be signed by all owners of the subject property. 
(2)  The application shall include a description of the proposed encroachment, together with a location map specifying the area of the encroachment. 
(3)  The application shall state the reason for the necessity of the encroachment. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee may grant a property owner an encroachment agreement only if the encroachment can be allowed without detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. In determining what constitutes detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the general public, the following factors, among others not specifically enumerated, shall be considered: 
a.  The type of structure. 
b.  The proximity of the structure to an opened public right-of-way. 
c.  The proximity of the structure to a travelled road, whether public or private. 
d.  The characteristics of the neighborhood. 
e.  Whether the structure will unreasonably interfere with the collection of garbage, delivery of mail, police and fire protection or the cleaning of streets. 
f.  Whether the structure will interfere with an existing water or wastewater line or other utility. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall set forth in writing the reason for granting or denying an encroachment agreement pursuant to this section. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
(d)  The terms of an encroachment agreement shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The agreement shall be subject to termination upon 30 days' notice at such time as the city manager or his designee may deem the encroachment, including activities associated with the encroachment, to create a traffic or safety hazard or public nuisance or otherwise not be in keeping with the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  The property owner obtaining the encroachment agreement shall agree that, upon such termination, if the property owner shall fail to remove the encroachment within 30 days following the giving of the notice in accordance with subsection (d)(1) of this section, the city shall be authorized to remove the encroachment and recover all costs associated therewith from the property owner. 
(3)  The property owner shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability that may arise by virtue of the encroachment. 
(Code 1965, § 25-17; Ord. No. 1891, § 1(25-17(D), (E)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 16-75. - Electric substations. 
The procedure for obtaining encroachment agreements for electric substations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Plans and design sketches of new, relocated or redesigned electrical substations shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee not less than 60 days prior to the commencement of construction. The plans and design sketches shall include the following: 
a.  Locational maps of the area in which the substation is to be located. 
b.  Maps detailing the specific routes proposed to be utilized in locating the transmission lines which will provide power to the substation. 
c.  Other details as may be necessary to determine the impact of the proposed facility upon the area in which it is to be located. 
(2)  Upon submittal of such plans and design sketches, the city manager or his designee shall review the plans and accompanying documentation for compliance with this division and other applicable local ordinances. Within 30 days following submission of the plans, the city manager or his designee shall submit to the city council written recommendations relative to the proposed project. 
(3)  Within 30 days following the receipt of the recommendations from the city manager or his designee, the city council may fix a date for public hearing of the proposed project or may approve or deny the project without a public hearing. 
(4)  If a public hearing is held, the recommendations of the city manager or his designee shall be reviewed, and the city council shall, after the closing of the public hearing, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Determine that the proposed plan be approved; 
b.  Determine that certain conditions and circumstances contained within the plan warrant amendment and after the deficiencies are corrected approve the plan; or 
c.  Determine that the proposed plan is not consistent with the city's comprehensive development plan and disapprove it. 
(Code 1965, § 25-17; Ord. No. 1891, § 1(25-17(F)), 2-12-91)  
Sec. 16-76. - Structures and merchandise on sidewalks and other public places. 
(a)  Structures or merchandise may be allowed on sidewalks or other public places only upon execution of an encroachment agreement between the city manager or her/his designee and the owners of the property adjacent to the sidewalk or other public place upon which the structure or merchandise is to be placed pursuant to the provisions of this article III or upon issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of article V of chapter 16 of this Code. If the person seeking the encroachment is a lessee of the property adjacent to the sidewalk or public place, both that person and the property owner shall execute the encroachment agreement. The city manager is hereby authorized to execute such agreements in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The procedure for obtaining an encroachment agreement authorizing a structure or merchandise on the sidewalk or other public place shall be as follows: 
(1)  Written application shall be made to the city manager or her/his designee, which application shall be signed by all owners of the property located adjacent to the sidewalk or other public place. If the property is being leased, the lessee shall also sign the application. 
(2)  The application shall include those items described in section 16-157. 
(3)  The application shall state the reason for the encroachment. 
(4)  The city manager or her/his designee may execute an encroachment agreement with property owners (and lessees, where applicable) only if the encroachment can be allowed without detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. In determining what constitutes detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the general public, the following factors, among others not specifically enumerated, shall be considered: 
a.  The location, type and size of the encroaching structure(s) or merchandise. 
b.  The proximity of the encroaching structure(s) or merchandise to a traveled road, whether public or private. 
c.  Whether the encroaching structure(s) or merchandise will unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular passage or safety. 
d.  Whether the encroaching structure(s) or merchandise will interfere with an existing water or wastewater line, storm water facility or other utility. 
(c)  The city manager or her/his designee shall set forth in writing the reason for granting or denying an encroachment pursuant to this division. The decision of the city manager or her/his designee shall be final. 
(d)  The terms of an encroachment agreement shall include, but not be limited, to the following: 
(1)  The agreement shall be subject to termination upon 30 days notice at such time as the city manager or her/his designee may deem the encroachment, including activities associated with the encroachment, to create a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic or other safety hazard or a public nuisance or otherwise not be in keeping with the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  The owner (and lessee, where applicable) obtaining the encroachment agreement shall agree that, upon such termination, if the owner (or lessee, where applicable) shall fail to remove the encroachment within 30 days following the giving of the notice by the city in accordance with subsection (d)(1) of this section, the city shall be authorized to remove the encroaching structure and recover all costs associated therewith from the property owner. 
(3)  The property owner (and lessee, if applicable) shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability that may arise by virtue of the encroachment, including, but not limited to, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the North Carolina State Building Code and all other health and safety laws and regulations. 
(4)  If the property is sold or, where applicable, if the lease is terminated after execution of the encroachment agreement, the encroachment agreement shall be null and void and a new encroachment agreement with the new property owner and, where applicable, with the lessee, shall be required prior to the encroachment being permitted to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2585, § 1(a), 6-22-99)  
Secs. 16-77—16-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local authorities may regulate processions and assemblages, G.S. 20-169; regulation of mass gatherings, G.S. 130A-251 et seq.; picketing or parading with intent to obstruct justice, G.S. 14-225.1; weapons at parades prohibited, G.S. 14-277.2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2299, § 1, adopted June 25, 1996, repealed § 16-96, which pertained to permit for funerals, processions and parades of certain size. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 16-97. - Community events and festivals. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the city manager is hereby authorized to permit certain types of community events or festivals to take place upon the public streets, sidewalks, squares, avenues or alleys of the city. 
(b)  The sponsor of the event or festival shall submit to the city manager a written application for a permit at least seven days prior to the opening of the community event or festival for which a permit is desired. The application shall state: 
(1)  The time, date and location of the festival or event; 
(2)  The group, firm or individual by whom the event will be sponsored; 
(3)  The purpose of the festival or event; and 
(4)  The activities that will be included. 
(c)  In granting permits for community events and festivals, the city manager shall consider the following: 
(1)  The nature of the event or festival and how it can serve the community of the city and its citizens; 
(2)  The time period during which the event or festival will occur; 
(3)  The location of the event or festival and whether the location inhibits the safe flow of traffic in the city; 
(4)  Whether the activities would be in compliance with other applicable laws; 
(5)  Whether the event or festival is to benefit nonprofit community service organizations. Commercial events or festivals which generate profit for the private sector, other than profit incidental to the festival or event which is made by persons other than the sponsor of the festival or event, shall be permitted only if the applicant submits evidence to the city manager that the event or festival constitutes a community service; and 
(6)  The general health, safety and welfare of the participants in the event or festival and the citizens of the city. 
(d)  The annual Bele Chere festival shall be automatically permitted. Nothing in this Code regulating signs, refuse containers or parking lot fees shall apply during the annual Bele Chere festival. 
(e)  The sponsor of the event or festival shall provide all cleaning services necessary to rid the festival area of all debris and litter created as a result of the event or festival. 
(f)  The issuance of a permit to a sponsor shall authorize only that sponsor and participants specifically authorized by the sponsor to participate in that community event or festival without the restrictions imposed by this chapter. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provisions contained in section 9-26 et seq., authorized participants in a community event or festival for which a permit has been issued shall not be required to obtain a city privilege license for the period during which the community event or festival takes place. 
(Code 1965, § 25-16.1)  
Secs. 16-98—16-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARADES AND PICKETING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2299, § 2, adopted June 25, 1996, repealed Div. 2, §§ 16-111—16-117, which pertained to parades, picket lines or group demonstrations and enacted provisions designated as a new Div. 2, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 16-111. - Title. 
This division shall be entitled parades and picketing. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-112. - Administration. 
The chief of police shall be responsible for the overall administration and enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-113. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this division, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Chief of police means the police chief of the City of Asheville or the police chief's designee. 
City means the City of Asheville, North Carolina 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Parade means any march, demonstration, ceremony or procession of any kind which moves from place to place completely or partially in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public grounds or places owned or under the control of the city along a specified route. 
Parade permit means prior written authorization to utilize the street, sidewalk or other city-owned areas for a parade. 
Picketing means the stationing of any person by standing, lying, walking, sitting, kneeling, bending or in any other similar manner at a particular place so as to persuade, or otherwise influence another person's actions or conduct, or to apprise the public of an opinion or message. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-114. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or otherwise participate in any parade that convenes before sunrise or terminates after sunset. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing focused on and taking place in front of a particular residence. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-115. - Parades. 
(a)  General responsibility of participants and persons in charge. 
(1)  Participants in a parade are required to abide by this division and the terms of the parade permit. Willful violation thereof is unlawful. 
(2)  The person designated in the application as responsible for the conduct of the parade shall be responsible for monitoring the conduct of the participants in the parade. Upon actual notice of any violation given to the responsible person by a law enforcement officer on the scene of said parade, such responsible person shall make immediate attempts to correct the violation. It shall be unlawful for such responsible person to refuse to make attempts to correct the violation. 
(3)  The person(s) designated in the application as the person(s) responsible for the conduct of the parade shall be physically present and accept responsibility for compliance with any an all terms of the parade permit as set forth in this division. 
(b)  Interference. No person shall unreasonable obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(c)  Permit. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(d)  Exception to permit requirement. This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
(4)  A public demonstration in a traditional public forum; and 
(5)  permits are not required for assemblies on public property including but not limited to parks, sidewalks or Court Plaza, Pack Square or Pritchard Park, subject to compliance with applicable city ordinances concerning public sidewalks, unless it is known or reasonably probable that the assembly may necessitate the use or temporary closure of the streets, in which case a permit is required. If an assembly begins off the street but attracts an unexpected number of participants such that the assembly begins to occupy a portion of the street, the Asheville Police Department shall accommodate the assembly by closing a segment, lane, or portion of the street where so doing will not jeopardize the participants or unreasonably inhibit the flow of traffic on a major traffic route; however, the Asheville Police Department is authorized to limit the available portion of the street, where a segment, lane or portion of the street is capable of accommodating the assembly. 
(e)  Permit and escort fees. The city shall charge an administrative fee as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual to cover expenses incidental to processing the application and to cover expenses for logistical support, including barricades, police escorts, and parking restrictions, when said support is requested, or in the judgment of the city, needed for the safety of the parade, whether or not such request or determination is made in advance of the event. The fees shall be waived in whole or in part as necessary to ensure that constitutional rights of the applicants are not infringed, as follows: 
(1)  The city shall waive a permit fee, in whole or in part, for indigent individuals or groups as necessary to ensure that the constitutional rights of indigent applicants are not infringed. In cases where an indigency waiver is requested, the police chief shall consider, but not be limited to, the following: whether the applicant is employed; the financial resources available to the applicant; whether the applicant receives federal, state or local financial assistance; whether the applicant owns real property, and whether alternative arrangements are available. The police chief may base his determination of indigency on the identity of the real party in interest. 
(2)  Even if the applicant is not determined to be indigent, the city shall waive a permit fee, in whole or in part, if the applicant demonstrates that a waiver of fees is necessary to avoid an infringement of constitutional rights. The applicant shall provide a statement supporting this assertion and shall identify the issue for which the parade is being organized. 
(3)  Furthermore, if it is later determined that there has been an intentional, material misrepresentation of the applicant's financial status or other information provided on the application, the city reserves the right to charge the organizers an appropriate fee based on actual events. 
(f)  Application. 
(1)  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file a completed application with the chief of police on a form provided by the chief of police. The form shall include a place for the applicant to indicate if the applicant is indigent and desires a waiver of permit fees. A copy of the city's schedule of fees from its fees and charges manual shall be furnished to the applicant form. 
(2)  An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less that five days before the time when it is proposed to conduct the parade, unless the applicant can show that the parade pertains to a current or emergent public issue. If the applicant makes this assertion in the application, the chief of police shall permit such an application to be filed within five days of the parade. Additional, a permit may be issued if filed less than five days before the time for commencement of the parade when the chief of police finds that: 
a.  There is no conflict in schedule with some other previously scheduled event; and 
b.  That the time for filing is sufficient to prepare for the parade pursuant to the standards set forth in this subsection. 
(g)  The applicant for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the person who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade. 
(3)  The date when the parade is to be conducted and the hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(4)  The proposed route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point. 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(6)  The location by streets and designation by time of an assembly area of such parade. 
(7)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit in his behalf. 
(8)  The person or person to be in charge of the parade for all purposes and who will accompany it and carry the permit at all times. 
(9)  Any additional information which the chief of police nay need to clarify any of the specific information set forth above. 
(h)  Issuance standards. The chief of police shall issue a parade permit upon submission of the completed application, unless he finds one or more of the following conditions present: 
(1)  Adequate provision cannot be made for the safe and orderly movement of the parade and of other traffic, pedestrian and vehicular, contiguous to its route. 
(2)  Adequate provisions cannot be made for police protection without requiring the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to police properly the lines of movement and the areas contiguous thereto, thereby preventing normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The applicant for the parade permit has not agreed to abide by the standards set forth in this division which are necessary measures to promote the safety and welfare of the community. 
Additionally, the following standards are applicable to the chief of police's decision to issue a parade permit: 
(4)  All costs for staging the parade, including fees and charges assessed by the city, shall be itemized and provided to the applicant with the permit. 
(5)  Such determinations may not be based on the estimated number of non-participant observers. 
(6)  Such determinations may not be based on the content of speech expected to be expressed during the parade. 
(i)  Notice of rejection. The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within 48 hours after the filing thereof. If the applicant has filed an application for a parade permit under the "current or emergent public issue exception" set forth in subsection (f)(2), the chief of police shall make every effort to act on the application within 24 hours and in any event not later than 24 hours before the event. If the chief of police disapproves the application he shall notify the applicant, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(j)  Alternative permit. The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit shall be empowered to authorize the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An application desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within one day after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division. 
(k)  Right to appeal. Any person denied a parade permit or who rejects an alternative permit, or who objects to any of the costs to be assessed by the city, shall have the right to an immediate appeal to the city manager. The hearing of a parade permit appeal shall be prioritized so as to allow the city manager the opportunity to review the appeal and render a decision prior to the requested date and time of the parade. Any applicant desiring to file an appeal shall, within 24 hours, excluding weekends and holidays after notice of the action of the chief of police, enter either a written or oral notice of appeal with the chief of police. The chief of police shall be responsible for forwarding the notice of appeal, along with all documents related to the appeal, to the city manager and arranging for the appeal hearing to take place within a reasonable period of time prior to the date of the proposed parade. 
(l)  Post event appeal. In the event an appeal based on costs cannot be resolved prior to the event, or if the applicant believes that the logistical support deployed for the event is not justified based on actual experience, or that a request for a fee waiver was wrongfully denied, that appeal may be made to the city manager within 48 hours after the event has occurred, and the city manager shall determine said appeal within the times prescribed above. 
(m)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof, constituting a part of the route of the parade. When necessary, the chief of police shall see that signs are posted to such effect at least 12 hours prior to the parade, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park, remain parked or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person, however, shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-21-07)  
Sec. 16-116. - Picketing. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Peaceful picketing shall be allowed in the city provided the same is done in accordance with the following regulations: 
a.  Picketing shall be conducted only on sidewalks or other city-owned areas normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement, including casements and rights-of-way, and shall not be conducted on a portion of any street used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
b.  Picketers shall observe the right of non-picketers to utilize the public rights-of-way for passage on foot and shall at all times keep the public rights-of-way free and clear for utilization by other pedestrian movement 
c.  Picketers shall walk in single file and not abreast. 
d.  Picketers are encouraged to provide notice to the chief of police of intent to picket. 
(b)  Interruption of passage. 
(1)  Whenever the free passage of any street or other public area in the city shall be obstructed by picketers, persons picketing shall disperse or move along when directed to do so by a police officer of the city. 
(2)  Whenever the free passage of any street or other public area in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move along when directed to do so by a police officer of the city. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from reconvening after dispersing so long as free passage of any street or other public area is not obstructed. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-117. - Weapons. 
With the exception of law enforcement officers acting within the scope of their duties, no firearms or dangerous weapons of any kind, as defined by federal, state and local laws, may be possessed by any participant in a parade or by any person engaged in picketing. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-118. - Signs. 
Persons participating in parades or pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-119. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this division. If any person is found to have violated any of the provisions of this division, such person or persons shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 16-120. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge, to be invalid or unconstitutional any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this division, such judgment or decree shall not affects impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this division, but the effect thereof shall be confined to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this division so judged to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2299, § 2, 6-25-96)  
Secs. 16-121—16-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SELLING, ENTERTAINING AND DINING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3024, adopted May 27, 2003, deleted Art. V, §§ 16-141 through 16-161, in its entirety and enacted similar provisions for a new Art. V as set out herein. Former Art. V pertained to selling, entertaining and dining. A history of former Art. V can be found in the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Pedestrians soliciting rides, employment, business or funds upon highways or streets, G.S. 20-175. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Audible performance means any performance, including but not limited to, music, dance, mimes, magicians, clowns, jugglers and/or theatrical presentations which involve or require the production of sound as an essential element of the performance. 
Biltmore Village Historic District means the overlay zoning district designated by that name in Appendix 7-E of this Code, described therein and outlined on the official zoning map of the city. 
Central Business District means the general use zoning district defined by that name in chapter 7 of this Code and outlined on the official zoning map of the city. 
High impact area means an area identified in Appendix H of the City Code within which only one audible performance may take place within 120 feet of a location marked on the sidewalk at any single time. 
Merchandise includes, but is not limited to, plants, flowers, wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, art work, household or office supplies, food or beverages of any kind, whether or not for immediate consumption, or other goods or wares. 
Office and business uses correspond to the use tables found in Chapter 7, Article VIII of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
Outdoor dining area means an area in front of or adjacent to a restaurant and located on a public sidewalk or square whereon tables, chairs or benches are placed for dining purposes. 
Outdoor merchandise area means an area in front of or adjacent to a retail business where merchandise is located on a public sidewalk for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting, selling or offering for sale merchandise. 
Performance means, but is not limited to, engaging in acting, acrobatics, dancing, juggling, magic, pantomime, playing musical instruments, puppetry, and/or recitation on any city sidewalk. 
Pushcart means a wheeled cart which may be moved by one person without the assistance of a motor and which is designed and used for displaying, keeping or storing any food, beverages or other articles for sale by a vendor. 
Sidewalk means all that area legally open to public use as a pedestrian public way between the curb line and the public right-of-way boundary along the abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 3266, § 1(a), 7-26-05; Ord. No. 4530, § 1, 10-25-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-142. - Scope. 
Except as a permit may be issued pursuant to this article V for locations within the Central Business District, the Biltmore Village Historic District, or other zoning districts where office and business uses are a permitted use, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, exhibit or demonstrate any goods, wares, merchandise, mechanical devices, animals or any article of any kind whatsoever, by whatever name called, upon any public street, sidewalk, square, avenue or alley within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 3266, § 1(b), 7-26-05)  
Sec. 16-143. - Exceptions. 
(a)  None of the requirements of this article for permits or encroachment agreements shall apply to the sale of food and other products from pushcarts, outdoor dining areas, or outdoor merchandise areas which are otherwise allowed under the community events and festivals permit set forth in section 16-97. 
(b)  Permits issues for pushcarts and outdoor merchandise area under the provisions of this article shall be temporarily suspended at locations designated for the community events and festivals permitted under section 16-97 of this Code. Permit holders may, however, apply to continue their operation during the community event or festival pursuant to the procedures set up by the community event or festival permit holder. Community events and festivals will be posted on the city's website. Permits issued for outdoor dining areas shall not be temporarily suspended in areas designated for a community event or festival. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, § 1a, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 16-144. - Pushcarts. 
All pushcarts and their operators shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The pushcart shall not be motorized or propelled in any manner other than the walking motion of the person operating the pushcart, with the exception that persons with disabilities may use a motorized system to propel the pushcart. No motorized assistance shall be used to locate the pushcart on the sidewalk or public place, with the exception that persons with disabilities may use motorized assistance. 
(2)  The pushcart shall be covered with an appropriate material to prevent exposure of the food or food product to wind, dust, insects and the elements and shall meet any such other regulations as may be required by the county health department or any other applicable regulatory agency. The pushcart operator shall display, in plain view, all required permits as set forth by federal, state, and local laws and shall provide a copy of health department and other regulatory agency permits and/or licenses to the city prior to the issuance of a permit by the city for the pushcart. The pushcart operator shall continuously maintain the required approvals, permits and/or licenses and provide evidence to the city of the continuous maintenance of them. 
(3)  The pushcart shall have attached to it a proper container for the collection of waste and trash. The pushcart operator shall be responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the pushcart operation. No grease, waste, trash or other debris from the pushcart operation shall be deposited on or released onto city property, which includes the streets, sidewalk or other public place nor into the gutter or storm drainage system. The pushcart operator shall keep the immediate area in a 5 ft. radius from the center of the pushcart clean of garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans or litter associated with the pushcart operation. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, a pushcart operator shall not locate a container for the collection of waste and trash on the streets, sidewalks or public places nor use city trash receptacles, city street cans or other city waste disposal containers for the disposal of waste and trash associated with the pushcart operation. 
(4)  The pushcart shall not have attached to it any bell, siren, horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract the attention of possible customers, nor shall the permit holder use any such device to attract attention. 
(5)  Signs attached to the pushcart shall comply with the requirements of article XIII of chapter 7 of this Code. 
(6)  The pushcart shall be set up only in the location set forth in the operator's permit issued by the city, and shall not impede, endanger or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(7)  The pushcart shall be set up so that a minimum of six feet of passage for pedestrians or the minimum required by the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual, whichever is more restrictive, shall be provided at all times. 
(8)  The pushcart shall not be stored, parked or left overnight on any street or sidewalk or in any parking space of the city. 
(9)  The pushcart shall operate only at times between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(10)  No item related to the operation of the pushcart shall be placed on the street, sidewalk, public place or anywhere other than in or on the pushcart. 
(11)  Pushcart operators shall not consume nor be under the influence of alcohol or controlled substance while operating the pushcart. 
(12)  The dimensions of the pushcart shall be no greater than the following: 
a.  4 feet 6 inches in height as measured from the ground to the highest point of the pushcart; and 
b.  24 square feet as measured in length and width (the overall footprint), excluding any trailer hitch; and 
c.  5 feet for the height of any umbrella affixed to the pushcart, as measured from the base of the umbrella to the highest point of the umbrella. No freestanding umbrella or canopy shall be used. 
The city reserves the right to require smaller dimensions based upon such factors as, but not limited to, pedestrian and vehicular safety and adequate sight distances. 
(13)  The pushcart permit holder or her/his designee shall be in attendance at the pushcart at all times, except in case of an emergency. 
(14)  The pushcart operator shall comply with all federal, state and local laws when operating the pushcart. 
(15)  Design of pushcarts which are to be permitted for located in the Biltmore Village Historic District area must be approved by the historic resources commission prior to a permit being issued for their use in the Biltmore Village Historic District. Design of pushcarts which are to be permitted for the Central Business District must be approved by the city's planning and development director or her/his designee, using the city's downtown design review guidelines, prior to a permit being issued for their use in the Central Business District. The applicant must provide a photograph, drawing or sketch of the design of the pushcart as part of the application for a permit. 
(16)  Any pushcart with a valid permit as of May 15, 2003, that complies with Ordinance No. 2595(1)(b); Section 16-144 (13) passed June 22, 1999, or in operation before the passage of said ordinance, will be allowed to continue operation subject to the remaining provisions of this Code section. This exception shall be in effect until the time that the operator or his successors can no longer maintain the cart in a fashion acceptable to the Health Department or in a fashion that precludes its ready removal in the event of an emergency situation. 
(17)  Applications for a pushcart are required to comply with subsection 16-156(b), Encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, §§ 1b, c, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 4152, § 2a, 1-8-13)  
Sec. 16-145. - Performers of sidewalk entertainment. 
(a)  Artistic performances on city sidewalks are a vital and welcome part of Asheville's unique character and culture. 
(b)  Street performances are distinguished from panhandling activities by the commercial nature of the performer's actions which provide the benefit of a live performance of artistic value in exchange for gratuities given in appreciation of the performance. 
(c)  Persons have a right to perform on city sidewalks, but those performances can cause adverse impacts to the community in the form of gathering crowds attracted to the entertainment offered in locations where there is insufficient room for crowds; blocked sidewalks; blocked ingress and egress of buildings; the risk of disrupting nearby motor vehicle traffic; and/or disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of residents and businesses. 
(d)  Such adverse impacts can be mitigated or alleviated through minimally intrusive regulation of the time, place, and/or manner in which such performances may occur. Such regulation ensures the ability of street performers to perform in public spaces and promotes harmony among street performers, local businesses, permitted event sponsors, and residents and visitors by balancing the interests of performing artists with the public's safety. 
(e)  General requirements. Unless prohibited elsewhere in this code, performers of sidewalk entertainment may utilize sidewalks for performances subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Performances must not violate the prohibitions on disturbing, annoying and unnecessary noise as set forth in article IV of chapter 10 of the city Code. 
(2)  Performances must not violate the prohibitions on solicitation as set forth in city Code sections 11-5 and 11-14. 
(3)  Performances must not obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including but not limited to, not obstructing or causing to be obstructed sidewalks, doorways or other access areas. Performances must provide a minimum of six feet for pedestrian passageway. Performances must cease if persons are stopped and observing a performance from a street. 
(4)  No performer may sell, display or exhibit any tangible good, on any sidewalk, in exchange for a fixed price or donation. 
(5)  Performances must only take place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(6)  Performers of sidewalk entertainment must not consume, or be under the influence of, alcoholic beverages or other controlled substances. 
(7)  The following limitations on sidewalk space used for performances must be observed at all times: 
a.  Generally: Performances must not take place any closer than 40 feet from another performance. 
b.  Within high impact areas: Only one audible performance may take place on a sidewalk at any single time within 120 feet of a location marked on the sidewalk and identified in Appendix H of the city Code. Non-audible performances within such areas must not take place any closer than 40 feet from another performance. 
(8)  Performances must not take place at locations designated for a community event or festival, unless permitted to play at the community event or festival by the event or festival coordinator, pursuant to section 16-97 of the city Code. 
(9)  Performances must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(10)  Performances involving the use of knives, swords, torches, axes, saws (except non-powered saws used solely as musical instruments), fire or other potentially dangerous objects or that involve acrobatics, tumbling, or other inherently dangerous activities are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4530, § 2, 10-25-16)  
Sec. 16-146. - Outdoor dining areas. 
Permit holders for outdoor dining areas and their employees shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  For all outdoor dining areas, a permit and encroachment agreement pursuant to the provisions of article III of chapter 16 of this Code shall be required, or for any condition which a fence, canopy, or other structure will be affixed to or overhang the sidewalk. 
(2)  The permit holder shall set up the outdoor dining area, including, but not limited to, the furniture, canopies, fencing and/or other accessories used for the outdoor dining area, only in the area designated by the city in the encroachment agreement or on the permit, specifically excluding roadways. The outdoor dining area shall not impede, endanger or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Furniture, canopies, fencing and/or other accessories used for the outdoor dining area shall be located so that a minimum clearance of six feet of pedestrian passage on sidewalks, or the minimum required by the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual, the North Carolina State Building Code or the Americans with Disabilities Act, whichever is more restrictive, shall be provided at all times. 
(4)  The permit holder shall provide proper containers or some other means for the collection of waste and trash within the outdoor dining area permitted. The permit holder shall keep the immediate area around the outdoor dining area and the outdoor dining area clean of garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans or litter associated with the operation of the outdoor dining area. All waste and trash shall be properly disposed of by the permit holder. 
(5)  The permit holder shall comply with all county health and other applicable regulatory agency requirements, including, but not limited to, the requirements for food preparation and service. The permit holder shall display in a conspicuous location all such required permits and/or licenses and shall provide copies of those permits and/or licenses to the city prior to issuance of a permit for an outdoor dining area by the city. The permit holder shall continuously maintain the required approvals, permits and/or licenses and provide evidence to the city of the continuous maintenance of them. 
(6)  The permit holder shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and security of the furniture and accessories of the outdoor dining area and the city shall not be responsible for the same. 
(7)  The permit holder shall not have on the premises any bell, siren, horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract the attention of possible customers nor shall the permit holder use any such device to attract attention. 
(8)  Signs attached to the outdoor dining area shall comply with the requirements of article XIII of chapter 7 of this Code. 
(9)  Employees of the permit holder for the outdoor dining area shall not consume alcoholic beverages while working in the outdoor dining area. 
(10)  For any outdoor dining area where alcoholic beverages are served, the permit holder shall comply with all state and local regulations for the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages and shall provide the city with a copy of any and all required permits or licenses for the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages and the diagram and/or plans showing the location of the outdoor dining area which were submitted for the permit or license. 
(11)  The permit holder shall comply with the prohibitions on disturbing, annoying and unnecessary noises set forth in section 10-81. 
(12)  Design of the furniture and accessories for an outdoor dining area to be located in the Central Business District must be approved by the City's Planning and Development Director or her/his designee, using the city's downtown design review guidelines, prior to a permit being issued for their use in the Central Business District. Design of the furniture and accessories for an outdoor dining area to be located in the Biltmore Village Historic District must be approved by the Historic Resources Commission prior to a permit being issued for their use in the Biltmore Village Historic District. The applicant must provide a photograph, drawing or sketch of the design of the furniture and accessories to be used for the outdoor dining area as part of the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, § 1d, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 16-147. - Outdoor merchandise areas. 
Permit holders for outdoor merchandise areas and their employees shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A permit and encroachment agreement pursuant to the provisions of article III of chapter 16 of this Code shall be required for outdoor merchandise areas. 
(2)  Outdoor merchandise areas shall be located only in the area designated by the city and indicated in the encroachment agreement or on the permit, specifically excluding roadways. Merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which it is displayed shall be located so that they do not impede, endanger or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which it is displayed shall be located so that a minimum of six feet of passage for pedestrian traffic, or the minimum required for pedestrian passage by the Asheville Standard Specifications and Details Manual, the North Carolina State Building Code or the Americans with Disabilities Act, whichever requirement is more restrictive, shall be provided at all times. 
(4)  No fixtures or devices on which outdoor merchandise is displayed shall be attached to the sidewalk or other public area without the permission of the city in the encroachment agreement. 
(5)  Outdoor merchandise areas will be permitted only adjacent to the building or structure in which the retail business is located. Outdoor merchandise areas shall not be permitted next to the curb of the street or sidewalk or in the middle of the sidewalk or in roadways. 
(6)  Merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed must not block regulatory signs, crosswalks or intersections and shall be sufficiently lit during times of low light in order to provide for safe pedestrian passage alongside the outdoor merchandise area. 
(7)  All merchandise located within an outdoor merchandise area shall be placed so that the outdoor merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed are stable and not easily tipped and do not include sharp edges, protrusions, or other features which may be hazardous to the public. 
(8)  All displays of merchandise within the outdoor merchandise area must meet a minimum height of 28 inches tall or of sufficient size or height so that safe pedestrian traffic is not impeded or must comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, whichever requirement is more restrictive. 
(9)  All merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed shall be moved inside the building or structure wherein the retail business is located during hours the retail business is not operated and during inclement weather, including, but not limited to, heavy rain, wind, ice or snow. 
(10)  All merchandise and the fixture, or devices on which the merchandise is displayed must be secured so that it may not be dislodged during windy or stormy weather prior to being moved inside the building or structure wherein the retail business is located. 
(11)  In the event of a declared emergency or in a situation where exigent circumstances arise, a permit holder shall remove all articles from the sidewalk when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer, fire official or emergency medical personnel. 
(12)  The permit holder for the outdoor merchandise area shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and security of the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed and the city shall not be responsible for the same. 
(13)  The permit holder for the outdoor merchandise area shall be responsible for keeping the outdoor merchandise area clean of garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans or litter associated with the operation of the outdoor merchandise area. 
(14)  The permit holder for the outdoor merchandise area shall not have on the premises any bell, siren, horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract the attention of possible customers nor shall the permit holder use any such device to attract attention. 
(15)  Signs attached to the outdoor merchandise area shall comply with the requirements of article XIII of chapter 7 of this Code. 
(16)  Outdoor merchandise areas shall not contain any live animals. 
(17)  Design of the outdoor merchandise areas to be located within the Biltmore Village Historic District must be approved by the Historic Resources Commission prior to a permit being issued. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, § 1e, 1-24-12)  
Secs. 16-148—16-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; ENCROACHMENT AGREEMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2585, § 1(b), adopted June 22, 1999, changed the designation of div. 2 from "permits" to "permits; encroachment agreements." 
 
Sec. 16-156. - Permits or encroachment agreements required. 
(a)  Upon successfully completing an application and upon meeting all of the requirements in this chapter and the City Code, the city manager or her/his designee shall issue permits or execute encroachment agreements to allow outdoor dining areas, outdoor merchandise areas, or pushcarts only within the Central Business District and within the Biltmore Village Historic District or other zoning districts where office and business uses are a permitted use. 
(b)  A separate permit or encroachment agreement shall be required for each outdoor dining area, outdoor merchandise area, or pushcart. 
(c)  Pushcart vendors requesting relocation to a new site must complete a new application and pay a new application permit fee for the new location. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 3266, § 1(c), 7-26-05)  
Sec. 16-157. - Application. 
Each application for a permit or encroachment agreement for an outdoor dining area, outdoor merchandise area, or pushcart shall be filed with the city manager or her/his designee and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the individual, business or organization making the application and the business address and telephone number. 
(3)  For permits to allow pushcarts, the application shall include information about the type of food or other product to be sold; proposed times and area of operation; description, drawing, sketch, or photograph of the type of pushcart to be used; and other pertinent information related to the method of doing business under the permit. For permits to allow outdoor dining areas, the application shall include a site plan showing the proposed location of furniture, canopies, fencing and other accessories for the outdoor dining area; a description, drawing, sketch, or photograph showing the design of all furniture, fencing, canopies and accessories to be used in the outdoor dining area; location for the outdoor dining area; and other pertinent information related to the use of the outdoor dining area. For permits to allow outdoor merchandise areas, the application shall include a site plan showing the location of the outdoor merchandise area, the proposed location of fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is to be displayed, and other pertinent information related to the use of the outdoor merchandise area. 
(4)  For permits for pushcarts to allow the sale of food, food products and/or beverages and for permits or encroachment agreements for outdoor dining areas, the applicant shall provide and maintain a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general liability and products and completed operations coverage in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and in the aggregate, provided that those certificates may be furnished as evidence of such coverage purchased for the applicant's principal place of business for serving food, food products and/or beverages, so long as such certificates meet the minimum acceptable requirements established in this section. For permits to allow the sale of other products from pushcarts, the applicant shall provide and maintain a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general liability in the minimum amount of $25,000.00 per occurrence and in the aggregate. For permits or encroachment agreements for outdoor merchandise areas, the applicant shall provide and maintain a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general liability and products and completed operations coverage in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and in the aggregate, provided that those certificates may be furnished as evidence of such coverage purchased for the applicant's retail business, so long as such certificates meet the minimum acceptable requirements established in this section. All certificates shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in North Carolina, shall name the city as additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advance written notice to the city. The permit holder or encroachment agreement party shall continuously maintain the insurance required by this section and shall continuously provide the city with evidence of the insurance required by this section. 
(5)  For permits to allow pushcarts, the application shall include the name and phone number of the sponsoring restaurant. 
(6)  The permit holder shall execute a statement on the permit application wherein the applicant holds harmless and indemnifies the city from any claims or causes of action arising out of or related to the permitted activity, including, but not limited to, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the North Carolina State Building Code and all other health and safety laws and regulations. 
(7)  Written approval from the county health department and/or other applicable regulatory agency showing that the pushcart or outdoor dining area has been inspected and is in compliance with current requirements for food handling establishments or sale of other product. 
(8)  Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager or her/his designee, which may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(9)  Payment of the permit fee and/or encroachment fee required under the city's fees and charges manual. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03)  
Sec. 16-158. - Term; fees; transferability; display. 
(a)  A permit required by this article shall be issued for no greater than 12 months at a time and shall expire on a day determined by the planning and development department director after consulting with the downtown commission and other applicable stakeholders. Permit holders may apply annually for a new permit by following application procedures and by paying the fee required under the city's fees and charges manual. 
(b)  Permit holders shall pay the applicable fee required for a permit and/or encroachment agreement under the city's fees and charges manual. The permits and fees required in this article are in addition to the annual privilege license required under this Code. No permit under this article shall be issued until the privilege license required under this Code has been issued to the applicant. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable or assignable. 
(d)  The permit must be conspicuously displayed by the permit holder while engaged in the activities allowed under the permit. 
(e)  The city shall designate locations where pushcarts, outdoor dining areas, and outdoor merchandise areas are permitted. No permit holder shall occupy more than 50 percent of the spaces designated by the city for any single category of the following: (i) pushcarts; (ii) outdoor dining areas, or (iii) outdoor merchandise areas. Permits for the designated areas shall be issued following a process established by the planning and development department director after consulting with the downtown commission and other applicable stakeholders. 
(f)  The city manager or her/his designee shall formulate any additional rules and regulations necessary for the proper administration of this ordinance. 
(g)  Permit holders are subject to relocation when their designated space is deemed to cause a hazard to public safety, sight distance, or vehicular congestion or other concerns by the city manager or her/his designee. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, §§ 1f, g, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 16-159. - Denial. 
Any applicant denied a permit under this article shall receive a statement, in writing, outlining the reasons for denial of the permit. The applicant may appeal the denial of the permit to the city manager within 15 working days after the date of the written denial. The determination of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03)  
Sec. 16-160. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager or her/his designee may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article upon the occurrence of any or all of the following events in which the permit holder has: 
(1)  Provided false information or fraudulently misrepresented information in the permit application. 
(2)  Violated this article, any local, state, federal law or any regulations of the county health department or other applicable regulatory agency. 
(3)  Failed to comply with the requirements of this article or the terms of the permit issued or encroachment agreement entered into pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Operated under the permit in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare or to damage or destroy public property. 
(5)  Failed to post conspicuously the permit at all times at the location where the activity is permitted. 
(6)  Failed or ceased to conduct the activities allowed in the permit for a period of seven consecutive days during the time period of April through October of any year. 
(7)  Failed to secure and maintain any other licenses or permits required by local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  Before the permit is suspended or revoked, the city manager or her/his designee shall notify the permit holder of the intent to suspend or revoke the permit and the reasons therefor, shall provide the permit holder a reasonable time period within which to comply with the requirements of this article or the permit, and shall afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard on the question of such suspension or revocation. In the event that the permit holder has not satisfactorily complied with the requirements of this article or the permit within the set time period, the city manager or her/his designee may then suspend or revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 4052, § 1h, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 16-161. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the requirements of this article or of the permit issued under this article. 
(a)  Such violations shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by N. C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(b)  In addition to and separate and apart from the other remedies set forth in this section, if any person is found to have violated any of the requirements of this article or a permit issued under this article, such violations shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 per day for each day the violation continues, to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has been cited for the violation. The procedures set forth in section 1-5 of this Code for violations which constitute a civil penalty are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-03)  
Secs. 16-162—16-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STREET NAME AND ADDRESS REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-171. - Title and authority. 
This section is adopted pursuant to authority granted in N.C.G.S. secs. 160A-174 and 160A-296. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(a), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-172. - Purpose. 
These regulations are adopted to provide a uniform system of assigning street names and addresses throughout the city, to facilitate provision of adequate public safety and emergency response services, and to minimize difficulty in locating buildings for public service agencies and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(b), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-173. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  COAMSAL (City of Asheville Master Street Address List). The official listing of all streets and roads within the City of Asheville. 
(2)  End point. A point at either end of a street where said street either begins or ends. 
(3)  Point of origin: 
a.  For cul-de-sac or dead-end streets, the point of origin is located at the end point from which said street emanates; 
b.  For all streets which are not cul-de-sac or dead-end streets, the point of origin shall be the end point of said street closest to the center of the intersection of Patton Avenue and Broadway; 
c.  Where the point of origin is questionable and for all other conditions not defined in a. and b. above, the determination of the point of origin is left to the discretion of the emergency address coordinator. 
(4)  Emergency address coordinator. A person designated by the city manager to be responsible for the administration of this section. 
(5)  Street address number. The address number assigned to a property or building by the emergency address coordinator. 
(6)  Street naming and numbering proposal. A proposal submitted to the emergency address coordinator prior to subdividing and recording subdivided parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(c), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-174. - Street names. 
(a)  The street names listed in the COAMSAL are kept on file with the public works department, are hereby declared the official names of streets in the city unless hereafter changed by action of the city council. 
(b)  The emergency address coordinator is hereby authorized to determine the need for street names and name changes and to recommend changes to the city council for both private and public streets within the city. 
(c)  There shall be no assignment of duplicate street names. Street names should not closely approximate phonetically the name of any street within the county, irrespective of the use of a designation suffix (street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc.) or a direction prefix or suffix (north, south, east, west, etc.). 
(d)  Where proposed streets are extension of existing streets, the existing street names shall be used and addresses assigned accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(d), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-175. - Street name changes. 
The city council may change the name of an existing street by resolution subsequent to a public hearing, with ten days' notice prior to the public hearing. This notice shall be prominently posted in at least two places along the street and published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. Costs of such notice shall be borne as follows: 
(1)  When a street name change is initiated by the city for the purposes hereinbefore enumerated, or when initiated by letter or petition by more than one-half of the owners of buildings or residents of said street, costs of such notice shall be borne by the city; 
(2)  When a street name change is initiated by one-half or fewer of the owners of buildings or residents of said street or any other person, costs of such notice shall be borne by those initiating the street name change. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(e), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-176. - Street addresses. 
(a)  The emergency address coordinator is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To assign street addresses on streets which are not presently addressed; and 
(2)  To resolve conflicts in numbers, assign and reassign numbers, or undertake any changes which are deemed necessary to carry out the purposes set forth hereinbefore. 
(b)  Street addressing includes the assignment of street numbers to residences, businesses and other property within the city. It shall not include the assignment of numbers to interior offices and rooms in existing or future houses, buildings and other structures. 
(c)  Assigning addresses to buildings and property. 
(1)  Address numbers shall follow in numerical sequence from low to high beginning at the point of origin of the street. 
(2)  For all address assignments, beginning at the street's point of origin, even numbers shall be assigned on the left side of the street and odd numbers shall be assigned on the right side of the street as the street numbers progress higher. 
(3)  Allowances shall be made for vacant properties in order that numbers may be assigned to future structures on said properties. For all new streets and roads and all streets receiving new street addresses, two numbers shall be assigned, one on either side of the street, at 50-foot intervals. 
(4)  The emergency address coordinator will have the right to authorize and approve alternate methods of street address numbering which meet the intent of this section when strict adherence to these standards cannot reasonably be met. 
(d)  For all subdivisions where new streets are proposed, a street naming and numbering proposal shall be submitted to the emergency address coordinator along with the plat required in section 26-4 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(1)  The proposal shall include: 
a.  The name proposed for each street identified on the map, 
b.  The proposed address scheme for the subdivision identified on the map, and 
c.  An alphabetical list of the proposed street names, together with an alternative name for each name proposed. 
(2)  The emergency address coordinator will review the proposed street naming and numbering proposal for duplicate names, appropriateness of names, and for overall, compliance with the street naming and numbering policy. 
(3)  Approved street names and addresses shall be included in the final plat submitted for recordation. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(f), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
Sec. 16-177. - Coordination. 
The emergency address coordinator shall advise the Buncombe County Director of Planning (or his/her designee) of proposed street names, or street name changes in order to minimize or eliminate duplication of street names in the city and Buncombe County in furtherance of the objectives set forth hereinbefore. 
(Ord. No. 2013, § 1(g), 2-2-93; Ord. No. 3299, 11-9-05)  
ARTICLE VII. - BARRICADES. 
 
Sec. 16-178. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Barricade means an obstruction or barrier placed across a public street, right-of-way or highway to prevent entry or passage. 
Fire chief means the chief of the fire department for the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Police chief means the chief of police for the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Public emergency means a reasonable belief that an individual(s) is/are in imminent danger of serious bodily injury or that property is in imminent danger of substantial damage. 
Public works director means the head of the public works department for the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2246, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 16-179. - Crossing barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross or attempt to cross, tamper with or remove any barrier from any public street or highway which has been placed there by the police chief, fire chief or the public works director to prevent entry due to a public emergency. Provided, however, the barricaded street shall be clearly and visibly marked with a "no crossing" and/or "no removal" sign, containing the name of the City of Asheville and notice that violators will be arrested. This section shall not apply to city, county, state, or federal officials acting in the discharge of their official duties or enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2246, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 16-180. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2246, 10-17-95)  
Chapter 18 - TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 9; nuisances, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; police, ch. 13; traffic, ch. 19; zoning, app. A; traffic schedules, app. C. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate taxicabs, G.S. 160A-304. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the taxicab inspector authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the City of Asheville. 
Driver's permit means the license issued by the taxicab inspector to any person to enable that person to drive a taxicab vehicle upon the streets of the City of Asheville. 
Exclusive-ride service means the operation of a taxicab by transporting one passenger, or a group of passengers, from one trip origin to one destination and not allowing additional passengers to board until the prescribed destination is reached. 
For-hire vehicle means and includes any full sized station wagon or van style vehicle, not equipped with a taximeter, used for the purpose of transporting passengers for a set charge or fee, based upon the origin or destination requested. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "for-hire vehicle" shall not include "taxicab" or "limousine" as herein defined. 
Insignia means a non-transferable dated window decal to provide exterior identification that a particular taxicab has a valid certificate associated with it. 
Limousine means and includes a full size chauffeur-driven sedan, often equipped with a glass partition separating the driver and passenger compartments, which is not equipped with a taximeter, and for which set charges or fees for use are based on the period of hours or days the vehicle is used and not on the number of miles operated or the origin or destination requested. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "limousine" shall not include "for-hire vehicle" or "taxicab" as herein defined. 
Manifest means a daily record, prepared by the owner, of all trips made by the taxicab(s) which the owner operates, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the amount of fare. 
Owner/holder means any person, firm or corporation to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued under this chapter. 
Shared-ride service means the operation of a taxicab by transporting passengers from one or several difference origins to one or several different destinations, not necessarily using the most direct route, but using a route that will allow the driver to deviate in order to pick up or discharge passengers other than, and in addition to, the first or original passenger. 
Taxicab means and includes any motor driven vehicle, seating nine or fewer passengers, for which public patronage is solicited and which calculates the fare by means of a taximeter. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "taxicab" shall not include "limousine" or "for-hire vehicle" as herein defined. 
Taxicab inspector means the person designated by the city manager, or his designee, who is charged with the duties required under this chapter, including the inspection and licensing of taxicabs, and the drivers thereof. 
Taximeter means any mechanical or electrical device which records and indicates a charge or fare calculated according to distance traveled, waiting time, traffic delay, initial charge, number of passengers, and other charges authorized by this chapter, or any combination of any of the foregoing. 
(Code 1965, § 27-1; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-2. - Penalties. 
Any person, owner or driver who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days. If the person violating any provision of this chapter is a corporation, any officer, agent or employee thereof who shall violate or procure, aid or abet any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the same penalties as if he himself had committed such violation, to the extent permitted by law. The taxicab inspector may suspend or revoke any certificate or driver's permit held by any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-3. - Taxicab equipment. 
Every vehicle used as a taxicab within the city shall display at all times a valid North Carolina safety inspection sticker. In addition, each vehicle shall: 
(1)  Have a body of a sedan or enclosed-type vehicle and shall be of not less than four passenger capacity. 
(2)  Have doors leading into the passenger's compartment and into the driver's compartment which are so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the outside. 
(3)  Have all windows, vents, and doors in proper working condition. 
(4)  Be equipped with a heater sufficient to heat the interior of the taxicab adequately in cold weather, and an air conditioner sufficient to cool the interior in hot weather. 
(5)  Have all windshields and side and rear glass free from discoloration, without hazardous cracks, and clear of dirt or obstructions to clear view. 
(6)  Have front and rear bumpers in proper repair. 
(7)  When required by section 18-39, be equipped with a two-way radio or other device which will allow the taxicab to have direct communication for immediate dispatching. 
(8)  Be equipped with a card frame permanently mounted to be visible to patrons for display of the owner's certificate (or a copy of such certificate) driver's permit, and fare schedule. 
(9)  Be equipped with the number of seat belts required by G.S. ch. 20 and have such seat belts readily available for use by passengers. 
(10)  Be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. 
(11)  Be equipped with standard sized wheels and tires. 
(12)  Be equipped with a taximeter of a size and design approved by the taxicab inspector. The taximeter shall be attached to and located within the taxicab so as to be in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, operated either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels of the taxicab by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. For the purposes of this chapter, for-hire vehicles shall be specifically exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(13)  Be equipped with a top light so designed that it will be illuminated only when the headlights are illuminated. For the purposes of this chapter, for-hire vehicles shall be specifically exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(14)  Be equipped with all safety devices in proper working order as designed by the original equipment manufacturer. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-6, 27-67, 27-69; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-4. - Condition and maintenance of taxicabs. 
Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The owner and driver shall keep the body of the taxicab, both interior and exterior, safe and clean and its general appearance with respect to sheet metal and finish of car, normal wear and tear exempted. In addition, when any taxicab is wrecked, or damaged so as to be unsafe for taxicab operation, the owner and/or driver shall make such repairs and alterations as may be required and shall not operate, or cause or permit to be operated, any such taxicab until such repairs and alterations have been completed and the taxicab inspector has re-inspected the vehicle for compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 27-5; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-5. - Application of provisions to for-hire vehicles. 
Unless otherwise provided, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to for-hire vehicles and the owners and operators thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-6. - Provisions not applicable to limousines. 
No provision of this chapter shall apply to limousines or to the owners or operators thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-7. - Duty to comply with law. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner and driver of a taxicab to comply with the laws of the state and this Code and to ensure that every taxicab is operated with due regard to the safety, comfort and convenience of the passengers, for the safe and careful transportation of property and for the safety of the general public. 
(b)  No taxicab shall be operated at a rate of speed greater than that established by state law or this Code nor in any event without proper regard for the traffic, surface or width of the highway and the hazard at intersections and any other conditions then existing nor in such manner or condition as to endanger or to be likely to endanger the safety of passengers, pedestrians, vehicles or the person and property of others. 
(Code 1965, § 27-2; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-8. - Inspection of vehicles required. 
(a)  Before the use and operation of any taxicab under this chapter, said vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the fleet management division of the city and found to be in compliance with the requirements of section 18-33 and the state's vehicle safety inspection requirements. In addition, every taxicab operated pursuant to a valid certificate shall be re-inspected annually by the fleet management division of the city to insure continued compliance with the requirements of this chapter. All required inspections shall be by appointment only. 
(b)  If, after inspection, any vehicle is found to be unsafe or not to conform with this chapter, written notice shall be given by the taxicab inspector to the certificate holder and such vehicle shall not thereafter be operated as a taxicab until the taxicab inspector determines upon re-inspection that the vehicle has been placed back into safe condition for operating or into conformity with this chapter. Upon failure of a vehicle to pass re-inspection within 30 days, the provisions of section 18-18 shall apply. Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve any owner or driver of any vehicle from all or any duties imposed by law, nor to relieve such owner or driver from liability resulting from the unfitness of such vehicles or the negligent operation thereof. 
(c)  Each approved taxicab shall have affixed to the lower left side of the rear glass, a City of Asheville insignia, issued by the taxicab inspector. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-5, 27-6; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-9. - Taxicab inspector. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of taxicab inspector who shall be designated by the city manager. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector is charged with the duties required under this chapter and in general shall be responsible for the inspection of taxicabs and the licensing of the drivers thereof. 
(c)  The taxicab inspector shall advise the city manager with respect to matters covered or incidentally involved in the operation or administration of this chapter. In addition, he or she shall make annual reports to the city manager that include the number of certificates and driver's permits issued, amended, retired, revoked or suspended under this chapter. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-3—27-5; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-10. - Conduct of drivers. 
(a)  No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger or prospective passenger as to the passenger's destination or rate of fare to be charged nor shall he convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger to a place other than directed by the passenger. No driver providing taxicab service shall take a longer route to the requested destination than is necessary, unless he is so requested by the passenger, except for shared ride service as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  While any passenger is being carried in a taxicab, no driver shall have in his possession a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe, without consent of the passenger. 
(c)  No driver shall park, stand or operate a taxicab at any time in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of traffic. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit drivers from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers and their belongings into or out of taxicabs. 
(d)  No driver shall park or stand a taxicab upon any public street or public ground in the city for the purpose of receiving calls, directions or instructions over the dispatch system, except in areas that the city may subsequently establish as taxicab stands and those areas where parking is not regulated. 
(e)  No driver shall allow the seating capacity of his taxicab to be exceeded, including driver, with the exception that rear seat passengers may hold children in their arms. 
(f)  If agreed to by the first passenger, a taxicab may answer other calls or pick up additional passengers prior to taking the first passenger to his destination, provided the first passenger agrees to the amount of additional time above the time normally required for the exclusive ride service as estimated in advance by the driver. Taxicab drivers shall specify, as provided in section 18-15, any fare discounts to passengers participating in shared ride service. If a child under 16 years of age and unaccompanied by a person 16 years or age or older is the original passenger, no other passengers shall be permitted in the taxicab. 
(g)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any person because of the person's race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age or handicap. 
(h)  Drivers shall be clean in dress and in person. 
(i)  No driver shall be under the influence of drugs or alcohol which impairs judgment, performance or behavior while on duty. 
(j)  The driver shall inspect each taxicab daily for articles left by passengers and make every reasonable effort to return such to the rightful owners as soon as possible after their discovery. 
(k)  When requested by a passenger, every driver shall give a receipt showing the company's name, driver's name, date, place and time of trip, origin and destination and the amount of fare charged. 
(l)  No driver shall monitor the dispatch frequencies of other taxicab businesses. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-10, 27-12, 27-15, 27-16; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-11. - Accident reports. 
Every accident involving the operation of a taxicab shall be reported to the taxicab inspector within 48 hours of the accident, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. The certificate holder for the taxicab involved in an accident and the driver of the taxicab so involved shall be jointly and individually responsible for making the required report, which report shall be on a form to be furnished by the taxicab inspector. Upon receipt of the report, the taxicab inspector shall determine whether the damage renders he vehicle unsafe for operation and, if so, shall immediately order the vehicle out of service until repaired and re-inspected. 
(Code 1965, § 27-19; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-12. - Owner's manifest. 
(a)  A daily manifest shall be maintained by the owner of each taxicab noting all trips made each day, showing the driver's name, cab number, place and time of origin and destination of each trip and the amount of fare. 
(b)  Every owner shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least 180 days and such manifests shall be made available upon demand for inspection by the taxicab inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 27-18(a), (b); Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-13. - Identification of taxicabs. 
Each owner of a taxicab business shall identify its vehicles as follows: 
(1)  The name identifying the owner, (i.e. taxicab company) taxicab number, and telephone number(s) shall be legibly and visibly affixed to both sides of each cab with letter and numbers not less than three inches high and with a cab number at rear of at least three inches high. 
(2)  Colors of paint to be used for lettering and numbering shall be of sharp contrast with color(s) of surface paint so as to be visible at a reasonable distance. Each vehicle shall be painted, lettered and numbered consistent with all other vehicles of the same company. 
(Code 1965, § 27-7; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-14. - Depots or terminals. 
Each depot or terminal used by a certificate holder for his taxicab shall: 
(1)  Be used in compliance with zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Be kept in a clean, safe and sanitary condition; and 
(3)  Have sufficient private off-street parking to accommodate those vehicles owned, operated and controlled by the certificate holder during times of nonuse. 
(Code 1965, § 27-12; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-15. - Fares prescribed. 
(a)  No person shall fix or charge a greater or lesser rate of fare for taxicab service, than as established and adopted from time to time by the city council, and as set forth in appendix F of this Code. For the purposes of this chapter, for-hire vehicles shall be specifically exempt from such rate schedule. 
(b)  Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called or the time consumed while standing or waiting at the direction of the passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost for insufficiency or breakdown of the taxicab or for time consumed by premature response to a call. 
(c)  There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab a card showing the rates charged by the taxicab. 
(d)  Reduced fares for shared ride service shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges as adopted by city council from time to time. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person requesting and receiving taxicab service to refuse to pay the fare established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-8, 27-9, 27-11; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Related laws reference— Authority to regulate taxicab fares, § 13.  
Secs. 18-16—18-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 18-36. - Required. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, no person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as such upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  A person driving a taxicab for which no city certificate or driver's permit has been issued and which is operated from a place of business not in the city may bring passengers into the city, but shall not solicit any passengers for any destination within or without the city. 
(c)  All certificates or other valid permission to operate issued by the city existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall remain valid until suspended, revoked or retired pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Upon proof of compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter by a certificate holder holding a certificate on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-20, 27-31, 27-35; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-37. - Authority to issue. 
(a)  The city council may, by appropriate action, limit the total number of taxicab certificates to be granted. A certificate, whether or not limited in number, shows that by its issuance the convenience and necessity of the public requires the operation of such taxicabs. 
(b)  The city council authorizes the taxicab inspector to issue a certificate to any applicant subject to such conditions as the city council may deem advisable or necessary in the public interest and upon payment of a licensing fee provided by section 18-48. Each certificate shall be issued with an anniversary date of December 31 or June 30 of the year following its date of issue and shall remain valid until retired, revoked or suspended. Certificates originally issued from January 1 through June 30 shall have an anniversary date of December 31 commencing the same year. Certificates originally issued from July 1 through December 31 shall have an anniversary date of June 31 commencing the next ensuing year. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, no certificate shall be issued to any person who fails to fully comply with all of the prerequisite requirements of this article prior to the commencement or continuation of the operation of the proposed or current service. 
(Code 1965, § 27-33; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-38. - Application. 
An application for a taxicab certificate, including any amendments thereto and including applications for transfer of certificates, shall be filed with the taxicab inspector upon forms provided by the city. Such application and amendments shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if an applicant is: 
a.  A corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation; 
b.  An association, a certified copy of the bylaws of the association; or 
c.  A partnership, a certified copy of the partnership agreement. 
(2)  The number of vehicles to be owned, operated and controlled by the applicant, including the make, type, year of manufacture, serial number and passenger capacity of each taxicab; provided, however, the number of vehicles to be owned, operated and controlled shall not be less than three. This vehicle number requirement shall not apply to existing certificate holders on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(3)  The proposed hours of operation. 
(4)  The applicant's complete record of criminal arrests and convictions, including those for traffic violations, during the past five years. If an applicant is a corporation, association or partnership, the criminal record of the officers, directors, partners and supervising employees thereof, including general manager, if any. 
(5)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(6)  The location of a depot or terminal on private property that is in compliance with city zoning ordinance and which has sufficient private off-street parking to accommodate those vehicles to be owned, operated and controlled by the applicant during times of nonuse. 
(7)  The ability to provide dispatch taxi service with centralized dispatching through the use of a radio or other device when the requested number of taxicabs is less than ten; the ability to provide 24-hour dispatch taxi service with centralized dispatching when the requested number of taxicabs is to exceed ten. 
(8)  The ability to provide adequate supervision of taxicabs and drivers operating under the certificate. 
(9)  An assurance that the telephone number of the taxicab company will be listed in the next city telephone directory issued. 
(10)  An assurance that the applicant will meet the insurance requirements of this chapter. 
(11)  An assurance that each vehicle operating under the certificate shall be kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good physical condition at all times. 
Failure to furnish required or requested information shall be grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of certificates. 
(Code 1965, § 27-32; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-39. - Issuance. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 18-37, upon concurrence of the city manager, the taxicab inspector shall issue to every person who has filed application therefor a certificate for such taxicab, subject to the conditions this chapter may require, provided: 
(1)  The vehicle for which application for a certificate is made shall have been found, after investigation of the taxicab inspector, to be in strict compliance with this chapter. 
(2)  The applicant has not, within the last five years, been convicted of a felony involving bodily injury or the use of a deadly weapon; of a violation of any federal, state or local statute, regulation or ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages; of laws against driving while intoxicated by alcohol or other substances; of any law relating to prostitution; or of any law relating to the use, possession or sale of any drugs or chemicals which are controlled substances. However, this shall not apply to anyone holding a valid certificate on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(3)  The applicant has eight or less accrued points for motor vehicle violations pursuant to G.S. 20-16 during the past two years; provided, however, this shall not apply to any holder of a valid certificate on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(4)  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article, including but not limited to the provision of: 
a.  A minimum of three vehicles to be owned and operated by the applicant. This shall not apply to existing owners with less than three vehicles in operation as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
b.  A depot or terminal on private property which is in compliance with city zoning ordinance and has sufficient private off-street parking to accommodate the number of vehicles to be owned, operated and controlled by the applicant during times of nonuse. 
c.  Dispatch service with centralized dispatching through the use of a radio or other device when the number of taxicabs authorized is less than ten and 24-hour dispatch service with centralized dispatching when the number of taxicabs authorized exceeds ten. 
d.  Adequate supervision of taxicabs and drivers. 
e.  Assurance that the telephone number for the taxicab company will be listed in the next city telephone directory issued. 
f.  Compliance with the insurance requirements of this chapter. 
g.  Assurance that each vehicle operating under the certificate shall be kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good physical condition at all times. 
(5)  The issuance is not in conflict with such conditions as placed by city council on the issuance of certificates. 
(b)  Any certificate issued or a legible copy of such certificate shall be prominently displayed in each taxicab associated with it. 
(Code 1965, § 27-34; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-40. - Expiration. 
All taxicab certificates shall be valid until retired, revoked or suspended; provided, however, that each certificate holder shall furnish application amendments as required by section 18-41 in addition to any applicable fee pursuant to section 18-48. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-41. - Application amendment. 
Each holder of a taxicab certificate shall receive a yearly application amendment to be filed with the taxicab inspector within 30 days of its receipt. Application amendments shall also be filed by each certificate holder at any time the application information is changed, including the addition, retirement or replacement of a taxicab. Upon receipt of such amendments, the taxicab inspector shall verify the certificate holder's continued eligibility pursuant to section 18-39. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-42. - Transfer. 
No taxicab certificate, including certificates existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, shall be transferred except upon application by the transferee to the taxicab inspector, with the transferee meeting all requirements of this chapter, including the requirements of section 18-39. For corporations, a transfer of in excess of one-half of the outstanding shares of stock shall constitute a transfer. For a partnership or association, the admission of a new partner or associate shall constitute a transfer. 
(Code 1965, § 27-36; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-43. - Application amendment for additional, retired or replaced taxicabs. 
Prior to operating additional or replaced taxicabs in connection with a certificate, the certificate holder shall file an application amendment with the taxicab inspector. In addition, a certificate holder who permanently retires any or all of the taxicabs associated with a certificate shall, within ten days of the vehicle's retirement, file an application amendment with the taxicab inspector. Upon receipt of such amendments, the taxicab inspector shall update the certificate holder's application and remove the medallion affixed to any retired or replaced vehicle and affix a medallion to the exterior of each new taxicab associated with the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-44. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every owner of every taxicab engaged in the business of transporting passengers in the city shall secure and keep in effect for each taxicab operated a policy of liability and property damage insurance with a company duly authorized to do business in the state in an amount not less than that required by G.S. 20-280. Such policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his servants or agents. A certificate of insurance certifying such coverage shall be filed in the office of the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company issuing the policy required by this section shall give the taxicab inspector not less than 30 days' advance written notice of any cancellation, reduction in coverage or other material change in the policy. 
(c)  Every certificate holder shall, upon the receipt of any notice of cancellation of the insurance required by this section, immediately notify the taxicab inspector of such cancellation. Continued operation of the taxicab associated with the cancelled insurance shall result in the immediate suspension of the owner's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00) 
State Law reference— Financial responsibility of taxicab operators, G.S. 20-280.  
Sec. 18-45. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The taxicab inspector shall suspend for a period not to exceed six months a taxicab certificate, either wholly or for any given number of taxicabs, for the failure of the certificate holder or certificate holder's driver to substantially comply with all the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the certificate holder may correct a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within ten days following notice of violation from the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector shall revoke for a period of one year a certificate, either wholly or for any given number of taxicabs, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The certificate holder's certificate has been suspended twice within a 13-month period. 
(2)  The certificate holder is convicted of: 
a.  A felony involving bodily injury or use of a deadly weapon; 
b.  A violation of any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to the possession or sale of alcoholic beverages; 
c.  A violation of any federal or state statute or regulation or city ordinance relating to prostitution; or 
d.  Any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of drugs. 
(3)  The taxicab inspector finds that the certificate holder submitted or caused to be submitted false or misleading information on the application for a certificate or any required amendment. 
(c)  No certificate may be revoked or suspended until the taxicab inspector has conducted a hearing thereon. The holder of the certificate shall have the right to be present at the hearing and shall be given at least 48 hours' advance notice thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 27-37; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-46. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the taxicab inspector that a taxicab certificate should be suspended or revoked pursuant to section 18-45, the certificate holder shall be given written notification thereof and informed of the manner in which the finding may be appealed by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The certificate holder may appeal the suspension or revocation of a certificate by filing with the city manager, within ten working days after receipt of the taxicab inspector's decision, a written notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall set forth the reasons why the certificate holder believes the suspension or revocation to be improper. If no appeal is filed within the prescribed time, the decision of the taxicab inspector shall be final and the certificate holder shall immediately surrender the certificate to the taxicab inspector. 
(c)  Upon timely receipt of a notice of appeal, the city manager shall fix a reasonable time, within ten working days after the receipt thereof, for a hearing of an appeal and shall give notice to all parties of the time and place for a hearing. The city manager shall convene an advisory committee to assist him in resolving the appeal. The advisory committee shall consist of the taxicab inspector and another certificate holder. Within ten working days after the date of the hearing, the city manager shall render a decision on the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1965, § 27-37; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-47. - Surrender. 
When a taxicab certificate is revoked or suspended, the operation of each vehicle as a taxicab subject to such revocation or suspension shall cease, and the certificate and insignia for such vehicle shall be surrendered immediately to the taxicab inspector. In addition, when any certificate holder permanently retires all vehicles subject to a certificate, the certificate for such vehicles shall be considered abandoned and will be void. The certificate holder shall immediately surrender each certificate and insignia to the taxicab inspector. Such retired certificates may not be restored by any means other than through application for a new certificate as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 27-37(c); Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-48. - Fees. 
Fees, as established by the city council and listed in the fees and charges manual, to cover the administrative costs of a certificate and any amendments thereto shall be paid to the taxicab inspector at the time the application and its amendments are filed. Other fees as permitted by state law may be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Secs. 18-49—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate taxicab drivers, G.S. 20-37. 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Required. 
No person shall drive a taxicab within the city without first having obtained a taxicab driver's permit from the taxicab inspector. An identification card shall be issued as evidence of the permit. The card shall be approximately four inches by five inches in size and shall contain the name and photograph of the permit holder and the permit number. Each driver, while on duty, shall display his permit card in a frame in the taxicab he is driving in such a manner as to be in full view of all passengers at all times. The driver shall retain custody of it and present it on demand for inspection by any passenger or law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1965, § 27-48; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-72. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Each applicant for a driver's permit shall make application to the taxicab inspector on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The full name, age, date of birth, place of birth, and current address of the applicant. 
(2)  The length of time of the applicant's residence in the city and in the state and whether or not he is a citizen of the United States. 
(3)  The applicant's physical condition, including the extent of his present and prior use within the past three years of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages and narcotics and barbiturate drugs. 
(4)  The applicant's physical description, including age, race, height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(5)  The applicant's place(s) of residence and employment for the two years immediately preceding the date of application and his previous experience in driving taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles carrying passengers. 
(6)  The applicant's complete record of criminal arrests and convictions, including those for traffic violations, during the past five years. 
(7)  The number and date of issuance of the applicant's North Carolina driver's license. A copy of the license will be made and become part of the applicant's records. 
(b)  Each applicant shall have color photographs of front view made in the collections division office. The fee for the photographs is established in the fees and charges manual. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant to willfully include, or willfully cause to be included, a false statement in his or her application for a driver's permit. 
(Code 1965, § 27-49; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-73. - Qualifications of applicants. 
The taxicab inspector shall not issue or renew a driver's permit unless the applicant for such permit meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  Not suffer from epilepsy, vertigo, heart disease, or any other physical or mental condition which renders him or her unfit for safe operation of a taxicab. 
(3)  Be able to speak the English language. 
(4)  Have a current and valid North Carolina driver's license. 
(5)  Have permission from a certificate holder or designee (designee must be authorized by sworn affidavit from owner) to operate a taxicab under the certificate of public convenience and necessity and certificate of insurance issued to that holder. Permission shall be in the form of certificate of permission to operate signed by taxicab owner and witnessed by city collections staff. 
(6)  The applicant has eight or less accrued points for motor vehicle violations pursuant to N.C. General Statute section 20-16 during the past two years. 
(Code 1965, § 27-50; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-74. - Refusal. 
The taxicab inspector shall refuse to grant or renew a taxicab driver's permit for any applicant: 
(1)  Whose state driver's license has been revoked or suspended. However, unless otherwise provided, for a state license revocation or suspension a taxicab driver's permit may be granted or renewed at the end of the revocation or suspension period. 
(2)  Who has committed, been convicted of or pleaded guilty or no contest to, within three years immediately prior to the date of application, any of the following: 
a.  Any crime involving the driving of a vehicle resulting in death to any person. 
b.  A felony involving bodily injury or the use of a deadly weapon; violation of any federal, state or local statute, regulation or ordinance relating to prostitution; any law relating to the use, possession or sale of any drugs or chemicals which are controlled substances. However, this shall not apply to anyone holding a valid permit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
c.  Any offense involving the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, wherein a taxicab is involved. 
d.  Driving while impaired on more than one occasion within the three-year period. 
e.  Driving while impaired at any time while operating a taxicab or other public conveyance. 
(3)  Who does not fulfill the qualifications set forth in section 18-73. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-75. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon finding that an applicant has satisfactorily complied with the provisions of this chapter, the taxicab inspector shall issue a privilege license and a driver's permit. The driver's permit shall show the applicant's photograph, name, height, weight, age, the expiration date, and the certificate holder for whom the driver will be employed, and such permit will be valid for one year from the date of issue. 
(b)  A driver's permit may be renewed one year from the initial date of issue provided the driver meets the requirements of section 18-73. 
(c)  The driver's permit must be displayed at all times in a card frame attached to the glove compartment or dash on the right side in the driver's taxicab. No driver shall operate a taxicab for any certificate holder other than the certificate holder shown on his driver's permit and upon termination of such employment the driver shall surrender the permit to the taxicab inspector within 48 hours thereof. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-52, 27-55, 27-54; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-76. - Fees. 
Fees to cover the administrative costs of the driver's permit, as established by the city council and listed in the Fees and Charges Manual, shall be paid to the taxicab inspector at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1965, § 27-51; Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00) 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing fees, G.S. 20-87.  
Sec. 18-77. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  At any time after the issuance of a taxicab driver's permit, the taxicab inspector shall suspend the permit for a period not to exceed six months if: 
(1)  He finds the permit holder fails to substantially comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The driver's permit has been suspended twice within a 12-month period. 
(3)  The driver accrued more than eight points for motor vehicle violations pursuant to G.S. 20-16 within any two-year period. 
(4)  He finds that the permit holder made a false statement or gave false information in the application or its update for a driver's permit. 
(b)  At any time after the issuance of a driver's permit, the taxicab inspector shall revoke for a period of one year the permit if he finds the permit holder has since the date of issuance been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty or no contest to any of the following: 
(1)  A felony involving bodily injury or the use of a deadly weapon; a violation of any federal or state statute or regulation or city ordinance relating to prostitution; or any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of drugs. 
(2)  A crime involving the driving of a vehicle resulting in death. 
(3)  Impaired driving on more than one occasion while off duty within any two-year period. 
(c)  At any time after the issuance of a driver's permit, the taxicab inspector shall revoke the permit for a period of five years if he finds that the permit holder has since the date of issuance been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty or no contest to any of the following. 
(1)  A felony involving the use of a vehicle. 
(2)  Any law relating to the possession, use or sale of alcoholic beverages wherein a vehicle is involved. 
(3)  Impaired driving involving the use of a taxicab or other public conveyance. 
(d)  No permit may be revoked or suspended until the taxicab inspector has conducted a hearing thereon. The holder of the permit shall have the right to be present at the hearing and shall be given at least 48 hours' advance notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-78. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon a determination by the taxicab inspector to suspend, revoke or refuse to issue or renew a taxicab driver's permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notification thereof and informed of the manner in which the finding may be appealed by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The applicant or permit holder may appeal the refusal to issue or renew, suspension or revocation of a permit by filing with the city manager, within ten working days after receipt of the taxicab inspector's decision, written notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall set forth the reasons why the failure to issue or renew, suspension or revocation is improper. If no appeal is filed within the prescribed time, the decision of the taxicab inspector shall be final and a permit holder shall immediately surrender the permit to the taxicab inspector. 
(c)  Upon timely receipt of a notice of appeal, the city manager shall fix a reasonable time, within ten working days after the receipt thereof, for the hearing of an appeal and shall give notice to all parties of the time and place for a hearing. The city manager shall convene an advisory committee to assist him in resolving the appeal. The advisory committee shall consist of the taxicab inspector and another certificate holder. Within ten working days after the date of the hearing, the city manager shall render a decision on the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-79. - Surrender. 
When a taxicab driver's permit is suspended or revoked, the permit holder shall immediately surrender the permit to the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1661, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00)  
Sec. 18-80. - Ordinance reviews. 
Ordinance reviews shall at a minimum be conducted in odd numbered years beginning with 2007. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 3365, § 1, 6-13-06)  
Secs. 18-81—18-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 18-91—18-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4497, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 2015, repealed Art. IV, §§ 18-91—18-120, which pertained to operation of horse-drawn carriages. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Art. IV.  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 11; police, ch. 13; taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; traffic schedules, app. C. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions applicable to motor vehicles as set out in G.S. 20-4.01 are incorporated by reference and made a part of this Code as if fully set out verbatim. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-2. - Obedience to police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer given pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-3)  
Sec. 19-3. - Authority of police and firefighters to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic of the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-4) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate and control pedestrian and vehicular traffic, G.S. 160A-300.  
Sec. 19-4. - Riding on handlebars, frame or tank of bicycle or motorcycle. 
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any other person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-5)  
Sec. 19-5. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall attach himself or his vehicle to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-6)  
Sec. 19-6. - Use of skateboards, roller skates, coasters or toy vehicles on roadways. 
No person upon a skateboard, roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-7)  
Sec. 19-7. - Use of skateboards, roller skates or coasters on sidewalks. 
No person shall engage in roller coasting, skate- boarding or roller skating on any sidewalk in a business district. 
(Code 1965, § 28-7.1)  
Sec. 19-8. - Quiet zones. 
(a)  All of the territory within 200 feet of the premises of each hospital in this city is hereby created and established as a zone of quiet. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect and maintain, within this area, such signs and markings as are necessary to designate it as a zone of quiet. 
(b)  The traffic engineer may temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any street where a person is seriously ill, if requested to do so by the written statement of at least one registered physician certifying to its necessity. Such temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory within a radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by the person named in the request of the physician. Such temporary zones of quiet shall be designated by the traffic engineer by placing, at a conspicuous place in the street, a sign or marker bearing the words "quiet zone." 
(c)  No person operating a motor vehicle within any designated and signed zone of quiet shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency, nor shall any person make any loud or unusual noise or play any music within or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in any such zone of quiet. 
(Code 1965, § 28-9) 
Cross reference— Excessive noise prohibited, § 10-81.  
Sec. 19-9. - Applicability to drivers of government vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-168.  
Sec. 19-10. - Applicability to authorized emergency vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, may: 
(1)  Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Disregard regulations governing direction or movement or turning in specified directions, so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
These exemptions shall not protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1965, § 28-11)  
Sec. 19-11. - Applicability to persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or driving or riding animals. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1965, § 28-12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-171.  
Sec. 19-12. - Use of blue signal lights on police emergency vehicles. 
Vehicles of the city police department and any private vehicles used by police department personnel and approved by the traffic engineer that are subject to emergency travel shall be equipped with blue emergency signal lights. No other privately owned emergency vehicle authorized under this chapter shall be equipped with or use blue emergency signal lights. 
(Code 1965, § 28-13)  
Sec. 19-13. - Accident reports. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in a collision resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of the collision to the police department, if the collision occurs within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the driver of any motor vehicle which collides with another motor vehicle left parked or unattended on any street or highway in the city shall immediately report the collision to the owner of such parked or unattended motor vehicle. Such report shall include the time, date and place of the collision and the driver's name, address, operator's or chauffeur's license number and the registration number of the vehicle being operated by the driver at the time of the collision. Such report may be oral or in writing. If the driver is, for any reason, unable to make the report required by this subsection, such driver shall make and file a report of the collision in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as in the case of a collision as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Any report made pursuant to this subsection shall be competent in any civil action for the sole purpose of establishing the identity of the person operating the moving vehicle at the time of colliding with the parked or unattended vehicle. 
(c)  The police department may require the driver of a vehicle involved in a collision which is required to be reported by this section to file a supplemental report when the original report is insufficient, in the opinion of the department, and the department may require witnesses of a collision to render reports. 
(Code 1965, § 28-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-166.1.  
Sec. 19-14. - Penalties. 
Civil penalties as set forth in Appendix B of this Code shall be assessed for the violation of the provisions of sections 19-16, 19-137, 19-138, 19-139, 19-140, 19-143, and 19-144 of this chapter. All other violations of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1965, § 28-159; Ord. No. 1981, 8-25-92; Ord. No. 2024, § 1(b), 4-27-93; Ord. No. 4715, § 3, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 19-15. - Appeals. 
The city manager shall establish an appeals process for persons contesting any civil penalty issued by a city employee pursuant to the chapter. Civil penalties must be appealed to the city manager or an office or official designated by the city manager within fifteen days of the issuance of the late notice. 
(Ord. No. 3007, § 1, 3-25-03)  
Sec. 19-16. - E-scooters and e-scooter share programs. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
E-scooter shall mean any two-wheeled device capable of propulsion by a motor or other power source with handlebars and a floorboard designed to be stood upon when riding. This device may also have a seat that does not interfere with the ability of the rider to stand and ride. This definition shall not include motorcycles, mopeds, or Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices as defined by the North Carolina General Statutes. 
E-scooter share operator means an individual or a public, private, or non-profit entity that owns, manages or operates a system whereby e-scooters are parked, placed, stored, exhibited, demonstrated, sold, rented or offered for rent on public sidewalks and right-of-ways to customers on a self-service basis through an electronic platform. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park, place, store, exhibit, demonstrate, sell, rent or offer to sell or rent any e-scooter on any street, sidewalk, square, avenue, alley or within any park or other publicly owned property within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any e-scooter share operator to permit an e-scooter it owns or leases to be parked, placed, stored, exhibited, demonstrated, sold, rented or offered for sale or rent on any street, sidewalk, square, avenue, alley or within any park or other publicly owned property within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate an e-scooter on any public street, sidewalk, alley, bridge or other way of public passage or within any park or on any other public property within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any e-scooter share operator to permit an e-scooter it owns or leases to be operated on any public street, sidewalk, alley, bridge or other way of public passage or within any park or on any other public property within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $100.00 per occurrence, to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days of receiving a notice of violation. This penalty shall be in addition to any penalty imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. 
(g)  This section may be enforced by any city department or employee as designated by the city manager, who shall be authorized to remove any e-scooter found to be in violation of this section from any sidewalk, square, park or other public property without prior notice. 
(h)  Any e-scooter removed from city property pursuant to subsection (g) shall be returned to its owner upon the city receiving adequate proof of ownership. If an e-scooter removed from city property remains unclaimed after a period of 60 days, it will be deemed abandoned, and may be disposed of in any manner permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 4715, § 1, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 19-17—19-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-36. - Driving on right side of highway; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all streets and highways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the highway except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway, provided any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a highway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a highway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all streets and highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the legal maximum speed limit shall be driven in the righthand lane then available for through traffic or as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the highway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn. 
(c)  Upon any street or highway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the highway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the highway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Whenever any street has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent with this section shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a street which is divided into three or more lanes and provides for the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance or in the preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by an official traffic control device. 
(3)  Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the street, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such device. 
(4)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of streets, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, when appropriate signs have been posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle over and upon the inside lane, next to the median of any dual-lane highway at a speed less than the posted speed limit when the operation of the motor vehicle over and upon the inside lane shall impede the steady flow of traffic, except when preparing for a left turn. The term "appropriate signs," as used in this section, shall be construed as including "slower traffic keep right" or designations of similar import. 
(Code 1965, § 28-28) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-146.  
Sec. 19-37. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1965, § 28-29) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-148.  
Sec. 19-38. - Overtaking vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at least two feet to the left thereof and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle. This subsection shall not apply when the overtaking and passing is done pursuant to the provisions of section 19-40. 
(b)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-30) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-149.  
Sec. 19-39. - Limitations on overtaking and passing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the center of a highway, in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction upon the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed within a distance of 500 feet. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any railway grade crossing nor at any intersection of highway unless permitted to do so by a traffic or police officer. For the purposes of this section the words "intersection of highway" shall be defined and limited to intersections designated and marked by the state department of transportation by appropriate signs and street intersections. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the centerline of a highway upon the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where such centerline has been placed upon such highway by the state department of transportation and is visible. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another on any portion of the highway which is marked by signs, markers or markings placed by the state department of transportation stating or clearly indicating that passing should not be attempted. 
(f)  The limitations of this section shall not apply upon a one-way street nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left in or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-150.  
Sec. 19-40. - Overtaking and passing on right. 
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is in a lane designated for left turns. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width which has been marked for two or more lanes of moving vehicles in each direction and such lanes are not occupied by parked vehicles. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon a highway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement when such street or highway is free from obstructions and is of sufficient width and is marked for two or more lanes of moving vehicles which are not occupied by parked vehicles. 
(4)  When driving in a lane designating a right turn on a red traffic signal light. 
(Code 1965, § 28-31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-150.1.  
Sec. 19-41. - Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle. 
Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle. The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-151.  
Sec. 19-42. - Turning at intersections. 
(a)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(c)  Modifications. The city traffic engineer may modify the method of turning at intersections by clearly indicating by buttons, markers or other direction signs within an intersection the course to be followed by vehicles turning thereat, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to fail to turn in a manner as so directed. 
(Code 1965, § 28-33) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-153.  
Sec. 19-43. - Prohibited turns. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. No driver of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle contrary to any such sign. 
(Code 1965, § 28-34)  
Sec. 19-44. - Right-of-way—Generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time and traffic at such intersection is not controlled by a traffic control signal or sign, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching but not having entered an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle already within such intersection, whether the vehicle in the intersection is proceeding straight ahead or turning in either direction. This subsection shall not be interpreted as giving the right-of-way to a vehicle already in an intersection when such vehicle is turning either to the right or left, unless the driver has given a plainly visible signal of intention to turn as required in section 19-47. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle approaching but not having entered a traffic circle shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle already within such traffic circle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-155.  
Sec. 19-45. - Same—Left turns. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Code 1965, § 28-36)  
Sec. 19-46. - Yield right-of-way intersections. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate main-traveled or through streets by erecting at the entrance thereto from intersecting streets signs notifying drivers of vehicles to yield the right-of-way to drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection on the main-traveled or through street. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever any such yield right-of-way signs have been so erected, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to enter or cross such main-traveled or through street unless he shall first slow down and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in movement on the main-traveled or through street which is approaching so as to arrive at the intersection at approximately the same time as the vehicle entering the main-traveled or through street. No failure to so yield the right-of-way shall be considered negligence or contributory negligence per se in any action at law for injury to person or property, but the facts relating to such failure to yield the right-of-way may be considered with the other facts in the case in determining whether either party in such action was guilty of negligence or contributory negligence. 
(Code 1965, § 28-37) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-158.1.  
Sec. 19-47. - Signals on starting, stopping or turning. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle upon a highway or public vehicular area before starting, stopping or turning from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in safety and if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement shall give a signal as required in this section, plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle, of the intention to make such movement. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  The signal required in subsection (a) of this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm in the manner specified as follows or by any mechanical or electrical signal device approved by the traffic engineer, except that when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand and arm signal from being visible, both to the front and rear, the signal shall be given by a device of a type which has been approved by the traffic engineer: 
(1)  Whenever the signal is given the driver shall indicate his intention to start, stop or turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle as follows: 
a.  Left turn: hand and arm horizontal, forefinger pointing. 
b.  Right turn: hand and arm pointed upward. 
c.  Stop: hand and arm pointed downward. 
(2)  All hand and arm signals shall be given from the left side of the vehicle and all signals shall be maintained or given continuously for the last 100 feet traveled prior to stopping or making a turn. In all areas where the speed limit is 45 miles per hour or higher and the operator intends to turn from a direct line of travel, a signal of intention to turn from a direct line of travel shall be given continuously during the last 200 feet traveled before turning. 
(3)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with and the required signal shall be given by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles, except combinations operated by farmers in hauling farm products. 
(c)  No person shall operate a righthand-drive motor vehicle or a motor vehicle equipped with the steering mechanism on the righthand side thereof unless the motor vehicle is equipped with mechanical or electrical signal devices by which the signals for left turns and right turns may be given. Such mechanical or electrical devices shall be approved by the traffic engineer. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence per se. 
(Code 1965, § 28-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-154.  
Sec. 19-48. - One-way streets and alleys—Designation and marking. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate streets and alleys or portions thereof whereon vehicular traffic shall be restricted to one direction only. Whenever such a designation is made, signs shall be erected and maintained at every intersection or entrance to such street or alley where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited, which signs shall indicate the direction of lawful traffic movement. 
(Code 1965, § 28-39) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to designate one-way streets, G.S. 20-169.  
Sec. 19-49. - Same—Driving in wrong direction. 
Whenever signs are in place in accord with section 19-48 indicating a one-way street or alley, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in any but the direction indicated for lawful traffic movement. 
(Code 1965, § 28-40)  
Sec. 19-50. - Obstructing intersections or crosswalks. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1965, § 28-4)  
Sec. 19-51. - Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-42)  
Sec. 19-52. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position, unless otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer, until the emergency vehicle has passed. 
(Code 1965, § 28-43) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-157(a).  
Sec. 19-53. - Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire. 
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1965, § 28-44) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-157(b).  
Sec. 19-54. - Driving over fire hose. 
It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle over a fire hose or any other equipment that is being used at a fire at any time or to block a firefighting apparatus or any other equipment from its source of supply regardless of its distance from the fire. 
(Code 1965, § 28-45) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-157(d).  
Sec. 19-55. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not, upon any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 28-46)  
Sec. 19-56. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle into an intersection or over a crosswalk or otherwise back the vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety. 
(Code 1965, § 28-47)  
Sec. 19-57. - Driving through safety zone or on sidewalks. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not at any time drive through or over a safety zone. 
(b)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-48) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-160.  
Sec. 19-58. - Driving on play streets. 
(a)  The traffic engineer may declare any street or part thereof a play street and place appropriate signs in the roadway indicating the play street. When so declared and indicated, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(b)  On those days when conditions are suitable for coasting on snow or ice, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any street or parts of streets when signs are erected giving notice thereof. This subsection shall not prevent the use of any streets by drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such reserved areas, but any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof at any such time. 
(Code 1965, § 28-50)  
Sec. 19-59. - Parking oversize vehicles on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle as described in subsection (b) of this section on any city system streets within the city. 
(b)  A vehicle to which this section shall be applicable shall be a truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer or bus which has a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or which has a length in excess of 270 inches overall or a width in excess of 96 inches. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to permit temporary parking of vehicles as described in subsection (b) of this section on city system streets as he may deem appropriate in connection with construction-related activities. 
(d)  This section shall not be applicable to the following vehicles: 
(1)  A vehicle in the process of being loaded, unloaded or in the performance of service to or for property located on or adjacent to the public street. 
(2)  A vehicle temporarily rendered inoperable by mechanical difficulty for such time necessary to effect necessary repairs, but in no event to exceed three hours. 
(Code 1965, § 28-51; Ord. No. 1697, § 1, 6-28-88)  
Sec. 19-60. - Trucks on residential streets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross vehicle weight (GVW) means the weight of any single axle, tandem axle or axle group of a vehicle or combination of vehicles plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Truck means a vehicle that has any of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating of 10,000 pounds or more. 
(2)  Tandem axle or tri-axle vehicle. 
(3)  Tractor and tandem vehicles when pulling semitrailers or tandem semitrailers. 
(b)  Prohibition. All trucks within the city shall be prohibited from travelling upon designated residential streets as enumerated in the city's traffic schedule printed herein as appendix C. 
(c)  Signs. The city shall clearly post the R5-2 sign, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, along the designated prohibited streets. Such sign shall be as follows: 
 
R5-2 
(d)  The above prohibition is subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Trucks are hereby allowed to travel upon any street which is the exclusive means/route to their point of destination. 
(2)  Trucks are hereby allowed to travel upon any street which is part of a city authorized detour. 
(3)  Authorized emergency vehicles, as such as defined in section 28-1 of this article, are hereby allowed to travel upon any street necessary in the exercise of their duties. 
(4)  Trucks which are owned, operated by or under contract to a public utility, electric, cablevision or telephone corporation or the City of Asheville are hereby allowed to travel upon any street necessary in the installation, restoration or emergency maintenance of utility services. 
(5)  Wrecker vehicles which are towing a disabled vehicle or combination of vehicles in an emergency are hereby allowed to travel upon any street which is en route to the nearest feasible point for parking or storage of the disabled vehicles(s). 
(6)  Vehicles used primarily for the transportation of passengers, provided that said vehicle is traveling upon an established bus route, or has on board passengers for hire. 
(Code 1965, § 28-52; Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 6-30-87; Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 1668, § 1, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 1702, § 1, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 1757, § 1, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1858, § 1, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 2106, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 2330, § 1, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 19-61. - Trucks on designated streets. 
Prohibition. all trucks within the city shall be prohibited from traveling upon designated streets as enumerated in the city's traffic schedule printed herein as Appendix C. Further, such trucks shall be subject to the same provisions of section 19-60 herein. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Secs. 19-62—19-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization of local authorities to control vehicles with reference to highways under their jurisdiction, G.S. 20-158, 20-169. 
 
Sec. 19-81. - Installation and maintenance. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate those intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by official traffic control signals, and he shall install such signals as shall be necessary. The traffic engineer shall also install and maintain such other traffic control devices as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-61)  
Sec. 19-82. - Obedience to devices. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or any pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer then on duty. 
(Code 1965, § 28-62)  
Sec. 19-83. - Signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution" or "stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or go. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn; but vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow alone or caution when shown following the green or go signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering any intersection or the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Red alone or stop. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering any intersection or the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or go is shown alone. After coming to a complete stop for a red light facing the vehicle, the vehicle may make a right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles at all intersections except those designated as follows: 
Cedar Street and Fairview Road. 
College Street and Haywood Street. 
College Street and Lexington Avenue. 
Deaverview Road and Bear Creek Road 
Glendale Avenue and Fairview Road. 
Haywood Street and Montford Avenue. 
Patton Avenue and Coxe Avenue. 
Patton Avenue and North French Broad/South French Broad Avenue 
South French Broad and Hilliard Avenue. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red or other color with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 28-63; Ord. No. 4642, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-18)  
Sec. 19-84. - Vehicle control signs and signals. 
(a)  Authority. The city traffic engineer, with reference to highways and streets under his jurisdiction, is hereby authorized to control vehicles at: 
(1)  Intersections, by erecting or installing stop signs requiring vehicles to come to a complete stop at the entrance to that portion of the intersection designated as the main traveled or through highway. Stop signs may also be erected at three or more entrances to an intersection. 
(2)  Appropriate places other than intersections, by erecting or installing stop signs requiring vehicles to come to a complete stop. 
(3)  Intersections and other appropriate places, by erecting or installing steady-beam stoplights and other traffic control devices, signs or signals. All steady-beam stoplights emitting alternate red and green lights shall be arranged so that the red light shall appear at the top of the signaling unit and the green light shall appear at the bottom of the signaling unit. 
(4)  Intersections and other appropriate places, by erecting or installing flashing red or yellow lights. 
(b)  Control of vehicles at intersections. 
(1)  When a stop sign has been erected or installed at an intersection, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop in obedience thereto and yield the right-of-way to vehicles operating on the designated main-traveled or through highway. When stop signs have been erected at three or more entrances to an intersection, the driver, after stopping in obedience thereto, may proceed with caution. 
(2)  Vehicles facing a red light controlling traffic passing straight through an intersection from a steady or strobe beam stoplight shall not enter the intersection while the steady or strobe beam stoplight is emitting a red light controlling traffic passing straight through an intersection. Except where prohibited by an appropriate sign, vehicular traffic facing a red light controlling traffic passing straight through an intersection, after coming to a complete stop at the intersection, may enter the intersection to make a right turn, but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and to other traffic using the intersection. When the stoplight is emitting a steady yellow circular light on a traffic signal controlling traffic passing straight through an intersection or a steady yellow arrow light on a traffic signal controlling traffic turning at an intersection, vehicles facing the yellow light are warned that the related green light is being terminated or a red light will be immediately forthcoming. When the stoplight is emitting a steady green light, vehicles may proceed with due care through the intersection subject to the rights of pedestrians and other vehicles as may otherwise be provided by law. 
(3)  When a flashing red light has been erected or installed at an intersection, approaching vehicles facing the red light shall stop and yield the right-of-way to vehicles in or approaching the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable to making a stop at a stop sign. 
(4)  When a flashing yellow light has been erected or installed at an intersection, approaching vehicles facing the yellow flashing light may proceed through the intersection with caution, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles in or approaching the intersection. 
(5)  When a stop sign, stoplight, flashing light or other traffic control device authorized by subsection (a) of this section requires a vehicle to stop at an intersection, the driver shall stop at an appropriately marked stop line or, if none, before entering a marked crosswalk or, if none, before entering the intersection at the point nearest the intersecting street where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting street. 
(c)  Control of vehicles at places other than intersections. 
(1)  When a stop sign has been erected or installed at a place other than an intersection, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop in obedience thereto and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(2)  When a stoplight has been erected or installed at a place other than an intersection and is emitting a steady red light, vehicles facing the red light shall come to a complete stop. When the stoplight is emitting a steady yellow light, vehicles facing the light shall be warned that a red light will be immediately forthcoming and that vehicles may not proceed through such a red light. When the stoplight is emitting a steady green light, vehicles may proceed subject to the rights of pedestrians and other vehicles as may otherwise be provided by law. 
(3)  When a flashing red light has been erected or installed at a place other than an intersection, approaching vehicles facing the light shall stop and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or other vehicles. 
(4)  When a flashing yellow light has been erected or installed at a place other than an intersection, approaching vehicles facing the light may proceed with caution, yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(5)  When a stoplight, stop sign or other signaling device authorized by subsection (a) of this section requires a vehicle to stop at a place other than an intersection, the driver shall stop at an appropriately marked stop line or, if none, before entering a marked crosswalk or, if none, before proceeding past the signaling device. 
(d)  Failure to stop. No failure to stop as required by this section shall be considered negligence or contributory negligence per se in any action at law for injury to person or property, but the facts relating to such failure to stop may be considered with the other facts in the case in determining whether a party was guilty of negligence or contributory negligence. 
(Code 1965, § 28-64) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-158.  
Sec. 19-85. - Pedestrians subject to signals. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer, with reference to highways and streets under his jurisdiction, is hereby authorized to erect or install, at intersections or other appropriate places, special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words or symbols "walk" or "don't walk" as a part of a system of traffic control signals or devices. 
(b)  Whenever special pedestrian control signals are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the don't walk signal is showing. 
(c)  Where a system of traffic control signals or devices does not include special pedestrian control signals, pedestrians shall be subject to the vehicular traffic control signals or devices as they apply to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 28-65) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-172.  
Sec. 19-86. - Unauthorized devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street, highway or roadway any sign, signal or device which: 
(1)  Purports to be or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic control sign or signal; 
(2)  Attempts to direct the movement of traffic; or 
(3)  Hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any officially placed sign, signal or device. 
(b)  Any device in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police is hereby ordered to remove the device or cause the device to be removed. 
(Code 1965, § 28-66)  
Sec. 19-87. - Defacing or removing devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, knock down or remove posted, painted or erected signs, signals or devices provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 28-67)  
Secs. 19-88—19-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to G.S. 160A-77, the city has compiled official lists establishing speed limits on various streets and portions of streets, which lists are published herein as appendix C, traffic schedule. 
 
Sec. 19-111. - Reasonable speed; speed limit in business and residential districts. 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway in the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour in any business district or in excess of 35 miles per hour in any residential district. 
(Code 1965, § 28-78)  
Sec. 19-112. - Decreasing speed under certain conditions. 
The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the limits prescribed in this article shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed: 
(1)  When approaching or crossing an intersection; 
(2)  When approaching and going around a curve; 
(3)  When approaching a hillcrest; 
(4)  When traveling upon a narrow or winding roadway; 
(5)  When a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or because of weather or street conditions; 
(6)  As may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street; and 
(7)  To avoid causing injury to any person or property, either on or off the street; 
in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1965, § 28-79) 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions and authority of city relative thereto, G.S. 20-141.  
Sec. 19-113. - Inapplicability of speed limits. 
(a)  The speed limitations set forth in this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Vehicles when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police in the chase or apprehension of violators or suspected violators of the law; 
(2)  Fire department or fire patrol vehicles when traveling in response to a fire alarm; 
(3)  Public or private ambulances when traveling in emergencies; or 
(4)  Vehicles operated by duly authorized officers, agents or employees of the state utilities commission when traveling in performance of their duties in regulating and checking traffic and speed. 
(b)  This section shall not relieve the driver of any such vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1965, § 28-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-145.  
Secs. 19-114—19-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-136. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended on a public street or highway or public vehicular area without first stopping the engine, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-91) 
State Law reference— Unattended motor vehicles, G.S. 20-163.  
Sec. 19-137. - Parking prohibitions at certain locations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal: 
(1)  Within an intersection; 
(2)  On a crosswalk; 
(3)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless otherwise indicated by signs or marks; 
(4)  Within 25 feet of the driveway or entrance to any fire station; 
(5)  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant; 
(6)  In front of any private driveway; 
(7)  In a designated bicycle lane that is identified with pavement markings and/or signs. 
(8)  On any sidewalk; 
(9)  On any curb; 
(10)  On any median strip; 
(11)  On any landscaped or planted area within the right-of-way of any street, highway or roadway; 
(12)  Alongside of or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping or parking shall obstruct traffic; 
(13)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street, highway or roadway, except in such instances as double parking may be allowed by the regulations of this chapter; 
(14)  At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting standing or parking. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, upon any public vehicular area, street, highway or roadway in any area designated as a fire lane. This subsection includes designated fire lanes in shopping center or mall parking lots and all other public vehicular areas. However, persons loading or unloading supplies or merchandise may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center or mall parking lot as long as the vehicle is not left unattended. The prima facie rule of evidence created by G.S. 20-162.1 is applicable to prosecutions for violation of this section. The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to have appointed any state, county or municipal law enforcement officer as his agent for the purpose of arranging for the transportation and safe storage of such vehicle. No law enforcement officer removing such a vehicle shall be held criminally or civilly liable in any way for any acts or omissions arising out of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this subsection, unless the conduct of the officer amounts to wanton misconduct or intentional wrongdoing. 
(Code 1965, §§ 28-95, 28-105; Ord. No. 2024, § 1(a), 4-27-93; Ord. No. 4576, §§ 2, 3, 4-25-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-162.  
Sec. 19-138. - Passenger zones, loading zones and tow-away zones. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the authority from time to time to determine, designate and locate passenger zones, loading zones and tow-away zones on the highways, streets and roadways within the city, and he shall direct and maintain or cause to be maintained appropriate signs indicating the zones. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for any period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or freight in any place marked as a passenger zone, and it shall also be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or material in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case shall a stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the space of 30 minutes, unless specially permitted by a permit issued by the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 28-96)  
Sec. 19-139. - Bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to require and establish bus stops on such public streets, highways and roadways in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. The traffic engineer is further authorized to establish taxicab stands in accord with section 18-37. Every such bus stop and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate sign. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than a bus, to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop or for any vehicle, other than a taxicab, to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any highway, street or roadway in the business district in any place other than at an officially designated bus stop or taxicab stand, except that this shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping, in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations, at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1965, § 28-97)  
Sec. 19-140. - Clearance for other traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street, highway, roadway or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily for the purpose of actually loading or unloading passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or a traffic signal or upon direction of a traffic officer. 
(Code 1965, § 28-98)  
Sec. 19-141. - Stop intersections. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect stop signs at the entrances of intersections designated by him, which signs shall be located so as to indicate which vehicles approaching the intersection are required to stop. The driver of a vehicle approaching such a sign shall stop at the entrance to the intersection and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Code 1965, § 28-99) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to designate stop intersections, G.S. 20-158.  
Sec. 19-142. - Stop required when emerging from alley, private road, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, private road, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-100)  
Sec. 19-143. - Designation and marking or areas where parking is prohibited, limited, restricted or allowed. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate streets and alleys or portions thereof where the parking of vehicles shall be prohibited, limited or restricted and to erect signs or markings indicating such prohibition, limitation or restriction. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of any such sign or marking, and each hour that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate streets and alleys or portions thereof where the parking of vehicles shall be allowed and to erect signs or paint lines or otherwise designate where parking is allowed and restrictions thereon. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle along or on a street or alley in the Central Business District zoning district, or its successor zoning district, as designated in the city's zoning ordinance and on the city's zoning maps, unless a sign, line or other marking designates that parking is allowed on streets or alleys in that district. 
(Code 1965, § 28-101; Ord. No. 2280, § 1, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 19-144. - Method of parking. 
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulation or traffic signal or the direction of a traffic officer, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park such vehicle in a highway, street or roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, street or highway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the road or curb, except that: 
(1)  Upon such streets, highways or roadways as may have been marked or signed for angle parking including reverse angle parking; vehicles shall be parked at the angle of the curb indicated by such marks or signs. 
(2)  In places where and at hours when stopping for loading or unloading of merchandise or material is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or material may back to the curb for the purpose of discharging or taking on loads to remain for a period of not more than 30 minutes, except as provided in section 19-145. 
(Code 1965, § 28-102; Ord. No. 4384, § 1, 2-24-15)  
Sec. 19-145. - Special parking permit for unloading freight. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to issue, in special cases where he deems it necessary, a permit for any vehicle used to transport merchandise or material to park the vehicle back to the curb for a longer period than provided for in section 19-144. However, such permit shall definitely specify the time to be permitted and the driver of such vehicle shall have the permit in his possession at the time and place of unloading. 
(Code 1965, § 28-103) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-157(b).  
Sec. 19-146. - Parking near scene of fire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than one on official business, to park any vehicle within a block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1965, § 28-104)  
Sec. 19-147. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked on a street during the time between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon such street, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. When, during such times or at any other time, there is not sufficient light upon a street to reveal a person at a distance of 200 feet, a parked vehicle shall be equipped with and shall exhibit lights in accord with G.S. 20-134. 
(Code 1965, § 28-106) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to enact ordinance similar to this section, G.S. 20-134.  
Sec. 19-148. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle or other vehicle that falls into one or more of the following categories, the officer shall have the vehicle removed by a properly licensed wrecker to the storage lot or garage operated by such wrecker: 
(1)  Vehicle abandoned, junked or wrecked on the public streets of the city or on city property. 
(2)  Vehicle involved in a hit-and-run accident. 
(3)  Vehicle subject of a theft. 
(4)  Vehicle used in the commission of a felony. 
(5)  Driver of vehicle operates vehicle without a driver's license or was under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics. 
(6)  Vehicle parked in violation of a state statute or a city ordinance, except the city ordinance against overtime parking. 
(b)  When any vehicle is so removed and impounded, it shall be the duty of the officer to affix to it a storage card. It shall be the duty of the police department to notify the owner of the vehicle or, if the owner is incapable of understanding the notice, to notify a responsible representative of the owner. If the owner of the vehicle cannot be determined, it shall be the duty of the police department to advertise the impounding of the vehicle. The owner may redeem and recover the vehicle by exhibiting proof of ownership to the police department and by paying all expenses incident to the impounding of the vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power and authority of the police department to remove any obstruction from the streets or other public places of the city or to excuse or exempt any person having the custody or control of any vehicle from any fine or penalty provided for the violation of any traffic law or ordinance. 
(c)  The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to have a vehicle removed by a properly licensed wrecker to the storage lot or garage operated by such wrecker pursuant to this section: 
(1)  If a vehicle has been abandoned as set forth in section 10-28 on city property and the notice requirements of section 10-32 or the emergency provisions of section 10-33 have been completed; or 
(2)  If a vehicle has parked in violation of article V of chapter 19 of the City Code except for overtime parking as set forth in section 19-165 of the City Code. 
(d)  For every vehicle removed by the city manager or his or her designee, he or she shall comply with the post-towing notice requirements as set forth in section 10-34 of the City Code. 
(Code 1965, § 28-107; Ord. No. 3229, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 19-149. - Enforcement of parking violations. 
All such persons as may be designated by the city manager to enforce the various provisions of Article V of Chapter 19 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, shall attach to any vehicle violating the provisions thereof, a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such a vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city, and that such violation subjects the offender to a civil penalty in the amount stated in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2035, § 1, 6-29-93)  
Secs. 19-150—19-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic and parking by means of parking meters, G.S. 160A-301. 
 
Sec. 19-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operator means and includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner or who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle because of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
Parking meter means and includes any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this division placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this division. Each parking meter installed shall indicate, by proper legend, the legal parking time established by the city and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
Parking meter space means any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter, and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter. 
Parking meter zone means and includes any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
Street means any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Code 1965, § 28-113) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-162. - Meter zones. 
The parking meter zones of the city shall be established by the city council from time to time and listed on Appendix E of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
(Code 1965, § 28-114; Ord. No. 2280, § 2, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 19-163. - Installation and maintenance of meters; time limits. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to cause parking meters to be installed, placed and maintained within the parking meter zones as traffic conditions require. Such meters shall be placed upon the curb alongside or next to individual parking spaces to be designated as provided for in section 19-164. The city manager or such officials or other persons as he may select shall provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this section and shall maintain such meters in good working condition. 
(b)  Each parking meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the fee as established by the city council from time to time in its fees and charges manual. Each parking meter shall also be so arranged that, upon the expiration of the parking limits, it will indicate by mechanical operation and proper signal that the lawful parking periods have expired. 
(Code 1965, § 28-115; Ord. No. 1952, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 19-164. - Marking of metered spaces; method of parking in spaces. 
(a)  The traffic engineer or such officers or persons as he may select shall place lines or marks on the curb and on the street about, alongside or in front of each parking meter to designate the parking space for which the meter is to be used. No vehicle shall be parked across any such line or mark or in any such way that the vehicle shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(b)  Any vehicle parking in any parking space laid out at an angle to the curb shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb except for reverse angle parking where the back of the vehicle would face the curb. Any vehicle parking in any space laid out parallel with the curb shall be parked facing the same direction of travel as the adjacent travel lane. Such vehicle shall also be parked within the lines marked on the street for such parking spaces, whether at an angle or parallel with the curb. 
(Code 1965, § 28-116; Ord. No. 3030, § 1(a), 6-10-03; Ord. No. 4384, § 1, 2-24-15)  
Sec. 19-165. - Depositing coin and setting meters; overtime parking. 
(a)  When any vehicle is parked in any space alongside, next to or in front of which is located a parking meter, the owner, operator, manager or driver of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit the required fee and shall set the meter in accordance with the instructions contained thereon. The parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the parking limits permitted. If such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond the permitted period, the parking meter shall display a sign indicating illegal parking and such vehicle shall be considered parked overtime. Each hour that any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or under his control to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful periods of time as set forth. 
(b)  This section shall be in effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day, except Sunday, New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Holiday (third Monday in January), Good Friday (Friday before Easter Sunday), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), Independence Day, Labor Day (first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day, Thanksgiving Friday, and three Christmas holidays observed by the city (Christmas Day, along with the first work day prior to and the first work day after Christmas Day). This section shall also not be applicable for any vehicle for which a limited event fee sticker has been purchased from the city and affixed to the motor vehicle for a limited event for vehicles, including automobiles and motorcycles, which limited event stickers shall allow the vehicle to which the sticker is affixed to remain parked in such parking space during an entire day of the limited event for that year, as set forth on the sticker. 
(Code 1965, § 28-117; Ord. No. 1952, § 1, 10-29-91; Ord. No. 2579, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 19-166. - Loading zones and bus stops in meter zones. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to set apart, within the parking meter zones, spaces for loading zones, bus stops and other places in which no parking or limited parking is permitted. 
(Code 1965, § 28-120)  
Sec. 19-167. - Exemptions from sections 19-163 through 19-166. 
During actual loading and unloading of delivery trucks and commercial vehicles within the parking meter zones, the operators of such vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 19-163 through 19-166. 
(Code 1965, § 28-121)  
Sec. 19-168. - Deposit of slugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute in place of a United States coin. 
(Code 1965, § 28-122; Ord. No. 1952, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 19-169. - Defacing or injuring meter. 
No unauthorized person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 28-123)  
Sec. 19-170. - Use of meter proceeds. 
The proceeds derived from the use of parking meters shall be used exclusively for the purpose of making such regulation effective and for the expenses incurred by the city in the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking and traffic relating to such parking on the streets and highways of the city. The proceeds derived from the use of such parking meters may also be used to provide for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension and operation of offstreet parking facilities, as defined in G.S. 160-414(d), and may be pledged to amortize bonds or other evidence of debts issued for such purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 28-124) 
Editor's note— Chapter 160 of the General Statutes of North Carolina has been repealed. For a city's authority to establish and operate offstreet parking facilities, see G.S. 160A-302.  
Secs. 19-171—19-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY PARKING LOTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to own and regulate offstreet parking facilities, G.S. 160A-302. 
 
Sec. 19-181. - Purpose. 
This division shall be deemed and construed to be for a public purpose and for the preservation and protection of the public safety, the alleviation of congestion created by traffic and parking upon the public streets and ways and for the promotion of the welfare and convenience of the public. All of the provisions of this division shall be liberally construed with a view to the effectuation of such purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 28-125)  
Sec. 19-182. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City parking lots includes all areas either owned, leased or acquired by the city and operated for the purpose of offstreet parking in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 28-126) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-183. - Arrangement of parking spaces. 
The arrangement, location and marking off of the individual parking spaces in city parking lots and the location, selection and arrangement of the various parking spaces in city parking lots shall be as prescribed by the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 28-127)  
Sec. 19-184. - Rates of charges for parking lots. 
The rates of charges for the parking of vehicles at the various public parking lots operated by the city shall be as set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. 
(Code 1965, § 28-128; Ord. No. 1633, § 1, 6-2-87)  
Sec. 19-185. - Hours of operation. 
The city parking lots shall be operated for the purposes and under the regulations set forth in this division from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and the following holidays: January 1, Easter Monday, July 4, the first Monday in September, the day designated and set aside by the President of the United States as the day of Thanksgiving and December 25. The city manager, at his discretion, may alter or suspend the normal hours of operation. 
(Code 1965, § 28-129)  
Sec. 19-186. - Overtime or illegal parking; towing; violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle which he is operating or over which he has any control to be parked overtime or in any space designated for parking in a city parking lot on a monthly basis to an individual or group of individuals upon any city parking lot or to be parked in a city parking lot beyond the period of authorized parking time, applicable to the parking space in which such vehicle is parked. Each hour that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the other provisions of this division, in all cases in which a vehicle is parked on any city parking lot in violation of this division, such vehicle may be towed away from such city parking lot and stored in such place as may be designated by the police. If it becomes necessary to have such vehicle towed away and stored, the charges for towing and storage shall be paid by the owner or other person responsible for such vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or parking control device located on any city parking lot any slug, device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful money of the United States. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and unlawfully deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or parking control device located on any city parking lot, buffer or any other property, installation or appliance installed and maintained at any city parking lot in connection with the operation thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 28-130)  
Sec. 19-187. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds derived from the use of offstreet city parking lots shall be used exclusively for the purpose of making such regulation effective and for the expenses incurred by the city in the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking. The proceeds derived from the use of such offstreet parking lots may also be used to provide for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension and operation of offstreet parking facilities, as defined in G.S. 160-414(d), and may be pledged to amortize bonds or other evidence of debts issued for such purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 28-132) 
Editor's note— Chapter 160 of the General Statutes of North Carolina has been repealed. For a city's authority to establish and operate offstreet parking facilities, see G.S. 160A-302.  
Secs. 19-188—19-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY PARKING GARAGES 
 
Sec. 19-201. - Use of city parking garages. 
City parking garages are for the exclusive use of those persons who park their vehicles there, along with passengers of such vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in a city parking garage unless the person is: 
(1)  In a vehicle which is in a parking space or on its way to or from a parking space; 
(2)  Walking to or from a parked vehicle, having entered or returning to the garage as a driver or a passenger of the vehicle; or 
(3)  An employee or agent of the city whose presence in the garage is required in connection with his duties. 
(Code 1965, § 28-133)  
Sec. 19-202. - Trespass. 
Unauthorized presence in the city parking garages and subsequent refusal to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer or parking attendant shall constitute trespass. 
(Code 1965, § 28-134)  
Secs. 19-203—19-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HANDICAPPED PARKING 
 
Sec. 19-211. - Generally. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated for handicapped persons or visually impaired persons when the vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate, placard, or identification card or a disabled veteran registration plate as provided by state law. 
(b)  It shall be prohibited for any person not qualifying for the rights and privileges extended to handicapped or visually impaired persons to exercise or attempt to exercise such rights or privileges by the unauthorized use of a distinguishing license plate, placard or identification card. 
(c)  A violation of this provision shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount as set forth in Appendix B, Schedule of Civil Penalties, Section A of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. The civil penalty shall be collected in the same manner as other violations of the parking ordinances of the city are collected. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 6-29-93)  
DIVISION 6. - USE OF WHEEL LOCKS 
 
Sec. 19-212. - Use of wheel locks on vehicles with unpaid and outstanding parking penalties. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee may immobilize by the use of wheel locks and/or tow and impound any vehicle which is illegally parked and for which there are three or more unpaid and overdue parking tickets, which are outstanding for a period of 90 days or more. For the purposes of this division, "illegally parked" means any time a vehicle is parked in violation of a city ordinance or state statute. Provided, however, any parking ticket which is the subject of an approved payment plan, no payment thereunder being delinquent, shall not be considered outstanding, unpaid and overdue for purposes of this section. In the event that the vehicle is determined to be an abandoned vehicle under Article II of Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, the regulations of Article II of Chapter 10 shall apply in lieu of the regulations of this division. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining whether an illegally parked vehicle has had issued against it three or more outstanding unpaid and overdue parking tickets for a period of 90 days or more, it shall be sufficient if the license plate number of the illegally parked vehicle and the license plate number of the vehicle having received the tickets are the same. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
Sec. 19-213. - Notice of immobilization. 
(a)  If a wheel lock is attached to a vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be readily visible. 
(b)  The notice shall warn that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage thereto. The City of Asheville shall not be responsible for any damage to an immobilized illegally parked vehicle resulting from unauthorized attempts to free or move that vehicle. 
(c)  An immobilization fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the removal of the wheel lock. The notice shall also state the total amount of civil penalties due for parking tickets which are overdue and unpaid and attributable to such vehicle, and the $25.00 immobilization fee to be charged. Said amounts shall be paid in full prior to removal of the wheel lock. 
(d)  The address and telephone number to be contacted to pay the charges to have the wheel lock removed shall also be listed on the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
Sec. 19-214. - Towing of immobilized vehicle. 
(a)  If the civil penalties due and an immobilization fee of $25.00 as provided hereinabove are not paid, or satisfactory arrangements in lieu thereof are not made, within 24 hours of the attachment of the wheel lock, such vehicle may be towed and impounded by, or at the direction of, the city manager or his/her designee, to any private impoundment lot. If a private contractor tows and stores such vehicle, there shall be imposed against the vehicle the private contractor's actual charges for towing and storing such vehicle. 
(b)  Once a vehicle has been impounded, the city manager or his/her designee, shall mail, or cause to have mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of impoundment to the registered owner at the address or addresses on record at the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
Sec. 19-215. - Release from impoundment. 
Upon payment of all civil penalties for unpaid and overdue parking tickets issued for a vehicle and of all other applicable charges authorized by this division, including immobilization, towing and storage fees, the vehicle shall be released from impoundment to the owner or any other person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
Sec. 19-216. - Hearing. 
(a)  The registered owner, or person entitled to possession, of any vehicle which has been immobilized or impounded pursuant to this section may submit a request for a hearing to the city manager by certified mail within seven calendar days from the date the notice of immobilization is affixed, as set forth in section 19-213 hereinabove, or the date of receipt of the notice of towing, as provided for in section 19-214 hereinabove, whichever is applicable. If a request for a hearing is not made within the allocated time, the right to a hearing shall have been waived. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall send a statement to such person to inform him/her of the time and place for the hearing, of the basis for the vehicle's immobilization and/or impoundment, of the opportunity to present evidence as to why such vehicle should not have been immobilized, towed, and/or impounded, and of the right to have counsel present at the hearing. The hearing shall be held within five work days of the city's receipt of a request for a hearing, unless a longer time period is requested by the person asking for the hearing. 
(c) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall serve as the hearing officer, shall conduct a hearing and shall prepare a written report within three work days of the hearing stating his/her conclusion as to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized, towed, and/or impounded, pursuant to this division, and the reasons and evidence underlying his/her conclusion. If it is concluded that the vehicle should not have been immobilized, towed, and/or impounded, then any improper charge(s) shall be cancelled, or if paid, rebated. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
Sec. 19-217. - Penalty for removal, damage or destruction to wheel lock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to remove from a wheel a wheel lock placed thereon pursuant to this division or to remove from impoundment any vehicle placed therein pursuant to this division without all civil penalties and applicable charges having first been paid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to damage or destroy a wheel lock placed on a vehicle pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 11-14-95)  
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 19-226. - Subject to traffic control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections, as declared in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions as stated in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 28-135) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-172.  
Sec. 19-227. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and shall maintain or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. The traffic engineer is also authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1965, § 28-136)  
Sec. 19-228. - Right-of-way at crosswalks. 
(a)  Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-137) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-173.  
Sec. 19-229. - Duty to use crosswalk. 
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1965, § 28-138) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-174(c).  
Sec. 19-230. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1965, § 28-139)  
Sec. 19-231. - Crossings at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-140) 
State Law reference— Crossing at other than crosswalks, G.S. 20-174(a), (b).  
Sec. 19-232. - Soliciting rides. 
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 28-141) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-175.  
Sec. 19-233. - Duty of drivers to use care. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding a horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-142) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 20-174(e).  
Sec. 19-234. - Citations for certain violations. 
It shall be the duty of police officers to issue a citation to any pedestrian violating section 19-82, 19-226, 19-229 or 19-230. 
(Code 1965, § 28-143)  
Secs. 19-235—19-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE LICENSE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose annual license tax on motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-213. 
 
Sec. 19-256. - Levy. 
An annual license tax in the sum of $5.00 shall be paid for each motor vehicle, private or for hire, including any taxicab or truck, which is required to be listed for the purpose of personal property taxes within the city and for which a state license plate or tag is required to be issued. The tax shall be assessed on a calendar-year basis and shall be paid on or before January 5 of each year. The number of motor vehicles for which each person shall be liable for the annual license tax shall be based upon record ownership of motor vehicles as of January 1 of the preceding year. 
(Code 1965, § 28-154; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 10-11-88)  
Secs. 19-257—19-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RAILROADS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossings, G.S. 20-143.1; authority of city to control or prohibit the laying of tracks in streets, G.S. 160A-298. 
 
Sec. 19-276. - Speed limit for trains. 
No railroad company shall run or operate its engines or trains within the city at a greater rate of speed than 20 miles per hour. 
(Code 1965, § 23-7)  
Sec. 19-277. - Construction or repair of bridges or culverts in streets. 
(a)  If, upon report of the traffic engineer or from other satisfactory evidence, the city council is convinced that the public safety requires that any railroad company should repair any of its bridges or culverts in any street in the city or should construct new bridges or culverts therein, the council shall cause written notice of 30 days to be given such company to this effect and order such work to be done at once under the supervision and direction of the city engineer, and such work shall be done at once, after the expiration of such notice, under the supervision and direction of the city engineer. 
(b)  No railroad company shall build or repair any bridge or culvert in any street in the city except after notice to do so, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and then only under the direction of the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 23-1)  
Sec. 19-278. - Permission to lay tracks in, along or across streets. 
Any railroad company that desires to lay or construct any railroad track in, on, along or across any street, lane, alley or other public highway of the city shall, before beginning such work, make application in writing to the city council for permission to do such work, in which application shall be shown the streets, lanes, alleys, squares, public highways or portions thereof which the company desires to use and to what width and at what grade. No such work shall be done until such permission is granted. 
(Code 1965, § 23-2)  
Sec. 19-279. - Maintenance of tracks and crossings. 
All railroad companies maintaining tracks in, along or across any of the streets of the city shall at all times keep such tracks and a space immediately outside of each rail and next thereto 24 inches wide in good condition and shall maintain their rails level with the surface of the street and in such condition with reference thereto as to render the crossing of the rails by pedestrians and vehicles easy, convenient and safe. 
(Code 1965, § 23-3) 
State Law reference— Defective crossings, G.S. 62-224.  
Sec. 19-280. - Arm gates or flagmen required at crossings; exceptions. 
(a)  All railroad companies with tracks crossing any street in the city shall maintain vertical arm gates of such pattern and kind as may be satisfactory to the city council at such crossings or keep flagmen stationed at such crossings, in order to give timely warning to the public of the approach or passing of any engine, car or train, and shall take all other precautions that may be necessary to protect the public from danger at such crossings. 
(b)  In lieu of the arm gates or flagmen required by subsection (a) of this section, the Southern Railway Company is hereby authorized to install and operate flashing light crossing signals, including bells, at the crossing at Biltmore and at the Haywood Street and Lyman Street crossings. 
(Code 1965, § 23-4)  
Sec. 19-281. - Operation of arm gates at crossings. 
It shall be the duty of every railroad company maintaining an arm gate at any crossing to provide for the closing of the gate at the approach of engines or trains and to have the gate immediately opened when the engine or train has passed, so as to interfere as little as possible with public travel over the crossing. 
(Code 1965, § 23-5)  
Sec. 19-282. - Obstruction of crossings. 
No conductor, engineer or other employee of any railroad company having tracks running across the public streets of the city shall obstruct the streets with any engine, car or train or prevent the free passage of vehicles and pedestrians, longer than 12 minutes at one time. 
(Code 1965, § 23-6)  
Sec. 19-283. - Crossing track in front of train. 
No person shall attempt to cross any railroad track in the city immediately in front of any moving engine, car or train. 
(Code 1965, § 23-8)  
Sec. 19-284. - Unlawful entry on train. 
No person shall enter, hang on or get upon any railroad car or engine or any part thereof, except for the bona fide purpose of obtaining lawful transportation thereon and with the intent to comply with all reasonable rules and regulations prescribed in that behalf by the person or corporation owning or operating the railroad car or engine, without having first obtained permission of the person or corporation owning or operating the same. 
(Code 1965, § 23-9) 
State Law reference— Riding on train unlawfully, G.S. 62-319.  
Sec. 19-285. - Unauthorized use of or loitering on railroad property. 
No person shall use the tracks, yards or any other real property of any railroad company as a public highway and no person shall pass through or loiter around any shop, car or depot of any railroad company, except for the bona fide purpose of transacting business with such company or its agents, employees or representatives. This section shall in no wise abridge, limit or affect the right of the public to use the tracks or other property of a railroad company in cases where such tracks or other property are in or upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-10)  
Sec. 19-286. - Giving away or drinking liquor at stations. 
Any person who shall engage in drinking or giving away intoxicating liquors in the waiting rooms, wash or baggage rooms, closets, booths or upon the platform of any railroad station in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-11) 
State Law reference— Sale of beer and wine on trains, G.S. 18B-108; unlawful possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages, G.S. 18B-102(a), 18B-301.  
Chapter 20 - TREES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2378, § 1, adopted June 10, 1997, repealed Ch. 20, in its entirety, which pertained to trees. Said section also enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 20 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Asheville Tree/Greenway Commission, § 2-156; buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; cemeteries, ch. 6; historic preservation, ch. 8; parks and recreation, ch. 12; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 14; subdivisions, ch. 17; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Damages for unlawful cutting, removal or burning of trees, G.S. 1-539.1; cutting timber on town watershed, G.S. 14-383; permit required for planting or removal of trees on state highway, G.S. 136-93; designation of official state tree, G.S. 145-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Asheville, realizing that trees have a profound effect on the quality of life in the community, deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact an ordinance for the preservation, planting, replacement and removal of trees without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the planting of new trees and shrubbery; to vigorously encourage the protection of existing trees and shrubbery, including their root systems; to regulate the preservation, replacement and indiscriminate removal of trees and to establish procedures for fulfilling these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-2. - Applicability. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to all city property, as well as to private property in the manner specifically described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-3. - Urban forestry commission. 
The city council may establish an Urban Forestry Commission, made up of citizen volunteers. 
The commission may request information on trees located on city property and shall receive in a timely fashion, reports from the director of public works. The commission shall receive regular reports from city staff on landscaping and buffering plans for new developments and alterations to existing developments. 
The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by city council to staggered three-year terms. In addition to the seven members appointed by city council, the executive director of Quality Forward, a representative of Progress Energy, and a representative of the Metropolitan Sewerage District shall serve as ex-officio voting members of the commission. Additionally, the director of public works may appoint ex-officio non-voting members. 
The commission shall select annually from among its members a chair and vice-chair. 
All appointed members shall serve a term of three years. Vacancies resulting from resignation or from a member's failure to attend the required number of meetings shall be filed by city council for the unexpired term upon request by the chairperson. 
The commission shall formulate and adopt rules of procedure under which it will operate. 
Any and all references to the "Tree Commission" or the "Asheville Tree Commission" elsewhere in the City Code shall be understood to refer to the Urban Forestry Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97; Ord. No. 3158, § 1, 9-14-04; Ord. No. 4781, § 2, 11-26-19)  
Sec. 20-4. - Definitions 
As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires, the words listed below shall have the following meaning: 
Caliper: Diameter measurement of the trunk taken six inches above ground level for trees up to and including four-inch-caliper size. Measurements shall be taken 12 inches above the ground for larger tree. 
City: The City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
City attorney: The City Attorney for the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
City property: All real property which is owned or leased by the city or which is maintained by it or any part of any city right-of-way. 
Diseased tree: A process in which fungi, bacteria, mycoplasms, and viruses are able to invade and infect trees causing poor growth and weak appearance, disruption of plant processes, distortion of certain tree parts and strain or death of the tree. 
DBH (diameter breast height): The diameter of a tree four and one-half feet above the average ground level. 
Drip line: A vertical line running through the outermost portions of the tree crown extending to the ground. 
Engineering director: The head of the City of Asheville Engineering Department or his/her designee. 
Frontage strip: A continuous planting strip, exclusive of access driveways, abutting a public street. 
Guidelines: Guidelines and Specifications of Tree Planting on Public and Private Property, published by the planning and development department. 
Historic tree: A tree that has been specifically designated by the Asheville City Council as historic. 
Impervious cover: Building and structure footprints, areas of pavement, compacted gravel or other compacted areas which by their dense nature do not allow the passage of sufficient oxygen and moisture to support and sustain healthy root growth. 
Large maturing tree: Any tree whose height exceeds 35 feet at maturity. 
Maintenance: Proper cultural practices including pruning, fertilization, pest management, and root system protection. The standards of maintenance are those published by the National Arborists Association. 
Parks and recreation director: The head of the City of Asheville Parks and Recreation Department or his/her designee. 
Paved area: Any ground surface covered with concrete, asphalt, stone, compacted gravel, brick or other paving material. 
Person: A public or private individual, corporation, company, firm, association, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility cooperative or other legal entity. 
Planning and development director: The head of the City of Asheville Planning and Development Department or his/her designee. 
Preservation: Maintaining a stable environment among mature trees is critical in delaying the transition from maturity to decline and death. (Prevention of construction damage, root system care, proper tree care maintenance, etc.) Tree care preservation should be proactive and then reactive. Treatments should be preventative rather than remedial to maintain tree health once tree decline begins. The periodic inspection of trees for structural defects such as root system damage. 
Private property: Property that is not owned by a federal, state or local government. 
Public works director: The head of the City of Asheville Public Works Department or his/her designee. 
Regulated tree: Trees which are located on private property and are listed as the champion or co-champion of its species, either on the "National Big Tree List" as compiled by the American Forestry Association or the "Champion Big Trees of North Carolina" as compiled by the North Carolina Division of Forestry Resources. 
Replacement: Replacement of dead, dying, diseased, or removed trees with trees of equal or comparable size, species, vigor and health. 
Removal: The cutting down of any tree or shrubbery and all other acts which cause the actual removal or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a tree or shrubbery. 
Root protection zone: Generally, 18 to 24 inches deep and a radius distance from the trunk of the tree equal to one foot for each one inch of trunk diameter or the outermost drip line of the tree, whichever is greater. 
Small maturing tree: Any tree whose height is less than 35 feet at maturity. 
Topping: Any pruning practice that results in pruning back the main leader stem of the tree or causes disfigurement of the normal shape of the tree. 
Tree evaluation formula: A formula for determining the value of ornamental trees and shrubs as published by the International Society of Arborculture. 
Unsafe tree: For a tree to be considered unsafe, one of the following criteria must apply: 
(1)  A combination of a structural defect and a target. 
a.  A structural defect which predisposes the tree to failure; i.e., dead tree, trunk decay, dead branches, V-crotches; and 
b.  A target such as a structure, road, walkway, campsite or other area where property exists or people reside. In urban areas, target areas are almost always in close proximity to trees; or 
(2)  A tree that is otherwise structurally sound trees but which interfere with the routine activities of people. Interferences include obstructions, sight distance problems for motorists, buckling of sidewalks, attracting lightning, or interference with utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97; Ord. No. 2411, § 1(a), 10-14-97)  
Sec. 20-5. - Administration. 
(a)  Public works director. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the public works director shall have responsibility and control over all trees and shrubbery planted or growing in or upon city property. The public works director shall also have responsibility and control over all regulated trees, unsafe and diseased trees located upon private property. 
(b)  Planning and development director. 
(1)  The parks and recreation director shall be responsible for formulating a Master Street Tree Plan (MSTP). The MSTP shall specify the species for tree planting. The MSTP shall also identify all regulated trees by type and location that have been specifically designated by the Asheville City Council as historic trees. Prior to its publication, the MSTP shall be presented to the commission for review and recommendation and for adoption by city council. From and after the effective date of the MSTP or any amendments thereof, the MSTP shall govern the species of trees to be planted. In developing the MSTP, consideration shall be given to the existing and future utility and environmental factors in recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other city property. 
(2)  The engineering director shall have prepared a document entitled, Asheville Standards Specification and Detail Manual, which shall contain the guidelines and specifications for tree planting, care, maintenance, removal and landscape design which shall be adopted by city council and used by developers, landscape architects, designers and the general public in furtherance of the requirements and intent of this chapter. The guidelines shall be reviewed at a minimum, every two years, by the parks and recreation director, engineering director, public works director, and the commission. Major revisions to the guidelines shall be approached by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97; Ord. No. 2411, § 1(b), (c), 10-14-97)  
Sec. 20-6. - Permits and review required. 
(a)  Permits shall be obtained from the public works director for all activity involving the planting, grading, removal and replacement of trees on city property except as noted herein. Permits are also hereby required for all removal and replacement of regulated trees and historic trees. 
(b)  The public works director shall review all requests for permits for the planting, grading, removal and replacement of trees and shrubbery on city property and the removal and replacement of regulated and historic trees. If the planting, grading, removal or replacement complies with the guidelines, the public works director shall issue a permit and may attach reasonable conditions to the permit. If the plans do not comply with the guidelines, the permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Secs. 20-7—20-20. - Reserved  
ARTICLE II. - CITY PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 20-21. - Trimming, pruning, planting and removal of trees and shrubbery. 
(a)  No person shall remove, destroy, cut, prune or otherwise treat any tree or shrubbery having its trunk upon any city property or right-of-way or contract with another person to perform such acts without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director except as herein set forth. 
(b)  No person shall plant or contract with another to plant any tree or shrubbery on any city property, except as herein noted, without a permit from the public works director. 
(c)  Public and private utilities shall submit written specifications for pruning, trenching or grading around trees and shrubbery on city property to the public works director for approval. A utility company shall not be required to obtain a permit for routine maintenance operations affecting trees and shrubbery having their trunks upon city property so long as such work is done in strict accordance with the specifications as approved by the public works director. A utility company is required to obtain a permit to remove any tree or shrubbery on city property. Approved written specifications shall be valid for two years, after which new specifications or a request for an additional two-year extension of the previously approved specifications must be made by the utility company. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-22. - Injuring trees and shrubbery. 
(a)  No person shall place or maintain upon the ground upon any city property any compacted stone, cement or other impervious matter or substance in such a manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree or shrubbery. This provision shall not apply to paving, repairing or altering of city streets, sidewalks and other city property performed by the city. 
(b)  No person shall perform or contract with another to perform construction work (including the operation or storage of equipment or materials) within the drip line of any tree or shrubbery having its trunk on any city property without first obtaining a permit from the public works director. 
(c)  No person shall attach any object, including but not limited to, rope, wire, chain or sign, to any tree or shrubbery in or upon any city property or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree or shrubbery except for the purpose of protecting it or the public. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-23. - Planting plan required where trees and shrubbery are to be planted. 
(a)  Any person subject to the provisions of Article III of this chapter desiring to plant trees and shrubbery in or upon city property or city right-of-way shall, in addition to applying for a permit, submit a planting plan or written statement in triplicate to the public works director who shall return one copy to the applicant and keep two copies on file. All planting plans upon city property shall accurately show the following: 
(1)  The proposed street width, together with its subdivision of pavement, curb, and gutter, parking strip and sidewalk areas, to a definite indicated scale. 
(2)  The location of underground and overhead utilities, all poles and posts, to a definite indicated scale. 
(3)  The proposed location of each and every proposed tree and shrubbery, together with the location of each existing tree, shrubbery, plant, or vine within the proposed street right-of-way in scaled relation to the other features to the plan. 
(4)  The variety, height and caliper, where applicable, of each and every tree and shrubbery proposed to be planted and of those already existing within the proposed street lines, either indicated on the plan or referenced with a number to a key list. 
(5)  The distance in feet between the tree and shrubbery in any one row. 
(6)  The nature of the soil in the planting space to a depth of three feet and all existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage system. 
(b)  All written statements filed in lieu of a planting plan shall contain the same information required on the planting plan except in the case of persons not involved in planned development and desires to perform small scale landscape plantings on city property. In such a case, a simple letter of intent outlining the location, method and materials, may be substituted. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-24. - Trees and shrubbery abutting city property to be kept trimmed; responsibility of owner. 
(a)  Trees, shrubbery, flowers, bushes or vines standing in or upon any lot or land abutting city property and having branches, limbs, trunks, or other parts projecting onto city property shall be maintained by the owner of the property on which such trees, shrubbery, flowers, bushes or vines are growing so as not to interfere with the free and safe passage along the city right-of-way by pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(b)  If the owner of such property does not keep this growth from projecting onto city property, the public works director may order its removal. The order shall be in writing to the owner and shall be acted upon within 30 days from the time of the receipt of the order. If, after 30 days, the owner has not responded or acted to remove the projecting growth from such trees or plants, then the public works director may enter upon the private property to perform the work necessary to correct the condition and bill the owner for the actual costs incurred. In situations deemed by the public works director to constitute an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the public works director may act without prior notification to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Secs. 20-25—20-41. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 20-42. - Removal of regulated and historic trees. 
The public works director may prohibit the removal of a regulated tree or a tree that has been designated by the Asheville City Council as historic. The following factor(s) may be a basis upon which the public works director may deny a permit to remove a regulated tree: (1) there exist no current plan to develop the property; (2) the planned development can be constructed without removing the regulating tree; (3) the purpose for removal can be accomplished with less drastic results; (4) the health of the tree; (5) the proposal for replacement of the regulated tree; and (6) any other factors reasonably related to the tree. The public works director may attach reasonable conditions to the removal. The owner may appeal the director's decision in accordance with section 20-53 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-43. - Utility responsibility. 
Public and private utility companies which install overhead and underground utilities (including CATV) shall be required to accomplish all work affecting trees and shrubbery located on such private property in accordance with the applicability of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-44. - Unsafe trees. 
(a)  The public works director may cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof on private property which is unsafe, injurious to the public welfare or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers or other public improvements or is infested with an injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(b)  The public works director may enter upon private property in the city to spray, or otherwise treat or cause or order to be sprayed or otherwise treated, any tree infected or infested by any parasite, insect or pest when it shall be necessary to do so to prevent the breeding or scattering of any parasite or animal pest and to prevent danger there from to persons or property or to trees planted on city property. 
(c)  Whenever, in the opinion of the public works director, the removal of a tree or shrubbery on private property shall be necessary, under the provisions of this section, the public works director shall have the power to remove such tree or shrubbery or cause or order the same to be done upon notice and an opportunity to be heard to the property owner. 
(d)  Prior to exercising the authority conferred by this section, the public works director shall give the owner notice and an opportunity to correct the condition by requesting that corrective action be taken. The request shall be in writing to the owner of the property in question and shall be acted upon within 30 days (or a lesser period of time if an imminent threat to life or property exists, from the date of the receipt of the request.) If, after 30 days or such less time period, the owner has not corrected the condition or undertaken action that would lead to a timely correction of the condition, the public works director may enter upon the property, perform the work necessary to correct the condition and bill the owner for the actual costs incurred. In situations involving an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city may act without prior notification to the property owner but notice shall be given within a reasonable period thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Secs. 20-45—20-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEAL 
 
Sec. 20-52. - Inspection of sites. 
(a)  The public works director and the director of planning and development may periodically inspect areas subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  If through inspection it is determined that a person has failed to comply or is no longer in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, a notice to comply shall be served upon that person by registered mail, returned receipt requested or by hand delivery from the public works director. The notice shall state the violation and describe that which will be necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(c)  The public works director may conduct such investigations as deemed reasonably necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this chapter and may enter at reasonable times upon private property as defined herein, for the purpose of inspecting trees and shrubbery subject to the provisions of this chapter. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who request entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Sec. 20-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice and appeal. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be notified by the public works director of the specific violation by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation, the measures required to comply with this chapter, if compliance is at all practicable, and a reasonable time period within which compliance must be had. 
(2)  If any aggrieved person disagrees with a decision of the public works director, such person may request a hearing within ten working days of receipt of the violation. The request must be in writing and directed to the tree commission's secretary. The secretary shall immediately assemble an appeals board from among the membership of the tree commission. The chairperson of the Asheville Tree Commission shall always serve on the appeals board as the chairperson and shall not vote except to cast the deciding vote in case of a tie. The members to sit on the board shall be selected on a rotating basis. The owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, examine and cross examine witnesses at said hearing. The city attorney shall serve as the appeals board's legal advisor during said hearing. The appeals board shall render its written decision within 30 days after the hearing. 
(3)  The appeals board may modify, amend or revise the decision appealed from. The decision of the appeals board shall be served upon the appealing party by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. 
(4)  If any aggrieved party is dissatisfied with the decision of the appeals board, an appeal may be taken to the Buncombe County Superior Court. Notice of the appeal must be filed within ten working days of receipt of the appeals board's decision. The parties may stipulate that the appeal to the Buncombe County Superior Court shall be a review of the record only. In the absence of a mutual stipulation, the review shall be de novo. 
(5)  Any aggrieved party may request an injunction to preserve the status quo during the pendency of any appeal in accordance with applicable North Carolina law. 
(b)  Civil penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty. The amount of the civil penalty shall be $100.00 except as hereinafter provided. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. The appeals board shall determine and assess the civil penalty, if any, at the time of the appeals hearing, if one is requested. In the absence of an appeal, the public works director shall submit a request to the chairperson of the appeals board who shall assemble the appeals board and assess the civil penalty with supporting documentation upon prior notice to the violating party of the date and time of the appeals board hearing. At least ten days notice shall be given to the violating party of the date, time and location whereby the appeals board will consider the request to assess a civil penalty. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the appeals board shall take into consideration the amount of money that the violator would be required to spend in order to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the amount of money saved by the violator in violating the ordinance, the cost of replacement of any removed tree, shrubbery or regulated tree. In determining the specific amount of the civil penalty for damage or destruction to regulated trees, the appeals board shall use the standard tree evaluation formula provided by the International Society of Arboriculture, as it may be amended from time to time. The standard tree evaluation formula is made a part of this chapter and adopted herein by reference. The appeals board shall have no discretion to vary the cost figures set forth in the formula. The appeals board may however, recommend that the amount of the civil penalty be modified as part of a negotiated settlement with the city. Upon failure of the violator to pay the assessed penalty or reach an equitable settlement within 30 days, an action in the nature of debt in the name of the city in the appropriate division of the general courts of justice may be instituted by the city attorney for recovery of a debt. 
(c)  Criminal penalty. A violation of this Chapter subjects the offender to a civil penalty, pursuant to the authority granted by N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-175, and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. Whenever there exists reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating this chapter or any standards adopted pursuant to this chapter or any term, condition or provision of an approved permit, the city may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in the name of the city for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and an order of abatement demanding the violator to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 6-1-97)  
Chapter 21 - WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and building regulations, Ch. 4; solid waste managment, Ch. 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION 
 
Sec. 21-1-1. - Authority; title. 
The following chapterto be known as the "water distribution system" is hereby adopted pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 130A-317 and rules promulgated thereunder. Amendments to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 130A-317 and rules promulgated thereunder that affect the city's water distribution permitting system shall be incorporated into the city's permitting program within 60 days of the effective date of such amendments, or as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-1-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to assist and to facilitate in the provision or denial of water services to Asheville residents, residents of Asheville extraterritorial areas, and all other areas serviced by the City of Asheville, through local approval of plans to construct or alter the distribution system of the city's proposed or existing public water system. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-1-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville, North Carolina, within the City of Asheville extraterritorial jurisdiction, and all other areas serviced by the City of Asheville where water service is already being provided to the permit applicant by the City of Asheville or where connection to the City of Asheville water system is immediately available to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 21-2-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
City: The City of Asheville, North Carolina. 
City manager: The city manager of the City of Asheville or his/her designee. 
Director: The head of the Water Resources Department for the City of Asheville, or his/her designee. 
Fees and charges manual: A manual adopted by the Asheville City Council listing all fees and charges associated with the City of Asheville. 
Hearing officer: The director of the City of Asheville Water Resources Department or his/her designee. 
Master utility plan: Existing or future master plans prepared by the city for the purposes of providing the most effective service to the customers. 
Standard Specifications and Details Manual: Manual approved by Asheville City Council effective May 27, 1997. 
State: State of North Carolina. 
Utility service area: All areas serviced or proposed to be serviced by the City of Asheville. 
Water system: Includes but is not limited to all of the city's water distribution lines, including required fire hydrants, valves and air release valves. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-2-2. - Administration. 
The director of the City of Asheville Water Resources Department is hereby empowered and charged with the duty to administer and enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 21-3-1. - Generally; payment of expense. 
All water extensions to property outside the corporate city limits and all water extensions to property inside the corporate city limits shall be made at the sole expense of the owner. Nothing in this section shall relieve any owner or developer of property from payment of acreage charges, connection charges or other charges made in conjunction with extension of or connection to water lines. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-2. - Ownership of lines. 
All lines extended and constructed under this chapter shall be of such size and material and shall be constructed in such manner as contained in the city's overall master utility plan and engineering standards. All lines so constructed or extended shall become and remain the property of the city. Provided however, the city will only approve proposed extensions that are capable of interconnection, have adequate arrangement for continued service and that are capable of compliance with North Carolina drinking water rules. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-3. - Street repairs at expense of property owners. 
Repaving and repairing of all streets required to be damaged to lay and construct lines under this chapter shall be done at the expense of the property owner obtaining the extension of water lines. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-4. - Permit requirements; prohibited activities; application. 
(a)  No person shall do or carry out any of the things or activities listed in subsections (1) through (3) below concerning a water distribution system (hereinafter "water system") which is, or is proposed to become a part of the city's water system and is located within the city's utility service area, as such term is defined herein, unless such person shall have applied for and shall have received from the city a permit therefore, and shall have complied with such conditions, if any, as are prescribed by such permit. Provided however, all extensions that are proposed to remain privately owned following construction must be approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, (hereinafter DENR), prior to construction. Activities prohibited without a permit are as follows: 
(1)  Construct or operate any water system; 
(2)  Alter, extend, or change the construction or method of operation of any existing or proposed water system; or 
(3)  Enter into a contract for the construction and installation of any water system, or for the alteration or extension of such a system. 
(b)  Any person proposing to undertake any activity described in subsection (a) of this section shall make timely and proper application on such forms(s) as may be prescribed by the director and provide such information as may be required by the director. A copy of all applications for permits, subject to this section and all approved permits and plans shall be provided to DENR pursuant to applicable law. 
(c)  All water systems proposed for connection to the city's water system and all proposed modifications to any existing portion of the city's water system shall be designed, constructed and installed in conformance with applicable provisions of the then current city standard specifications and details manual (hereinafter "Manual"), and all other city rules, policies and procedures. Any engineering plans, specifications and profiles submitted by applicants for construction of a water system or modifications shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of an engineer licensed to practice in the state, shall bear the signature and seal of such engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the director. Following the installation of the water line extension, the engineer must provide the director a certificate of completion. Such plans, specifications and profiles shall be prepared at the expense of the applicant. The director shall maintain a copy of the current manual and city requirements for public inspection. 
(d)  The denial of an application for a permit subject to the provisions of section 21-3-4 shall be made in writing and shall contain each reason for the denial and the city's recommendation for changes in the applicant's proposed activities or plan which will be required in order that the applicant may obtain a permit. Nothing in such recommendation shall preclude or otherwise bar the city from denying a permit which incorporates such changes, based upon changes in circumstances or information not previously known by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3405, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-5. - Processing of applications. 
(a)  Each application subject to section 21-3-4 shall be accompanied by a fee, which shall be set forth in the city's fees and charges manual. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be maintained by the director and made available for inspection upon request. Any application which is not accompanied by a fee in the proper amount may be considered incomplete. 
(b)  The director shall review the fee, plans, specifications and other project data accompanying an application, and shall determine if the application and accompanying material are complete and in a form acceptable to the director. The director shall acknowledge receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  The director shall take final action on all permit applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application; however, no permit shall be issued until final approval has also been given by the city council for any related development plan. All permits issued shall be in writing, provided, however, in the event construction has not begun pursuant to an issued permit within one year of the date of the permit, the permit shall expire and a new permit must be applied for and obtained by the applicant in accordance with sections 21-3-4 through 21-3-8. Construction and operation shall strictly conform to the permit requirements. A permit may contain such conditions as the director determines to be reasonably necessary, considering the factors on which final action on a permit can be based. Final action on any permit shall be based upon the design, capacity and manner of operation of the appropriate city water system; effectuating the purposes of all applicable rules, standards, requirement, regulations, statutes and ordinances of the city, the state, and the United States of America. 
(d)  If the application is not complete, the application shall be returned to the applicant. The director shall advise the applicant in writing: 
(1)  How the application can be modified to make it complete and acceptable; and 
(2)  That the time for the director to take final action on an application does not begin until receipt of a complete, corrected application. 
(e)  Any permit issued by the director, pursuant to sections 21-3-4 through 21-3-8, is subject to revocation, suspension, or modification, in whole or in part, upon 14 days' written notice to the applicant by the director for good cause, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of sections 21-3-4 through 21-3-8 or the permit; 
(2)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts that the applicant knew or reasonably should have known; 
(3)  Refusal of or by the applicant or its contractors, agents or employee to allow authorized officers, employees or agents of the city, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect or observe any activity, system, or other work required by the applicant's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-6. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil penalty. Any person who violates, fails to comply with, or continues to violate any provision of sections 21-3-4 through 21-3-8 or any permit issued hereunder shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of up to $10,000.00 per violation per day for as long as the violation(s) continue. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the director shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, efforts to correct the violation, the compliance history of the person against whom the violation is assessed, cost of enforcement to the city, whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally, and any other factors as justice may require. 
(b)  Equitable relief. If any person violates the provisions of sections 21-3-6 through 21-3-8 or the terms or conditions of any permit issued hereunder, a civil action may be commenced in the general court of justice in the name of the city for such legal and equitable relief as may be appropriate. 
(c)  Other remedies. The remedies provided herein are not exclusive. The city may take any one, all, or any combination of these actions including selecting a criminal remedy under section 1-5 of the City Code, against any person in violation of the provisions of sections 21-3-4 through 21-3-8 or the terms or conditions of any permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-7. - Appeal process. 
(a)  Aggrieved parties. 
(1)  The following persons are aggrieved parties and are entitled to a hearing pursuant to this section: 
a.  Any person whose application for a permit under section 21-3-5 is denied or granted subject to conditions which are not agreed to by such person. 
b.  Any person to whom a permit has been issued and is revoked or modified pursuant to this chapter. 
c.  Any person who is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to section 21-3-6. 
(2)  Persons who do not qualify as an aggrieved party under North Carolina law and practices are not entitled to a hearing. 
(b)  Demand for a hearing. 
(1)  Any aggrieved person may exercise such right. The demand for a hearing shall be in writing and state separately each issue to be considered and such other matters as are hereinafter required. 
(2)  Any person making a demand for a hearing shall deliver the demand to the director within the following applicable time limits after receipt of notice of the action to be heard: 
a.  Thirty days for the denial of a permit required by this chapter or for the grant of a permit required by this chapter subject to conditions which are not agreed to by the applicant; 
b.  Thirty days for the assessment of a civil penalty; and 
c.  Ten days for the modification or revocation of a permit required by this chapter. 
(c)  Contents of written demand for hearing. 
(1)  In the case of denial of a permit, modification or revocation of a permit, or the granting of permit subject to conditions, the applicant must state separately every condition or reason for the action taken with which he disagrees, and show the basis for his disagreement; 
(2)  In the case of a civil penalty assessment, the person to whom such penalty was assessed must state separately each reason why such penalty should not be assessed or, if the person contends that the civil penalty was assessed in an improper amount, each reason why the amount of the penalty is improper. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing. 
(1)  The hearing shall be conducted by the director and shall be subject to such rules as have been approved by the council or the director as hereinafter set forth. If the demand for a hearing is not made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the director shall reject the demand and any right to a hearing shall be terminated. If any person demanding a hearing shall fail to comply with an order of the director or with any rules issued by the director and approved by the council concerning the conduct of the hearing, the director may reject the demand and any right to a hearing shall be terminated. Within 90 days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing, the director shall conduct a hearing and issue a final order or decision; provided that, a hearing to consider the modification or revocation of a permit shall be held and a final order or decision issued within ten days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The director shall transmit a copy of the final order or decision to the person demanding the hearing by registered or certified mail. No further review of the director's final order or decision will be allowed, except as set forth in subsection 21-3-7(f). 
(2)  The director may submit rules to the city council for approval concerning the conduct of the hearing herein provided for and any other matter associated with such hearing. Such rules may impose requirements in addition to the provisions of this chapter. Upon approval by the city council, such rules shall be as effective as if set forth in this chapter. The director shall make a copy of such rules available for inspection upon the request of any person. 
(3)  The director is authorized to take any action which is reasonably necessary or convenient in considering a demand for hearing and in resolving the issues raised therein so long as such action is not contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any rules approved by the city council or other applicable law. 
(4)  The director may appoint a hearing officer to conduct any hearing authorized by this chapter. A hearing officer shall have the same authority to conduct a hearing and reach a decision as is provided to the director; provided, that the decision of the hearing officer shall not be final but shall be a recommended decision for consideration by the director. The director may approve such decision without change, reject the decision and require a new or continued hearing, or issue a different or revised decision which is supported by evidence presented at the hearing. The director may refer a recommended decision of a hearing officer to the city manager. 
In the event of a referral, the city manager shall have the same authority to act upon a recommended decision of a hearing officer as is provided to the director. The decision of the director or, in the event of a referral, of the city manager, shall be final. A final order may provide that the action which is the basis for the demand for a hearing is approved without change or may modify such action in any manner that is supported by the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(5)  The director may provide for any part of the hearing to be recorded by any reasonable means, including but not limited to, audio and/or video recording, stenographer, or court reporter. A transcript of any hearing or part thereof which is recorded need not be prepared unless requested. The original of a requested transcript shall be filed with the director. Each person shall bear the cost of the transcript which said person requests, including any copy thereof. 
(e)  Stay of enforcement. Each assessment of a civil penalty which has been included in a demand for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is stayed and shall not take effect until the earliest occurrence of any one of the following circumstances: The assessment of the civil penalty is approved or is modified at a hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter; or the person who is assessed the civil penalty and the director agree on the assessment. 
If the assessment of a civil penalty against any person is approved or modified by the director at a hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter, the director may require the payment of said penalty within ten days or such additional time as the director may specify. 
(f)  Appeal to superior court. Any person aggrieved by the final order or decision of the director made pursuant to the hearing conducted under this chapter, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written petition in the nature of certiorari within 30 days after receipt of notice of the order or decision, but not thereafter, with the Superior Court of Buncombe County. If not previously requested, said person may request in writing that a transcript be prepared for every part of the hearing which was recorded. Said request shall be made at or before the time that the petition is filed. A copy of the petition shall be served on the city in the manner required by law. Within 30 days after service of a copy of the petition upon the city or such other time as may be ordered by the court, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court the original or a certified copy of the official record of the hearing as hereinafter set forth. The official record of the hearing shall include: 
(1)  All notices, motions and other similar documents; 
(2)  All documentary and tangible evidence tendered at the hearing, including the transcript, if any, as is necessary for the court's understanding of the matter; and 
(3)  The final order or decision appealed from. 
(4)  Such other material as may be necessary for the court's understanding of the matter, or as may be ordered by the court. 
(g)  Remission of civil penalty. The director may consider petitions for remission of civil penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter. A petition for remission shall be in writing and shall be signed by the person against whom the civil penalty was assessed. The petition shall include: a waiver of any and all rights of the petitioner to a hearing and judicial review of the assessment; and a stipulation that the facts are correct as set forth in the documents(s) assessing the civil penalty. The decision of the director on the petition shall be final and shall not be subject to further administrative or judicial review. In determining whether a petition for remission will be approved, the director shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether one or more of the factors concerning the assessment of a civil penalty in section 21-3-6 were wrongly applied to the detriment of the petitioner; 
(2)  Whether the petitioner promptly abated continuing environmental damage resulting from the violation giving rise to the assessment; 
(3)  Whether the violation giving rise to the assessment was inadvertent or the result of an accident; 
(4)  Whether the petitioner has been assessed civil penalties for any prior violations pursuant to this chapter or by any state or federal authority enforcing substantially similar provisions; 
(5)  Whether payment of the civil penalty by the petitioner will prevent payment for any remaining, necessary remedial action. 
(h)  After submitting a petition for remission, the petitioner shall provide such additional information and records as may be reasonably necessary or convenient to the director's consideration of the petition. The director may remit the entire amount of a civil penalty only when the petitioner has not been assessed civil penalties for any prior violation of this chapter or by state or federal authorities enforcing substantially similar provisions and the payment of the civil penalty will prevent payment of any remaining, necessary remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
Sec. 21-3-8. - Permits not transferable. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are issued to a specific person. A permittee may not assign, transfer, or sell a permit, or any right or obligation or a permit, to another person. 
(Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 7-24-07)  
APPENDIX A - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2369, § 1, adopted May 27, 1997, repealed App. A, in its entirety, which pertained to the city's zoning regulations. Said ordinance also enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 7 which pertain to development and a new App. A pertaining to sign regulations. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 2369. 
 
ARTICLE 9. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-9-1. - Purpose and scope. 
A.  Purpose of sign regulations. The purpose of this article is to provide sign standards and restrictions which allow for the legitimate needs for identification of residential, office, commercial, industrial and other activities while at the same time promoting signs which do not unduly detract from the overall aesthetics of the community; which reduce intrusions and protect property values; which provide for improved public safety by minimizing undue distraction of the motoring public; which provide standards for the erection and maintenance of signs; which provide for the protection and enhancement of the tourist industry by promoting a more harmonious and pleasing community image; which provide equitably for the nature and scale of the activities to be identified; and which generally enhance and strengthen the economic stability of the City of Asheville. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to the erection and maintenance of all signs within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Asheville (section 30-1-3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Asheville), and it shall be unlawful following the effective date of this article to erect or maintain any sign except in conformance with provisions of this article. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to alter, maintain, move, relocate or enlarge any sign erected or constructed prior to the enactment of this article except to bring the sign in conformance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-1), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-2. - Definitions. 
Abandoned sign or sign structure. A sign or sign structure which was erected on property in conjunction with a particular use which has been discontinued for a period of 90 days or more or a sign of which the contents pertain to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies or which has occurred. 
Animated sign. Any sign using flashing or intermittent lights, sound, color changes or other mechanical or electrical means to give motion to the sign or the impression of motion or movement to the sign or any sign with visible moving, revolving or relocating parts; provided, however, this shall not include time, date and temperature or electronic message signs as hereinafter defined. 
Attached sign. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building, including, but not limited to, a wall, window, or projecting sign, or a sign on a canopy, awning or marquee. 
Awning. A temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building, and which may include a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting building. 
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Building frontage. The linear length of only that portion of a building used by an individual tenant in a multiple tenant development and which faces a public street or alley. 
Canopy. A permanent attached structure which projects from and is supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or decoration and which extends beyond the building. 
Changeable copy sign. Any permanently enframed sign, illuminated or not, which is principally devoted to and designed for changeable text and graphics, but which specifically excludes time/date/temperature signs and electronic message marquee signs as hereinafter defined. Portable or moveable signs are not considered changeable copy signs. 
Clearance. The vertical distance from the established finished grade to the lowest edge of the sign. 
Commemorative sign. Any sign erected in remembrance of a historical person, place or event or which denotes, honors, celebrates or acknowledges a historical person, place or event. 
Construction sign. A sign whose message is limited to identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other persons involved with the construction project or to the name of the building being constructed, the intended purpose of the building and the expected completion date. 
Development identification sign. A sign bearing only the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Directional sign. A sign or guide whose sole purpose is to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises on which it is displayed. Examples include "in," "out," "entrance," "exit" and "driveway." 
Eave line. The point where a cornice or projection occurs at the top of an exterior building wall. 
Electronic message signs. Signs which display changeable information electronically in an easily comprehensible way. All messages shall be visible for a minimum of three seconds and shall be kept accurate. Electronic message signs shall include tri-panel message systems as well as automatic changeable copy signage. These will not be deemed to constitute changeable copy or animated signs and are permitted only on marquee signs. 
Erect. To construct, build, raise, assemble, install, place, replace, locate, relocate, affix, attach, display, alter, use, create, paint, draw, illuminate, or in any other way bring into being or establish. 
Externally illuminated sign. Any sign which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it, for example, by means of floodlights or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures. 
Facade. The entire building sides including parapet and wingwalls. 
Flashing sign. A sign illuminated by direct or indirect artificial light that flashes on and off in regular or irregular sequences, including, but not limited to strobe light. 
Freestanding pole sign. A sign which is permanently affixed to the ground by a pole or other structure and which is not part of the building. 
Governmental sign. Any sign erected by or on the order of an authorized public official which includes, but is not limited to, traffic control signs, street name and identification signs, warning and directional signs, public notices or signs of a similar nature. 
Grade. The lowest point at which a sign is attached to the ground. 
Ground sign. A freestanding sign flush to the ground and not elevated upon poles or stanchions and not attached to the building. 
Group development. A development as defined in article 6 of chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
Height. The vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is highest, and the base of the sign at grade. 
Home occupation sign. A sign used for a home occupation as defined in article 2 of chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
Identification sign. A sign used to identify, indicate or advertise the name, logo or other identifying symbol of a building, business, profession, institution, service, or entertainment conducted on the lot upon which the sign is located. 
Incidental sign. A single face professional or announcement sign attached wholly to a building, window or door containing information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored and other similar accessory information. 
Inflatable balloon sign. A sign which is inflated with air or other gases. Self-propelling aircraft and hot air balloons not tethered to the ground or a structure which include advertising are specifically excluded. 
Internally illuminated. Any sign designed to provide artificial light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign. 
Joint identification sign. A sign bearing the name of individual tenants located within a multiple tenant development and which may include the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Logo. A business symbol or trademark. 
Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy for a building together with its accessory building, including the open space required under chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. For the purposes of this article the word "lot" shall be taken to mean any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof, upon which one or more main structures for a single use are to be erected. 
Marquee. A sign of a theatre, auditorium, fairground or museum which advertises current and scheduled events. Marquees may include, incorporate or consist of electronic message signage. Marquees are not allowed in residential districts. 
Maintain. To clean, paint, repair or replace defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic design or structure of the sign. 
Menu board. A freestanding or wall mounted sign primarily designed for the display of menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through service. 
Multiple tenant development. A development in which there exists a number of individual and/or separate activities and in which there are appurtenant shared facilities (such as parking areas or pedestrian mall areas). 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign which was allowed when erected or displayed but which does not conform with the standards of this article and any sign which was not allowed, but was nonetheless impermissibly erected or displayed, before the effective date of this article. 
Off-premises sign. Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered on a lot other than on the lot where such sign is displayed. 
On-premises sign. Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying or directing attention to a business, products, operations or services sold or offered on the lot where the sign is located. 
Parapet. That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof line. 
Person. Includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers. 
Portable or moveable sign. Any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds or any other device which is intended to be moved from one location to another. 
Projecting sign. A sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a building and which projects from the wall. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on, upon or over the roof of any building or structure and which is wholly or partially dependent upon the roof or the building structure for support. 
Sandwich board signs. Any portable sign which is single or double faced, which may readily be moved from place to place, and which is intended to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way. 
Setback. For the purpose of this article, setback shall mean the horizontal distance between the leading face of the curb of a street and the closest point of a sign or sign structure on such lot. Where there is no curb, the measurement shall be made from the edge of the pavement. 
Sign. Any words, lettering, numerals, parts of letters or numerals, figures, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is known, made of any material, except live vegetation, including any surface, fabric, or other material background structure designed to carry such devices, as are used to designate at attract attention. This definition shall not be interpreted to include awnings except for the portion of an awning which contains a message, logo, emblem, or similar wording or symbols and any background which highlights such message, logo, emblem, or similar wording or symbols. Furthermore, this definition shall not be interpreted to include architectural features of a building even when such features (i.e. roof style/color) are identifiable with a certain establishment. 
Sign structure. Any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of supporting a sign, including any decorative cover for said sign structure. 
Single tenant. A single business establishment, activity or use. 
Soffit. The underside of a structural component such as an arch, beam or cornice. 
Street frontage. That portion of a lot abutting a publicly maintained street or alley. 
Suspended or transom sign. A sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface, such as a canopy or marquee, and which is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign. A sign with or without a structural frame, not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground and intended for a limited period of display; provided, however, this shall specifically exclude portable or moveable signs which are hereinafter prohibited. 
Time/date/temperature sign. A sign containing numerals or letters, which may be alternately displayed, and which alternating portion only shows the time, date and/or temperature. This sign shall not be considered a flashing or an animated sign. 
Trademark. A name, symbol, or other device identifying a product which is officially registered and legally restricted to the use by its owner. 
Wall sign. Any sign painted or attached flat against and parallel to the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and/or which projects from that wall or surface. 
Wind sign. A suspended sign made of a flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic or waterproof paper, including, but not limited to, banners, pennants, spinners or streamers. 
Window sign. A sign which is permanently painted on, permanently attached to or designed to be visible through a window, excluding displays of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-2), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2189, § 2, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 2254, §§ 2, 3, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-3. - General provisions. 
A.  Administration. The planning department of the City of Asheville shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The director of planning shall appoint a sign administrator to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this article and all other provisions of laws relating to signs. The duties of the sign administrator shall include not only the issuance of permits as required in subsection (B) of this section, but also enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
B.  Permit requirements. 
1.  General requirements. Except as otherwise provided in section 30-9-3(C) and 30-9-3(D), it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign or sign structure without first obtaining a sign permit. Application for the permit shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the sign administrator and signed by the applicant or authorized agent. No permit shall be required, however, for the maintenance requirements of section 30-9-7 hereinafter. Failure to secure a permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
2.  Plans, specifications and other data required. The application shall be accompanied by complete information as required on forms provided by the sign administrator and shall include, without being limited to, a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, a drawing of the building facade indicating the proposed location of the sign, height, dimensions and square footage of the proposed sign and any other data as the sign administrator may determine is necessary for review of the application. The sign administrator shall not issue a sign permit unless the plans, specifications and intended use of such sign conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this article. 
3.  Fees. 
(a)  Generally. A sign permit fee shall be paid to the City of Asheville for each sign permit applied for in accordance with this article in an amount determined by the City of Asheville through the adoption of its fees and charges manual and based on the size of the sign. This permit fee does not include electrical permit fees, which shall be additional. A sign permit fee shall not be charged for replacing a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign or for bringing a nonconforming sign into conformance with this article if such action is undertaken voluntarily within three years of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  When fees payable. Sign permit fees shall be paid upon the application for a sign permit and prior to commencement of any sign construction on the lot where the sign will be located. 
(c)  Late fee. Work performed without a permit shall be subject to a late fee as set forth in the City of Asheville fees and charges manual. 
4.  Revocation of permits for nonuse. 
(a)  Commencement of work. If actual work for the permitted sign on the site is not commenced within 60 days from the date of such sign permit or if substantial work for the permitted sign is suspended for a period of 60 consecutive days after issuance of the sign permit, the permit shall automatically become null and void. Provided, however, for new construction, the sign permit shall not become null and void until 60 days after the certificate of compliance has been issued. 
(b)  Extensions of time. The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply when delays are not a result of willful acts or neglect of the persons obtaining the permit. In that event, the sign administrator may grant an extension of time within which operations must be started or resumed. All requests for such extensions and approval thereof shall be in writing. 
5.  Forfeiture of fees. When any permit has been revoked under the terms of this article, the permit fees shall not be refunded. If a sign permit is denied, however, the permit fee will be refunded. 
6.  Licenses. 
(a)  Sign contractor's license. No person shall engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued a sign contractor's license which has not expired at the time said work is done. This requirement shall be interpreted to exclude those persons who construct and erect a principal use identification sign when that sign is used at that person's place of business, provided all construction and installation is properly permitted and inspected for compliance with the applicable building codes of the City of Asheville and other sections of this article. 
(b)  Outdoor advertising license. No person shall erect or maintain off-premises advertising structures in the City of Asheville unless said person has been issued an outdoor advertising license which has not expired at the time said work is done. In order to obtain an outdoor advertising license, the licensee must be a licensed sign contractor, as described in subsection (a) above, and must submit annually upon renewal of this license a listing of all sign structures leased, owned or maintained by the licensee. Such list shall give the specific location of each sign by reference to ward, sheet and tax lot number as indicated on the Buncombe County tax maps and by reference to the name of the property owner. 
C.  Signs exempt from regulation. Unless otherwise prohibited hereinafter in sections 30-9-4(A) or 30-9-7, the following signs are exempt from regulation under this article: 
1.  Signs which are not designed to be visible beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which they are located and/or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, except as such signs may be regulated hereinafter. 
2.  Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties; governmental signs or signs installed under governmental authority which note the donation of buildings, structures or streetscape materials (such as, but not limited to, benches, trash cans, lampposts and park facilities). 
3.  Flags, pennants, or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county or city, any religious, civic or fraternal organization, or any educational or cultural facility and/or any one corporate flag per lot; except when such are used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device or as an integral part of a sign regulated under this article. 
4.  Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday/celebration. 
5.  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices or signs providing directions around such conditions. 
6.  Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services which are incorporated as an integral part of a window display. 
7.  Unless such signs are used in the manner prohibited under section 30-9-4 hereinafter, signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles which are being operated in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name of the owner or business and which are affixed or painted onto moving vans, delivery trucks, contractors' vehicles and equipment and the like, are exempt from regulation, provided that, when not being so operated, such vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles and in such a manner and location on the lot so as to minimize their visibility from any street to the greatest extent feasible. 
8.  Trademarks or product names which are displayed as part of vending machines, dispensing machines, automatic teller machines, and gasoline pumps. 
9.  Signs required for or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. These signs may be of any type, number, area, height above grade, location or illumination authorized by law, statute or ordinance under which such signs are required or authorized. 
10.  Signs that display information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general public with regard to a particular piece of property shall be located on the premises to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a sign. 
11.  Signs attached to buildings existing as of the effective date of this article which identify buildings and which are permanently integrated by etching, embossing and/or engraving or which are otherwise permanently made a part of building facades. These signs specifically include, but are not limited to, commemorative cornerstones. 
12.  Signs designated to be historically significant and/or landmark signs by the city council provided the signs satisfy one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  The sign is significant to the history of the City of Asheville, including, but not limited to, the character of the city as a tourist attraction or cultural center. 
(b)  The sign is unique, notably aesthetic, or creative so as to make a significant contribution as a work of art. 
(c)  The sign merits recognition as an important example of technology, craftsmanship, materials or design of the period in which it was constructed and may no longer be economically feasible to produce or manufacture the sign today. 
13.  Temporary signs providing directions or other information in conjunction with a community festival or event permitted under section 25-16.1 [16-97] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
14.  Signs affixed to windows of vehicles displaying the terms of sale for said vehicles. 
D.  Signs exempt from permit requirement. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below as well as to other applicable requirements of this article. 
1.  Real estate signs. Temporary signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the property on which said signs are located are allowed, provided such signs are nonilluminated and do not exceed two signs per lot, do not exceed four feet in height and do not exceed four square feet per face for property zoned residential or do not exceed eight feet in height and do not exceed 32 square feet per face for property zoned other than residential. All such signs shall be removed within seven days after the closing of the sale, rental, or lease of the property. 
2.  Commemorative signs. Commemorative signs which do not exceed eight square feet per face in area and eight feet in height. 
3.  Directional signs. Directional signs shall be located on the premises to which directions are indicated. If advertising (name or logo) is used on these signs it shall be computed as part of the total allowable sign area for a lot. Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet per face, two faces per sign, and shall not exceed three feet in height if freestanding or six feet in height if attached to the principal or an accessory structure. The maximum number of signs allowed per lot shall be four. These signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
4.  Incidental signs. Signs containing information necessary or convenient for persons coming on to a premises shall be located on the premises to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a sign and these signs shall be single-faced only and wholly attached to a building (including the windows or doors). If advertising (name or logo) is used on these signs it shall be computed as part of the total allowable signage for a lot. 
5.  Copy changes and maintenance. No permit shall be required for copy changes made to a changeable copy sign, menu board, marquee sign or off-premises sign; provided any such changes do not change the classification of the sign under this article. No permit shall be required for maintenance where no structural changes are made. 
6.  Political signs. Signs of candidates for election or for issues on a ballot shall be allowed in any zoning district providing such signs do not exceed eight square feet in area per display face and two faces per sign. All such signs may not be erected prior to 30 days before the appropriate primary or 45 days before the appropriate general or run-off or referendum and must be removed within five days after the primary, general or run-off election or referendum. Provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the use of off-premise signs for such candidates or issues according to the restrictions for such signs in zoning districts where they are permitted. Such off-premises signs shall not be subject to the time limits for erection prior to or removal following any election. In all cases, the property owner and the political candidate shall be equally responsible for the removal of the signs. 
7.  Construction signs. Construction signs shall be allowed provided such signs do not exceed one sign per street frontage with a maximum of two signs per construction site. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per display face, two faces per sign for single-family or duplex residential construction or 32 square feet in area per display face for multifamily residential or nonresidential construction, and a maximum of ten feet in height. Construction signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven days of the issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
E.  Noncommercial messages. Any sign, display, or device allowed under this article may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, and that complies with size, lighting, and spacing requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-3), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-4. - Signs prohibited in all zoning districts. 
The following signs and/or sign features shall not be erected or maintained in any zoning district within the jurisdiction of the City of Ashe- ville: 
A.  Signs on roadside appurtenances. On- or off-premises signs on roadside appurtenances, including, but not limited to roadside benches, bus stop shelters, planters, utility poles, trees, parking meter poles and refuse containers, with the exception of commemorative signs or governmental signs. 
B.  Portable or moveable display signs erected on or after July 31, 1990. Between the effective date of this article and July 31, 1990, portable or moveable display signs shall be allowed in commercial service, commercial highway, light industrial and heavy industrial zoning districts for no more than 30 consecutive calendar days during any 90-day period. Following the expiration of said 90-day period which shall begin with the date specified on the appropriate sign permit, subsequent temporary sign permits may be applied for and issued. The size of the sign shall be limited to 50 square feet per face and only one sign shall be allowed per lot for single tenant development and only two signs shall be allowed per lot for multiple tenant development. 
C.  Signs located in the right-of-way. Signs, whether temporary or permanent, within any street or highway right-of-way, with the exception of governmental signs; provided, however, projecting signs which are allowed under section 30-9-5(B) hereinafter are not hereby prohibited and signs providing direction to churches, public auditoriums or properties designated as local or national historic properties, all of which are single-faced and no greater than two square foot in total area per sign and limited to nine feet in height are not hereby prohibited, but shall be allowed only by permit issued by the City of Asheville and shall be limited to three signs permitted per church, public auditorium or historic property. 
D.  Signs on vehicles. Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign. This does not include temporary construction site vehicles on active construction sites. 
E.  Roof signs. Signs on the surfaces of a mansard roof and on parapets shall not, however, be hereby prohibited provided the signs do not extend higher than the height restriction for on-premises freestanding signs in the zoning district in which the sign is located and provided that the signs do not extend above the mansard roof or parapet to which they are attached. 
F.  Wind signs. Wind signs except in conjunction with a community festival or event sponsored by a nonprofit organization or a governmental agency and except as wind signs are allowed under section 30-9-5(A)(13) hereinafter. A sign permit must be obtained for any wind signs erected. Signs erected in conjunction with a community festival or event shall be allowed for seven days. 
G.  Off-premises signs in all residential, office institutional, commercial general, neighborhood commercial and central business zoning districts. 
H.  Off-premises signs in national and local historic districts or on national or local historic properties. 
I.  Off-premises signs along scenic drives. Off-premises signs designed to be visible from streets designated by the Asheville City Council as "scenic drives" and/or "park- ways." 
J.  Off-premises signs which are within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way and visible from the maintained traveled way of the federal aid primary and interstate system, all as described in the Federal Highway Beautification Assistance Act of 1979, as amended, and which are constructed or erected on or after the effective date of this article. Provided, further, off-premises signs located specifically as described hereinbefore which were erected prior to the effective date of this article are not prohibited from continuing, notwithstanding their nonconformance with regulations of this article, other than conformance with the maintenance provisions set forth in section 30-9-7 hereinafter. 
K.  Signs of illusion. Signs with optical illusion of movement by means of a design which presents a pattern capable of reversible perspective, giving the illusion of motion. 
L.  Signs resembling traffic signals. Signs displaying intermittent light resembling the flashing light customarily used in traffic signals, or used by police, fire, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles, nor shall any sign use the word "stop," "danger," or any other words, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that might be misconstrued as a public safety warning or traffic sign. 
M.  Animated signs and flashing signs. 
N.  Abandoned signs or sign structures. 
O.  Signs obstructing access. Signs which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a driveway or a required door, window, fire escape or other required exitway. 
P.  Sandwich board signs. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-4), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-5. - On-premises signs. 
A.  General provisions for on-premises signs. Following the effective date of this article, on-premises signs shall not be erected or maintained in any zoning district except in compliance with the provisions set forth in this article. 
1.  Computation of sign area. 
(a)  The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectilinear figure (but which shall have a continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight lines) which encompasses all lettering, wording, design or symbols, together with any background on which the sign is located and any illuminated part of the sign, if such background or such illuminated part of the sign is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Any cutouts or extensions shall be included in the area of a sign, but supports and bracing which are not intended as part of the sign shall be excluded. In the case of a multifaced sign, the area of the sign shall be considered to include all faces visible from one direction. The area of a wall or window sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectilinear figure (but which shall have a continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight lines) which encompasses all of the letters or symbols and the background and illuminated part of such sign when either or both are designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. 
(b)  The space between one identification sign and one changeable copy sign on a signpost or structure or attached to a building shall not be included in the total square footage if both signs serve a single business located on the lot. The space between two or more changeable copy components of a sign or between two or more permanent copy components of a sign shall be included, however, in the total square footage of sign area allowed. 
(c)  Where three-dimensional figures are used as signs, the area shall be the total of all sides made an integral part of the projected figure used in conveying the intended message. 
2.  Group development. Any development which is part of a group development shall be governed by section 30-9-5(B) and section 30-9-5(C) hereinafter and by article 6 and article 11 of chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
3.  Encroachment into right-of-way. No part of any sign shall be located on or extended into a public right-of-way except as projecting signs are allowed by this article. 
4.  Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic resources commission shall be required prior to the issuance of a sign permit for all signs located in local historic districts. 
5.  Time/date/temperature signs. Time, date and temperature signs which do not exceed ten square feet per face shall not be included in the allowable sign area, provided, however, if an existing freestanding sign is located on the lot, then the time, date and temperature sign must be incorporated into the existing freestanding sign. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of such signs to maintain such signs and insure that they are kept accurate. If these conditions are not met, the sign shall be repaired or removed. 
6.  Signs for nonconforming uses. Signs for nonconforming uses, where such uses may be continued, shall be allowed, but shall comply with all regulations for signs in the zoning district where such signs are located. 
7.  Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Any light used for illumination shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine into surrounding areas or on the public roadway. 
(b)  Neither direct nor reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
8.  Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be allowed in all nonresidential districts as follows: 
(a)  Temporary signs which are affixed to the inside of a window and which do not exceed a cumulative total for all such signs of 16 square feet in area are allowed, without a permit, for each business. 
(b)  Temporary signs affixed to the inside of windows and which exceed a cumulative total for all such signs of 16 square feet in area or temporary signs which are freestanding or attached to a structure other than at the inside of a window shall be allowed twice a year per business. These signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall require a sign permit, and shall be allowed for a period of 30 days for each sign permitted. No time extensions shall be granted. 
9.  Inflatable balloon sign. One inflatable balloon sign shall be allowed per commercial or industrial zoning district at any one time, limited to once a year per business. This limitation shall not apply, however, to community festivals or events permitted by the City of Asheville pursuant to section 25-16.1 [16-97] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. Further, inflatable balloon signs shall not be internally illuminated; shall not be higher than 25 feet above grade; and shall not be erected or maintained on a building parapet or roof. The time allowed for these signs shall not exceed ten days. These signs shall be located on either an attached, tethered or freestanding structure. The sign and its structure shall not block or inhibit the visibility of vehicular traffic or in any way pose a danger to pedestrians or vehicular traffic or property. The sign may advertise a product, service, or sponsor affiliated with the event or the event itself. 
10.  Visibility. No sign or structure shall be erected or maintained to impede safe and adequate visibility from vehicles or for pedestrians. 
11.  Signs for tall buildings. Buildings which are seven stories or greater in height shall be allowed one wall sign per side, not to exceed four sides, which signs shall be located at the seventh story or above and shall not exceed 125 square feet per sign. These signs shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the attached signs permitted for the zoning district wherein the building is located; provided, however, individual tenants with building frontage at the first floor (or street level) only shall be allowed tenant identification signs as set forth in section 30-9-5(C) hereinafter. 
12.  [ Additional freestanding sign. ] Any business which has street frontage of less than 50 feet along a street shall be allowed one additional freestanding sign on its lot provided that the additional freestanding sign was erected under a valid permit prior to the effective date of this article and, provided further, that one of the freestanding signs is located more than 200 feet from the street and that both freestanding signs conform with the provisions of this article. 
13.  Wind signs. Wind signs shall be permitted in the central business district, in local historic districts, and in group developments which are retail shopping centers subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Wind signs shall be limited to one sign per pole, mastarm or other device and maintained in good condition without fraying, tearing or fading. 
(b)  Wind signs shall be constructed of nylon, canvas or plastic material. 
(c)  Each wind sign must be at least eight square feet in area and less than 24 square feet in area and all banners on the same lot must be consistent in colors and materials. 
(d)  No wind sign may contain a commercial advertising message, name, or logo. 
(e)  Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. 
B.  On-premises signs: single tenant development. The following sign regulations shall be applicable for single tenant development within the zoning districts indicated for single tenant development. Any sign not specifically allowed shall be deemed as prohibited. 
1.  Residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5). Signs allowed for nonresidential uses (excluding home occupations) within these zoning districts may be either: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy 
Attached: 	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/canopy 
	Changeable copy 
 
(a)  One business or product identification sign is allowed per lot for nonresidential uses. For freestanding or attached signs, the total allowable area per face of selected sign (excluding home occupation signs) shall not exceed 15 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. Signs may be either internally or externally illuminated. Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected: 
If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of six feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet. 
If projecting: Sign (excluding awning/canopy signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5 (A) (8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
(b)  Subdivision and multifamily development identification signs may contain the name of the development only and must either be freestanding ground signs or attached wall signs. If the signs are freestanding ground signs, the height shall be limited to six feet from grade and the minimum setback shall be ten feet. Only two entrances to the development may have a sign. The main entrance sign shall have no more than 32 square feet (16 square feet per face). The secondary entrance sign shall have no more than 16 square feet (eight square feet per face). Only two sign faces shall be allowed at each entrance, however, said sign faces may be on two individual sign structures. 
(c)  Churches, schools, and institutions located in residential zoning districts are allowed one additional freestanding pole or ground sign or attached wall sign, either of which may be only a changeable copy sign, with the total area of the changeable copy sign no greater than 12 square feet per face, with two sign faces per sign and a maximum of six feet in height, with a minimum setback of ten feet. 
(d)  Attached home occupation signs shall not exceed one square foot per face, with no more than two faces per sign, and shall not be illuminated. 
2.  Office-institutional district. Signs allowed within this zoning district may be either: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
Attached: 	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/Canopy 
 
Two business or product identification signs are allowed per lot, only one of which shall be a freestanding pole or ground sign. Corner lots are allowed one additional attached sign on separate street frontage, not to exceed a total of three separate signs. For freestanding or attached signs, the total allowable area per face of selected sign(s) shall not exceed 60 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. In the event the freestanding sign is less than the 60 square feet per face allowed, the difference between the 60 square feet per face allowed and the size of sign erected may be used to increase the size of the attached sign by that difference. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected: 
If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of eight feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
3.  Commercial general district, neighborhood commercial district. Signs allowed within the zoning district may be either: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy 
	Menu board 
Attached: 	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/canopy 
	Changeable copy 
	Menu board 
 
(a)  Two business or product identification signs are allowed per lot, only one of which shall be freestanding pole or ground sign. Corner lots are allowed one additional attached sign on separate street frontage, not to exceed a total of three separate signs. For freestanding or attached signs, the total allowable area per face of selected sign(s) shall not exceed 40 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. In the event the freestanding sign is less than the 40 square feet per face allowed, the difference between the 40 square feet per face allowed and the size of sign erected may be used to increase the size of the attached sign by that difference. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected. 
If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of 12 feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
If menu board: One external menu board with one face is allowed per restaurant. The total sign area shall not exceed 36 square feet per face. The sign shall not be located so that the copy is designed to be visible to vehicular traffic from the roadway. The minimum setback shall be ten feet. 
(b)  For any lot which has no street frontage along but which is within 400 feet of the edge of the paved portion of Tunnel Road, Patton Avenue or Hendersonville Road, the permitted size of a freestanding sign on that property shall be allowed to be increased by 20 percent of the allowed square footage for freestanding signs up to a maximum of 48 square feet and the height of the freestanding sign shall be allowed to be increased by 20 percent of the allowed height up to a maximum of 14.4 feet high. Provided, however, that any sign so constructed shall be at least 100 feet from the nearest edge of the paved portion of the roads listed hereinbefore. 
4.  Commercial service, commercial highway, light industrial, heavy industrial districts. Signs allowed within the zoning district may be either: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy 
	Menu board 
Attached: 	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/canopy 
	Changeable copy 
	Menu board 
 
(a)  Two business or product identification signs are allowed per lot, only one of which shall be freestanding pole or ground sign. Corner lots are allowed one additional attached sign on separate street frontage, not to exceed a total of three separate signs. For freestanding or attached signs, the total allowable area per face of selected sign(s) shall not exceed 125 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(b)  In the event the freestanding sign is less than the 125 square feet per face allowed, the difference between the 125 square feet per face allowed and the size of sign erected may be used to increase the size of the attached sign by that difference. 
(c)  In the event that a lot has an off-premises sign which has the total maximum square footage allowed for both sides of the sign structure under section 30-9-6(B)(1) hereinafter, no on-premises freestanding sign shall be allowed on that lot. Where the off-premises sign is less than that total square footage allowed, the total square footage for both sides of the on-premises freestanding sign for that lot shall be no greater than the difference between the maximum square footage allowed for both sides of the off-premises sign and the size of the off-premises sign erected, but in no event shall the on-premises freestanding sign be greater than the maximum 125 square feet allowed per face. When the provisions of this subsection (c) apply, they shall in no way be interpreted to allow on-premises attached signs to be further increased in size under the formula set forth in subsection (b) hereinabove. Provided, however, on-premises freestanding signs with off-premises signs on the same lot which were both erected prior to the effective date of this article, shall be allowed to remain when conforming with the other provisions of this article. 
(d)  Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected: 
If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of 25 feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy and marquee signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
If menu board: One external menu board with one face is allowed per restaurant. The total sign area shall not exceed 36 square feet per face. The sign shall not be located so that the copy is designed to be visible to vehicular traffic from the roadway. The minimum setback shall be ten feet. 
(e)  For any lot which has no street frontage along but which is within 400 feet of the edge of the paved portion of Tunnel Road, Patton Avenue or Hendersonville Road, the permitted size of a freestanding sign on that property shall be allowed to be increased by 20 percent of the allowed square footage for freestanding signs up to a maximum of 150 square feet and the height of the freestanding sign shall be allowed to be increased by 20 percent of the allowed height up to a maximum of 30 feet high. Provided, however, that any sign so constructed shall be at least 100 feet from the nearest edge of the paved portion of the roads listed hereinbefore. 
5.  Central business district. Signs allowed within the zoning district may be either: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
Attached: 	Projecting 
	Window 
	Wall 
	Awning/canopy 
 
(a)  One freestanding and one attached business or product identification signs are allowed per lot. Corner lots or through lots are allowed one additional attached sign on separate street frontage not to exceed a total of three separate signs. Total allowable area per face of selected sign(s) shall not exceed 50 square feet per face, with two faces per sign allowed. In the event the freestanding sign is less than the 50 square feet per face allowed, the difference between the 50 square feet per face allowed and the size of sign erected may be used to increase the size of the attached sign by that difference. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. As an exception to the square footage allowed above, marquee signs shall be allowed a maximum of 95 feet per face and 190 square feet per sign for the allowed freestanding or attached sign. Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on the type of sign selected: 
If freestanding pole or ground: The sign shall be a maximum of 20 feet in height with no minimum setback. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy and marquee signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be at a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above the third story of the building or above the building soffit, eave line, or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of building. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
C.  On-premises signs: multiple tenant development. The following sign regulations shall be applicable within the zoning districts indicated for multiple tenant development. Any sign not specifically allowed is prohibited. Multiple tenant developments which are defined as a group development shall also be governed by article 6 and article 11 of chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville. 
Multiple tenant developments may erect either a development identification or joint identification sign. In addition, tenant identification signs for individual businesses within a development are allowed. 
For a multiple tenant development, the development itself is allowed one identification sign for each property boundary with street frontage with a maximum of two signs allowed per development, only one of which may be freestanding. These identification signs may be either a development identification or a joint identification sign. The choice of sign affects the tenant identification regulations within the development. If there is no development identification or joint identification sign erected or maintained, individual tenants shall be allowed signs as permitted for individual tenants where a development identification sign is used. Where one type of sign has been selected and an additional identification sign is allowed due to a second street frontage, the additional sign must be of the same type (i.e., two development identification signs or two joint identification signs). If a joint identification sign is selected, said sign shall be limited to one sign component per tenant. 
1.  Development identification signs. Where a development identification sign is selected, such a sign or signs may be of the following types: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
Attached: 	Wall 
	Projecting 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
 
The sign(s) shall meet the following requirements based on the zoning district in which it is located. 
Zoning 
District 	Maximum 
Height 
Allowed 	Maximum Square 
Footage Per Face 
Residential 	 6 ft. 	 25 sq. ft.  
Office-institutional 	 8 ft. 	 90 sq. ft.  
Commercial general and neighborhood commercial 	12 ft. 	 60 sq. ft.  
Commercial service, commercial highway, light and heavy industrial 	25 ft. 	187.5 sq. ft. 
Central business district 	20 ft. 	 75 sq. ft.  
 
Setback for freestanding development identification signs in all zoning districts (except the Central Business District) shall be 15 feet. There shall be no minimum setback requirement for freestanding identification signs in the Central Business District. In addition, if the principal use of a tenant in the development is a theater, auditorium, fairground or museum, it will be allowed one additional freestanding or attached marquee sign with the maximum square footage, height and setback in accordance with applicable regulations for single tenant developments in section 30-9-5(B) hereinbefore except no such marquee signage will be allowed in residential districts. 
Where a development identification sign is selected, the individual tenant identification within the development shall meet the following regulations. Tenant identification signs shall be of the following types: 
Attached: 	Awning 
	Wall 
	Projecting 
	Window 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
 
One attached sign is allowed for each exterior public business entrance. The total allowable sign area for the building frontage having the primary business entrance shall be 25 square feet or one square foot per one linear foot of said building frontage, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the area be greater than the maximum square footage per face allowed for a development identification sign in the zoning district where the business is located. Each secondary business entrance shall be allowed a total sign area of one square foot per three linear feet of building frontage where the secondary business entrance is located. A maximum of two secondary business entrance signs is allowed. Where an exterior entrance does not exist, the tenant will be allowed one window sign. Signs may be illuminated internally or externally. 
Also, one suspended or transom sign may be incorporated per business, which sign shall not exceed six square feet per face per sign. Where an exterior entrance does not exist, the tenant will be allowed one window sign. Signs may be illuminated internally or externally. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy and marquee signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above third story of building or above the building soffit, eave line or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of the building. 
2.  Joint identification signs. Where a joint identification sign is selected, such sign or signs may be of the following types: 
Freestanding: 	Pole 
	Ground 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
Attached: 	Wall 
	Projecting 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
 
The sign(s) shall meet the following requirements based on the zoning district in which it is located: 
Zoning 
District 	Maximum 
Height 
Allowed 	Maximum Square 
Footage Per Face 
Residential 	 6 ft. 	 25 sq. ft.  
Office-institutional 	 8 ft. 	 90 sq. ft.  
Commercial general and neighborhood commercial 	12 ft. 	 60 sq. ft.  
Commercial service, commercial highway, light and heavy industrial 	25 ft. 	187.5 sq. ft. 
Central business district 	20 ft. 	75 sq. ft. 
 
Setback for freestanding joint identification signs in all zoning districts (except the Central Business District) shall be 15 feet. There shall be no minimum setback requirement for freestanding identification signs in the Central Business District. In addition, if the principal use of a tenant in the development is a theater, auditorium, fairground, or museum, it will be allowed one additional freestanding or attached marquee sign with the maximum square footage, height and setback in accordance with applicable regulations for single tenant developments in section 30-9-5(B) hereinbefore except no such marquee signage will be allowed in residential districts. 
Where a joint identification sign is selected, the individual tenant identification within the development shall meet the following regulations. Tenant identification signs shall be of the following types: 
Attached: 	Awning 
	Wall 
	Projecting 
	Window 
	Changeable copy (except in the Central Business District) 
 
One attached sign is allowed for each exterior public business entrance. The total allowable sign area for the building frontage having the primary business entrance shall be 20 square feet or one square foot per two linear feet of said building frontage, whichever is greater, but in no event shall the area be greater than 60 percent of the maximum square footage allowed for a joint identification sign in the zoning district where the business is located. Each secondary business entrance shall be allowed a total sign area of one square foot per three linear feet of building frontage where the secondary business entrance is located. A maximum of two secondary business entrance signs is allowed. Where an exterior entrance does not exist, the tenant will be allowed one window sign. Signs may be illuminated internally or externally. 
If wall: Maximum projection from a wall shall be 12 inches. 
If projecting: Signs (excluding awning/canopy and marquee signs) shall not project more than three feet from the facade of the building. Clearance over sidewalks shall be a minimum of nine feet and clearance over streets, alleys or driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet. Signs shall not project above third story of building or above the building soffit, eave line or building parapet. 
If window: Only permanent identification signs are allowed as window signs; provided, however, temporary signs which are placed in or on windows shall be allowed when complying with section 30-9-5(A)(8) hereinbefore. Window signs are not allowed above the third story of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-5), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2026, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2254, § 1, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-6. - Off-premises signs. 
A.  General provisions for off-premises signs. Following the effective date of this article, off-premises signs shall not be erected, or maintained in any zoning district except in compliance with the provisions set forth in this article. 
1.  Computation of sign area. 
(a)  The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectilinear figure (but which shall have a continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight lines) which encompasses all lettering, wording, frame, design or symbols, together with any background on which the sign is located and any illuminated part of the sign, if such background or such illuminated part of the sign is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Any cutouts or extensions shall be included in the area of a sign, but supports and bracing which are not intended as part of the sign shall be excluded. In the case of a multifaced sign, the area of the sign shall be considered to include all faces visible from one direction. 
(b)  Where three-dimensional figures are used as or on signs, the area shall be the total of all sides made an integral part of the projected figure used in conveying the intended message. 
2.  Encroachment into the right-of-way. No part of any sign shall be located on or extended into a public right-of-way. 
3.  Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Any light used for the illumination shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly into surrounding areas or on the public roadway. 
(b)  Neither direct nor reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
4.  Visibility. No sign or structure shall be erected or maintained to impede safe and adequate visibility from vehicles or for pedestrians. 
5.  Extensions. No extension(s) shall be allowed beyond those dimensions for the sign area as initially permitted. 
B.  Off-premises signs by zoning districts. The following sign regulations shall be applicable within the zoning districts wherein off-premises signs are allowed. Any sign not specifically allowed is prohibited. 
In the commercial service, commercial highway, light industrial and heavy industrial zoning districts, off-premises signs are allowed subject to the restrictions set forth herein. 
1.  Size. 
(a)  No off-premises sign shall exceed 150 square feet per directional flow of traffic (300 square feet total per sign structure). 
(b)  A maximum of four faces per sign structure is allowed, positioned either back to back or v-shaped, such that only two faces are allowed per side. Both sides of a double-faced or v-shaped sign shall be of equal size. In no case shall there be more than two faces per directional flow of traffic. 
2.  Height. 
(a)  No off-premises sign shall exceed 25 feet in height. 
3.  Spacing. 
(a)  The minimum distance between any two sign structures shall be 1,000 linear feet on either side of the same street. 
(b)  No off-premises sign shall be located within a 200-foot radius of a school, place of worship, public park, national park and/or forest land(s) or bridge. 
(c)  No off-premises sign shall be located within 75 feet of any intersection. 
(d)  No off-premises sign shall be located within a 100-foot radius of a residentially zoned property. 
(e)  No off-premises sign shall be located within 50 feet of any building or on-premises sign. 
4.  Setback. Minimum setback distances shall be as follows: 
(a)  For sign area of 0 to 75 square feet per face—10 feet. 
(b)  For sign area of 76 to 150 square feet per face—20 feet. 
For all sign sizes, the minimum setback distances from all other property lines shall be ten feet. 
5.  On-premises signs. In the event that an off-premises sign which is located on the same lot as an on-premises freestanding sign, the on-premises freestanding sign is subject to section 30-9-5(B)(4)(c) hereinbefore. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-6), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-7. - Maintenance. 
A.  To insure that signs are erected and maintained in a safe and aesthetic manner, it shall be unlawful for any sign designed to be visible from any public street or highway within the jurisdiction of the City of Asheville to be erected or maintained by any person, other than by a sign contractor properly licensed under section 30-9-3(B)(6) or by a designated representative of such licensed contractor, except that this requirement shall be interpreted to exclude those persons who construct and erect a principal use identification sign when said sign is used at said person's place of business and to exclude licensed general contractors erecting signs as part of a permitted construction or renovation project; provided, however, in all cases, all erection must be properly permitted and inspected for compliance with the applicable codes of the State of North Carolina and the City of Asheville and with other sections of this article. 
B.  The following maintenance requirements must be observed for all signs visible from any public street or highway within the jurisdiction of this article. 
1.  No sign shall have more than 20 percent of its surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint or poster paper for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
2.  No sign shall be allowed to stand with bent or broken sign facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts or be allowed to stand more than 15 degrees away from the perpendicular for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
3.  No sign shall be allowed to have weeds, vines, landscaping or other vegetation growing upon it and obscuring its view from the street or highway from which it is to be viewed for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
4.  No neon or internally illuminated sign may be allowed to stand with only partial illumination for a period of more than 30 successive days. 
5.  If a sign or sign structure is damaged due to factors other than vandalism or other criminal or tortious acts such that more than 50 percent of the value is lost, with such determination made by the sign administrator, any repair or replacement must be done in conformance with this article. If a sign or sign structure is damaged due to vandalism or other criminal or tortious acts, it may be repaired or replaced, regardless of cost, but must be repaired or replaced as previously permitted or if no permit exists, it must be repaired or replaced to the same specifications to which and with the same materials of which the sign was constructed immediately prior to the act which caused the damage. 
C.  The sign administrator may inspect all signs for compliance with these maintenance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-7), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-8. - Structural and construction requirements. 
All on-premises and off-premises signs allowed by this article shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-8), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-9. - Enforcement. 
Violation of the provisions of these sign regulations shall be enforceable as set forth below in addition to the enforcement provisions as set forth in section 30-10-7 of the Code of Ordinances [this appendix] of the City of Asheville. 
A.  Notice of violation. The sign administrator shall have the authority to issue a notice of violation for all violations of this article. 
Where the owner of the sign is indicated on the sign or is otherwise apparent or known to the sign administrator, a copy of the notice of violation shall be delivered to the sign owner by hand delivery or by certified mail. In all other cases, a copy of the notice of violation shall be posted on the sign. A copy of the notice of violation shall also be delivered by hand delivery or certified mail to the property owner as shown on the Buncombe County tax records. In addition, service hereunder may be made in accordance with rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
B.  Time to remedy violation. Other than for temporary signs, all violations shall be remedied within 30 days. The 30-day period shall commence upon the service of the notice of violation as set forth above. Violations of regulations for temporary signs shall be remedied within 24 hours after service of the notice of violation as set forth above. 
C.  Extension of time for compliance. Other than for violations of regulations for temporary signs, the sign administrator shall have the authority to grant a single 30-day extension of time within which to remedy the violation. For violations of regulations for temporary signs, the sign administrator shall have the authority to issue a single 24-hour extension of time within which to remedy the violation. Either single extension of time may be issued based upon a written request for extension of time which sets forth valid reasons for not complying within the original time period. 
D.  Remedies for failure to comply. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-175(f) [G.S. 160A-175(f)], the sign administrator, in consultation with the city attorney, may choose from the remedies set forth below to enforce the requirements of this article when there is a failure to comply with the notice of violation. Those remedies are as follows: 
1.  In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in this section, the sign administrator may issue a citation setting forth a civil penalty of $50.00, pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-175(c) [G.S. 160A-175(c)]. In the case of a continuing violation, each 72-hour period during which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The citation shall be served upon the person(s) described in subsection (A) by the means set forth therein. In the event the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days of service of the citation, the civil penalty shall be collected by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, which shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4 [G.S. 14-4]. 
2.  In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in this section, the sign administrator shall have the authority to issue a remove order for any sign not repaired or brought into compliance within the time required by the foregoing provisions. Remove orders shall be issued to and served upon the person(s) described in subsection (A) by the means set forth therein. The sign shall be removed 30 days after the service of the remove order at the expense of the offender. The remove order shall describe with particularity the location of the sign to be removed and all of the reasons for issuance of the remove order, including specific reference to the provisions of this article which have been violated. 
3.  In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in this section, the city attorney may seek injunctive relief in the appropriate court. 
E.  Removal and recovery of expense. In the event of failure to comply with the requirements of a remove order, the sign administrator may cause such sign to be removed. The sign owner and property owner may be jointly and severally liable for the expense of removal. Notice of the cost of removal shall be served upon the person(s) described in subsection (A) by the means set forth therein. If said sum is not paid within 30 days thereafter, said sum shall be collected by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, which shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 14-4 [G.S. 14-4]. 
F.  Removal of dangerous signs. Pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. sec. 160A-193 [G.S. 160A-193], the sign administrator shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate or remedy a sign which the chief building inspector determines to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety. The expense of the action shall be paid by sign owner, or if the sign owner cannot be determined, by the property owner, and if not paid, shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the nuisance arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
G.  Removal of other signs. The sign administrator shall have the authority to remove summarily any signs prohibited under section 30-9-4(A) and (C). 
H.  Stay upon appeal. In the event of a timely appeal of a decision of the sign administrator to the board of adjustment, enforcement of all proceedings and the furtherance of the action appealed from is stayed, unless the sign administrator certifies to the board of adjustment that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-9), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2032, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-10. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any sign which does not conform to the requirements set forth herein. This requirement shall not be construed so as to prohibit the painting, repainting or changing of the face of a sign, including changing the message, where the resulting sign is the same size, shape and height as the preceding sign and no other alteration and no expansion is made to the sign or sign structure. 
B.  All nonconforming on-premises or off-premises signs (and their sign structures) which did not conform as of August 28, 1990 with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in Article 9 of Chapter 30 (this Appendix) of the Code of Ordinances on October 21, 1977, shall be made conforming or removed no later than August 28, 1995. In no event shall any such sign (and sign structure) be allowed for a period in excess of five years after it first becomes nonconforming pursuant to the terms of this article. 
All nonconforming on-premises and off-premises signs (and their sign structures) which conform as of August 28, 1990 with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in Article 9 of Chapter 30 (this Appendix) of the Code of Ordinances on October 21, 1977 shall be allowed to remain in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. Nonconforming signs and signs deemed conforming which were allowed to remain by the sign regulations adopted as part of the readoption of Ordinance No. 322, effective October 21, 1977, shall not be allowed to remain in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and shall be made conforming or removed no later than August 28, 1995. 
All on-premises or off-premises signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by a subsequent amendment to Article 9 of Chapter 30 (this Appendix) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Asheville, or by amendment to the official zoning map or by extension of the city's territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction, and which do not conform with the requirements of the sign regulations adopted in Article 9 of Chapter 30 (this Appendix) of the Code of Ordinances on October 21, 1977, shall be made conforming or removed within five years of the effective date of said amendments or extension. 
All on-premises or off-premises signs (and their sign structures) which did not conform with requirements of the sign regulations adopted in Article 9 of Chapter 30 (this Appendix) of the Code of Ordinances on October 21, 1977, but which have been granted a permit as a result of a variance granted by the board of adjustment shall be allowed to remain in accordance with the terms of the variance granted. 
In the event that a nonconforming off-premises sign has been made nonconforming by an extension of the sign area initially permitted for that sign, the extension shall not be allowed to continue after the copy which includes that extension has been changed. 
All portable and moveable display signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by a subsequent amendment to this article or to the official zoning map or by extension of the city's territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be removed within 90 days of the effective date of said amendments or extension. 
All temporary signs (and their sign structures) which are made nonconforming by subsequent amendment to this article or to the official zoning map, or by extension of the city's territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be removed within 90 days of the effective date of said amendments or extension. 
C.  All on-premises and off-premises signs which were erected as of the effective date of this article and which do not exceed by more than 20 percent the size, height, setback, spacing or other dimensional requirements hereunder shall be considered as conforming to the terms of this article and not subject to the foregoing removal requirements. Nothing herein shall permit any such on-premises or off-premises sign to be renovated or remodeled such that the initial percentage by which the sign exceeds those requirements is increased in any manner. Further, adjacent off-premises signs shall jointly be allowed only one single 20-percent allowance for the space between them in computing the spacing requirement set forth in section 30-9-6(B)(3)(a). 
D.  All off-premises signs which conform with all the requirements of this article, except the spacing requirement set forth in section 30-9-6(B)(3)(a), within five years of the effective date of this article shall be considered as conforming to the terms of this article and not subject to the foregoing removal requirements. 
E.  During the time periods set forth above for removal or conformance of nonconforming signs, sign structures, or uses, such nonconforming signs, sign structures, or uses as described above shall be maintained as provided for in section 30-9-7, but shall not be: 
1.  Changed to or replaced by another nonconforming sign or sign structure; 
2.  Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements); 
3.  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign or sign structure; 
4.  Expanded; 
5.  Reestablished after its discontinuance for 60 days; 
6.  Continued in use after cessation of business; or 
7.  Reestablished after damage or destruction due to factors other than vandalism or other criminal or tortuous acts if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value, as determined by the sign administrator. 
None of these prohibitions shall be construed to prohibit the painting, repainting or changing of the face of a sign, including changing the message, where the resulting sign is the same size, shape and height as the preceding sign and no other alteration and no expansion is made to the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 1863, § 2(30-9-10), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2188, §§ 1—3, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 30-9-11. - Variances. 
A.  In accordance with the procedure stated in article 8 of chapter 30 [this appendix] of the Code of Ordinances the board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and act upon applications for a variance which meet the following requirements: 
1.  If the applicant complies strictly with the provisions of this article, the applicant can make no reasonable use of the sign allowed; and 
2.  If the hardship of which the applicant complains is unique, or nearly so, and is suffered by the applicant rather than by owners of surrounding properties or the general public; and 
3.  If the hardship relates to the applicant's land (such as the terrain of the site) rather than to personal circumstances; and 
4.  If the hardship is not a result of the applicant's own actions; and 
5.  If the variance will neither result in the extension of a nonconforming use nor authorize the initiation of a nonconforming use; and 
6.  If the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and preserves its spirit and if the variance secures the public safety and welfare and does substantial justice. 
B.  In granting a variance, the board of adjustment shall make written findings that all of the above listed requirements have been met. If a variance is granted it shall be the least possible deviation from the requirements of this article. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violations of the provisions of the variance granted, including any conditions or safeguards, which are a part of the grant of the variance, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1860, § 2(30-9-11), 8-28-90; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97)  
APPENDIX B - SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES[1] 
Schedule of Civil Penalties 
The violation of those provisions of the Code of Ordinances referenced hereinafter are subject to civil penalties as set forth hereinafter. Each violation and any delinquent penalty are not subject to the penalty provisions of N.C.G.S., sec. 14-4 [G.S. 14-4], but instead constitute civil penalties to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt when the violator does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time, pursuant to N.C.G.S., sec. 160A-175(c) [G.S. 160A-175(c)]. The following civil penalties are hereby established: 
A.  Stopping, standing and parking violations established by article V of chapter 19 of the Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  Overtime parking at metered or non-metered spaces ..... $20.00 
Provided, however, as second or subsequent violation within a 24-hour period shall be subject to an additional civil penalty of $40.00 
(2)  Violation of division 5, article V (handicapped parking) ..... $250.00 
(3)  Violation of section 19-137(b) (illegally parking in a fire lane) ..... $50.00 
(4)  Violation of section 19-138 (Passenger zones, loading zones and tow-away zones) ..... $30.00 
(5)  All other violations ..... $20.00 
(6)  Parking violations included in this section shall be delinquent after the fifteenth day from the issuance of the citation; thereafter the following civil penalties shall apply to the foregoing parking violation, in addition to the stated penalty: 
Delinquent 
Period 	Additional 
Penalty 
 
(a)  15 to 30 days delinquent on all penalties ..... $25.00 
(b)  For each additional 30-day period of delinquency thereafter for the penalties set forth in subsections A(1) through A(6) the city may assess an additional $25.00 penalty, with a maximum of three delinquency penalties per violation, pursuant to this subsection. 
B.  Animal control violations established by chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  First offense ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Second offense ..... 100.00 
(3)  Third offense ..... 150.00 
(4)  Succeeding offenses within 12 months shall result in an increased penalty in increments per offense ..... 50.00 
(5)  A violation of section 3-5(b) and (c). This penalty shall be waived if the owner of the animal presents documentation to the city that the animal has been altered within 30 days of the citation. Late penalties pursuant to section (6) is not applicable to this section. ..... 200.00 
(6)  Unpaid penalties shall be delinquent after the fifteenth day of the issuance of the citation; thereafter the following civil penalties shall apply to the foregoing animal control violation in addition to the stated penalty. 
Delinquent period/Additional penalty 
(a) 15 to 30 days delinquent ..... 50.00 
(b) For each additional 30-day period of delinquency thereafter for the penalties set forth in B(1)—B(4) the city may assess an additional $50.00 penalty, with a maximum of three delinquent penalties per violation, pursuant to this section.\ 
C.  Fire code violations established by chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  Class D violations ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Class C violations ..... 100.00 
(3)  Class B violations ..... 250.00 
(4)  Class A violations ..... 500.00 
(5)  Extinguishment of a fire due to an open burning with a valid permit during an emergency or any fire that does not have a valid burning permit ..... 250.00 
per hour 
or fraction 
thereof 
D.  Violations of provisions regarding junk dealers and junkyards established by article III of chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances: 
Each separate offense ..... 50.00 
E.  Violations of certain provisions regarding pushcarts, outdoor dining areas and outdoor merchandise areas established by article V of chapter 16 of the Code of Ordinances: 
Each separate offense ..... 100.00 
F.  Violations of noise regulations established by article IV, chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances: 
First violation (per City Code section 1-5) ..... 50.00 
Second violation ..... 100.00 
Third violation ..... 200.00 
Fourth or subsequent violation, per offense ..... 300.00 
G.  Violations of pre-towing notice provisions established in section 11-18. 
(1)  Within a one year period, civil penalties shall be as follows: 
First violation ..... $200.00 
Second violation ..... $300.00 
Third violation ..... $500.00 
Fourth violation ..... $750.00 
Fifth violation ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Once the one year period has run from the first violation, the next violation shall be considered to be a first. 
H.  Violations of provisions regarding snip signs established by article V of chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances: 
Each separate offense ..... 50.00 
I.  Size of tree or area or area of specified vegetation removed: 
Each 100 square feet of specified vegetation above 250 square feet ..... $500.00 
6—8' tree (dbh) ..... 500.00/tree 
8—12' tree (dbh) ..... 700.00/tree 
12—16' tree (dbh) ..... 1,000.00/tree 
18—20' tree (dbh) ..... 1,500.00/tree 
Over 20' tree (dbh) ..... 2,500.00/tree 
In situations where specified vegetation removal cannot be precisely ascertained from an on-site inspection, aerial photographs or other methods, per each 1,000 square feet of area where vegetation has been removed ..... 8,000.00 
J.  Fines for destruction of historic features without a certificate of appropriateness: 
Item Destroyed 	Fine 
Building ..... 	$10,000.00 
Outbuilding/garage ..... 	5,000.00 
Windows or doors ..... 	250.00 per window or door 
Light fixtures ..... 	250.00 per fixture 
Other destroyed features that cannot be replaced including but limited to brackets, railings, moldings or other architectural details ..... 	250.00 per item 
Trees 	See fines as set forth in Appendix B(1) 
 
K.  Penalties for cutting into city streets/sidewalks without a permit: 
Failure to obtain a street cut permit ..... $250.00 
and $100.00 
daily thereafter 
Exceeding time of street cut permi: ..... 100.00 
per day 
Maximum penalty ..... 5,000.00 
per permit 
L.  The penalty for violating the e-scooter regulations of Chapter 19, Article I of the Code of Ordinances shall be $100.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2024, § 1(c), 4-27-93; Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 6-29-93; Ord. No. 2242, § 13, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 2264, § 1, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2585, § 3, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2586, § 2, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2889, § 1, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 2901, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 3041, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 3057, § 1B, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 3054, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 3239, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 3342, § 2, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 3467, § 1(h), 5-8-07; Ord. No. 4186, §§ 1—3, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 4329, § 2, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 4334, § 1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 4698, § 2, 8-28-18; Ord. No. 4709, § 1, 11-27-18; Ord. No. 4715, § 2, 11-27-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-5. 
 
APPENDIX C - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's traffic schedule compiled pursuant to G.S. 160A-77. Section designations from the 1965 Code and amendments thereto are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Taxicabs and vehicles for hire, ch. 18; traffic, ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1. - Truck traffic prohibited on residential streets. 
All trucks within the city shall be prohibited from traveling upon the following residential streets: 
Allen Street, between Haywood Road and State Street. 
Ambler Road, in its entirety. 
Avon Road, in its entirety. 
Balm Grove Avenue, in its entirety. 
Barnard Avenue, in its entirety. 
Bear Creek Road, between Patton Avenue and Sandhill Road. 
Beaucatcher Road, in its entirety. 
Beechwood Road, between Crockett Avenue and N.C. 81. 
Beverly Road, between Tunnel Road and New Haw Creek Road. 
Burton Street, beginning at a point 603 feet north of the intersection of Haywood Road and Burton Street and continuing northward for the entirety of Burton Street. 
Caledonia Road, in its entirety. 
Catawba Street , in its entirety. 
Cedar Street, from Wood Avenue to Fairview Road. 
Chatham Road, from Edgewood Road to US 25 (Merrimon Avenue). 
Coleman Avenue, from Mount Clare Avenue to a point 200 feet west of US 25 (Merrimon Avenue). 
College Street, between Beaucatcher Road and US-70 (College Street). 
Columbine Road, in its entirety. 
Crayton Road, from 200 feet east of Southern Railroad to Liberty Street. 
Crockett Avenue, between U.S. 70 and Beechwood Road. 
Dailey Drive, in its entirety. 
Dorchester Avenue, in its entirety. 
Druid Drive, between Patton Avenue and Mitchell Avenue. 
Dunwell Avenue, in its entirety. 
East Chestnut Street, from SR 1781 (Broadway) to a point 325 feet west of US 25 (Merrimon Avenue). 
East Street, in its entirety. 
Edgewood Road (North) between Kimberly Avenue and University Heights. 
Edwin Place, between Charlotte Street and Kimberly Avenue. 
Evelyn Place, between Charlotte Street and Murdock Avenue. 
Fairfax Avenue, between Haywood Road and I-240 off-ramp. 
Fairview Road, from a point 0.3 mile from Sweeten Creek Road to Stevens Street. 
Fairway Drive, from 0.13 mile north of Swannanoa River Road to Gladstone Road. 
Farrwood Avenue, between Merrimon Avenue and Kimberly Avenue. 
Florida Avenue, in its entirety. 
Forest Hill Drive, between Biltmore Avenue and Kenilworth Road. 
Gladstone Road, southern portion, between Fairway Drive and Ambler Road. 
Glen Falls Road, in its entirety. 
Glendale Avenue, in its entirety. 
Glendale Avenue, between McArthur Lane and Fairview Road. 
Governors View Road, between U.S. 70 and N.C. 81. 
Gracelyn Road, between Merrimon Avenue and Kimberly Avenue. 
Grovewood Road, in its entirety. 
Hanover Street, between I-240 ramp and State Street. 
Hazel Mill Road, between Patton Avenue and North Louisiana Avenue. 
Irwin Street, in its entirety. 
Kenilworth Road, between Forest Hill Drive and Beaucatcher Road. 
Kimberly Avenue, between Edwin Place and Beaverdam Road. 
Lakeshore Drive, between Elkwood Avenue and Merrimon Avenue. 
Liberty Street, between Crayton Road and Fairview Road. 
Lula Street, in its entirety. 
Majestic Avenue, between Haywood Road and Louisiana Avenue. 
Martin Luther King Drive, in its entirety. 
Mineral Springs Road, between a point Shaft Street and Beaucatcher Road. 
Mitchell Avenue, between Druid Drive and Haywood Road. 
Montana Avenue, in its entirety. 
Montford Avenue, in its entirety. 
Morgan Avenue, in its entirety. 
Mount Clare Avenue, from SR 1781 (Broadway) to Coleman Avenue. 
Murdock Avenue, in its entirety. 
Olney Road , in its entirety. 
Onteora Boulevard, between Fairview Road and I-40 (city limits). 
Osborne Road, from Lakeshore Drive to a point 0.09 mile east of Lakeshore Drive. 
Overbrook Road, between tunnel Road and Governors View Road. 
Overlook Road, in its entirety. 
Pinchoit Drive, in its entirety. 
Reed Street, in its entirety. 
Richmond Hill Drive, in its entirety. 
Ridgelawn Road, in its entirety. 
Riverview Drive from SR 3556 (Amboy Road) to SR 3548 (Haywood Road). 
Rock Hill Road, in its entirety. 
Royal Pines Drive, from US 25A (Sweeten Creek Road) to US 25 (Hendersonville Road) 
Rumbough Place, from US 19-23 (Patton Avenue) to Salola Street. 
Salola Street, from Rumbough Place to SR 3412 (Sand Hill Road). 
School Road, in its entirety. 
Shelburne Road, between Brevard Road and Sandhill Road. 
Springside Road, between Hendersonville Road and Overlook Road. 
St. Dunstans Road, in its entirety. 
Stoner Road, in its entirety. 
Sunset Terrace, in its entirety. 
Swannanoa Avenue , in its entirety. 
Sycamore Drive, from US 25A (Sweeten Creek Road) to US 25 (Hendersonville Road). 
Thomas Street, in its entirety. 
Vance Crescent , in its entirety. 
Vance Crescent Extension , in its entirety. 
Waynesville Avenue, in its entirety. 
Wells Avenue, in its entirety. 
Wendover Road, in its entirety. 
Wilburn Road, in its entirety. 
Wilshire Drive, in its entirety. 
Wood Avenue, from the end of N.C.D.O.T. maintenance to Cedar Street. 
Woodlink Road, in its entirety. 
Woodvine Road, in its entirety. 
(Code 1965, § 28-52(b); Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 6-30-87; Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 1668, § 1, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 1702, § 1, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 1757, § 1, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1858, § 1, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 2015, § 1, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2149, § 1, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 2237, § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 2747, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2857, § 1, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3053, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 4096, § 1, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 4732, § 1, 3-12-19; Ord. No. 4783, § 1, 12-10-19)  
Sec. 2. - Truck traffic prohibited on designated streets. 
Maxwell Street, between Broadway and Chestnut Street. 
Page Avenue, between Battery Park Avenue and Battle Square. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 3, 6-14-05)  
Secs. 3—20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21. - Ten miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of ten miles per hour on the following portions of streets in the city: 
Cumberland Alley, in its entirety. 
Federal Alley, from Coxe Avenue and Hilliard Avenue. 
Langren Alley, between Market Street and Woodfin Street. 
PriTchard Alley, between Asheland Avenue and Grove Street. 
Wilson Alley, from Eagle Street to Sycamore Street. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81; Ord. No. 2856, § 1, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 4641, §§ 1, 9, 1-23-18)  
Sec. 22. - Fifteen miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour on the following portions of city system streets in the city: 
Asheville Recreation Park, all streets. 
Brooklet Street, entirety. 
Buchanan Road, entirety. 
Circle Street , in its entirety. 
Dundee Street, in its entirety. 
Hamilton Street, entirety. 
Homewood Drive, entirety. 
Huntington Street , in its entirety. 
Knob Street , in its entirety. 
Lindsey Road, entirety. 
Lynmar Avenue, entirety. 
Orchard Road, in its entirety. 
Pine Street , in its entirety. 
Reservoir Road, entirety. 
Tuskeegee Street , in its entirety. 
Wall Street, in its entirety. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.1; Ord. No. 2199, § 1, 4-4-95; Ord. No. 2236, § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2323, §§ 1, 2, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2474, § 1, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2746, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2856, § 2, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3053, § 4, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3242, § 4, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 23. - Twenty miles per hour. 
(a)  State highway system. No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Biltmore Avenue (N.C. 81), from Thompson Street to Bryson Street (N.C. 81). 
Biltmore Avenue (U.S. 25), from Aston Street to Patton Avenue. 
Biltmore Avenue (US 25), between Hilliard Avenue and Aston Street. 
Broadway (U.S. 25), from Patton Avenue to Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25). 
Brook Street (U.S.25A), between Biltmore Plaza and Fairview Road. 
Chunns View Drive, in its entirety. 
Haywood Road (S.R. 3548), from Hanover Street to Westwood Place. 
Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business), from Oakwood Street to Hanover Street. 
Hendersonville Road (N.C. 81), from All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25) to Thompson Street. 
Lodge Street (U.S. 25-A), from All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25) to Biltmore Plaza. 
Woodfin Street (U.S. 25), from Broadway (U.S. 25) to North Market Street. 
(b)  City street system. No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour on the following portions of city system streets in the city: 
All Souls Crescent, between Hendersonville Road and Brook Street. 
Ambler Road, in its entirety. 
Angle Street, between All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25) and All Souls Crescent. 
Arco Road, in its entirety. 
Asheland Avenue, between Patton Avenue and Hilliard Avenue. 
Aston Street, from Coxe Avenue to Biltmore Avenue. 
Aurora Drive, in its entirety. 
Arthur Road, in its entirety. 
Avon Road, in its entirety. 
Baker Drive Extension, in its entirety. 
Banks Avenue, between Coxe Avenue and Church Street. 
Barnard Avenue, entirety. 
Battery Park Avenue, between Haywood Street and Otis Street. 
Battle Square, between O'Henry Avenue and Page Avenue. 
Balm Grove Avenue, in its entirety. 
Beaumont Street, from M. L. King, Jr. Boulevard to Hazzard Street. 
Bent Oak Lane, in its entirety. 
Beverly Road, from U. S. 70 Tunnel Road to Kensington Drive. 
Biltmore Plaza, between Brook Street and Kitchen Place. 
Boston Way, between All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25) and All Souls Crescent. 
Bradley Street, in its entirety. 
Braeside Circle, in its entirety. 
Briar Knoll Court, entirety. 
Brucemont Circle, in its entirety. 
Buncombe Street, between Commerce Street and Aston Street. 
Buxton Avenue, between Coxe Avenue and Church Street. 
Cane Street, in its entirety. 
Carter Street, between Haywood Street and Patton Avenue. 
Chatham Road, in its entirety. 
Cherokee Road, in its entirety. 
Chiles Avenue, in its entirety. 
Church Street, between Patton Avenue and South Lexington Avenue. 
City—County Plaza. 
Clairmont Avenue, in its entirety. 
Clemmons Street, in its entirety. 
Clubhouse Court, entirety. 
College Street, between Charlotte Street and Valley Street. 
College Street, between Valley Street and Patton Avenue. 
Collier Avenue, between Milliard Avenue and Ravencroft Drive. 
Colonial Place, in its entirety. 
Columbine Road, from East Schenck Crescent to Town Square Boulevard. 
Commerce Street, between Church Street and Coxe Avenue. 
Conifer Court, in its entirety. 
Cordova Street, in its entirety. 
Covington Street, entirety. 
Coxe Avenue, between Patton Avenue and Southside Avenue. 
Creekside Court, entirety. 
Crescent Lane, in its entirety. 
Crockett Avenue, in its entirety. 
Crocus Lane, in its entirety. 
Crown Street, in its entirety. 
Crowningway Drive, from Sunset Summit to Patton Mountain Road (SR 2049). 
Dallas Street, in its entirety. 
Davidson Drive, from Eagle Street to Marjorie Street. 
Dearborn Street, from East Schenck Crescent to Town Square Boulevard. 
Deaver Street, in its entirety. 
Deerhaven Lane, in its entirety. 
Dellwood Street, in its entirety. 
Depot Street from Livingston Street to Clingman Avenue. 
Dorchester Avenue, between Florida Avenue and Burton Street. 
Dunwell Avenue, in its entirety. 
Eagle Street, between Biltmore Avenue and South Charlotte Street. 
East Schenck Crescent from Thetford Street to its northern intersection with Schenck Parkway. 
Edgewood Road (South), from Sweeten Creek (US 25-A) to Rock Hill Road. 
Elderberry Lane, in its entirety. 
Fairway Drive, between Governors View Road and Swannanoa River Road (U.S. Highway 81). 
Fenner Avenue, in its entirety. 
Foxglove Court, in its entirety. 
Frederick Street, entirety. 
Gatehouse Court, entirety. 
George Washington Carver Street, in its entirety. 
Glendale Avenue, between Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81) and Dogwood Lane. 
Grail Street, in its entirety. 
Granada Street, in its entirety. 
Grove Street, between Patton Avenue and Hilliard Avenue. 
Grovewood Road, in its entirety. 
Harmon Circle, in its entirety. 
Harrison Street, entirety. 
Haywood Street, between Patton Avenue and Clingman Avenue. 
Hedgerose Court, in its entirety. 
Hiawassee Street, between North Lexington Avenue and Flint Street. 
Hilderbrand Street, in its entirety. 
Hilliard Avenue, between Biltmore Avenue and Clingman Avenue. 
Houston Street, in its entirety. 
Howland Road, entirety. 
Irwin Street, in its entirety. 
Jordan Street, in its entirety. 
Keasler Road, in its entirety. 
Kendall Street, in its entirety. 
King Street, entirety. 
Kitchen Place, between Biltmore Plaza and Angle Street. 
Larkspur Court, in its entirety. 
Laurel Loop, entirety. 
Lee Avenue, entirety. 
Lincoln Avenue, in its entirety. 
Logan Avenue, in its entirety. 
London Road, between Sweeten Creek Road (U.S. 25) and Bellview Road. 
Lula Street, in its entirety. 
Madison Avenue, entirety. 
Manetta Road, entirety. 
Marietta Street, entirety. 
Marjorie Street, between Spruce Street and Valley Street. 
Market Street, between Woodfin Street and Biltmore Avenue. 
Marne Road, in its entirety. 
McTindle Circle, in its entirety. 
Melrose Avenue, entirety. 
Millard Avenue, between Coxe Avenue and Buxton Avenue. 
Morning Glory Drive, in its entirety. 
Mountain Street, between M. L. King, Jr. Boulevard and Hilderbrand Street. 
Mount Vernon Place from Mount Vernon Circle to Lakeshore Drive. 
Mt. Vernon Circle, entirety. 
North Ann Street, between Haywood Street and Patton Avenue. 
Nebraska Avenue, in its entirety. 
Nevada Avenue, in its entirety. 
North French Broad Avenue, between Haywood Street and Patton Avenue. 
North Lexington Avenue, between Patton Avenue and Broadway. 
Oakwood Street from Haywood Road to end of city maintenance. 
Oak Street (Central Business District), in its entirety. 
O'Henry Avenue, between Haywood Street and Battery Park Avenue. 
Otis Street, between Patton Street and North French Broad Avenue. 
Ottari Road, between Merrimon Avenue and Kimberly Avenue. 
Pack Square, in its entirety. 
Page Avenue, between Haywood Street and Battery Park Avenue. 
Parkridge Court, entirety. 
Patton Avenue, between Pack Square and Clingman Avenue. 
Pearl Street, between Patton Avenue and Hilliard Avenue. 
Peeler Drive, in its entirety. 
Pennsylvania Place, in its entirety. 
Prospect Street from Salem Avenue to Lee Avenue. 
Rankin Avenue, between College Street and Hiawassee Street. 
Ravenscroft Drive, between Sawyer Street and the dead end. 
Red Fox Circle, entirety. 
Richmond Avenue, in its entirety. 
Richmond Hill Drive, in its entirety. 
Ridge Street, in its entirety. 
Roberts Street from Clingman Avenue to Lyman Street. 
Rose Street, in its entirety. 
Rosewood Avenue, entirety. 
Salem Avenue from Chatham Road to Prospect Street. 
Sawyer Street, between Church Street and Coxe Avenue. 
Schenck Parkway, from Thetford Street to its northern intersection with East Schenck Crescent. 
Short Michigan Avenue, in its entirety. 
Skyview Circle, in its entirety. 
Skyview Drive, in its entirety. 
South Ann Street, between Patton Avenue and Pearl Street. 
South French Broad Avenue, between Patton Avenue and Hilliard Avenue. 
South Jordan Street, in its entirety. 
South Lexington Avenue, between Patton Avenue and Southside Avenue. 
Spruce Street, from Walnut Street to Eagle Street. 
St. Dunstans Circle, in its entirety. 
St. Dunstans Road, in its entirety. 
Stamford Street from Thetford Street to Schenck Parkway. 
Starmount Drive, entirety. 
Stewart Street, in its entirety. 
Stockbridge Road, entirety. 
Stoner Road, in its entirety. 
Summit Street, in its entirety. 
Sunset Drive from Baird Street to Griffing Boulevard—North. 
Sunset Summit, in its entirety. 
Sunset Walk, in its entirety. 
Swanger Road, entirety. 
Swann Street, between Brook Street and Angle Street. 
Sweetspire Ridge, in its entirety. 
Tacoma Circle, in its entirety. 
Thetford Street, from Stamford Street to Schenck Parkway. 
Thistle Knoll Court, entirety. 
Thomas Street, in its entirety. 
Thompson Street, in its entirety. 
Town Square Boulevard, from Thetford Street to its northern intersection with Schenck Parkway. 
Trapper's Run, in its entirety. 
Trillium Court, in its entirety. 
Unaka Avenue, entirety. 
Vandalia Avenue, in its entirety. 
Walterstone Road, from Thetford Street to Stamford Street. 
Walnut Street, between Haywood Street and Spruce Street. 
Wayside Road, in its entirety. 
West Haywood Street, from Park Avenue North to Roberts Street. 
Westover Drive, in its entirety. 
Westchester Drive, in its entirety. 
Westhaven Drive from NC 694 Town Mountain Road to Crowningway Drive. 
Westwood Road, in its entirety. 
Windflower Court, in its entirety. 
Windflower Way, in its entirety. 
Woodfin Street, between Broadway and North Lexington Avenue. 
Woodvale Avenue, entirety. 
Wyoming Road, entirety. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.2; Ord. No. 1627, § 1, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 1653, § 1, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 1790, § 3, 9-12-89; Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 2105, § 2, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2133, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 2178, § 1, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2236, § 2, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2323, § 3, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 2338, § 1, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 2371, § 1, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2390, § 1, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2425, § 2, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2474, § 2, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2746, §§ 2, 5, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2856, §§ 3, 4, 7, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3053, §§ 5, 6, 10, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3242, §§ 5, 6, 9, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3596, § 1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 4046, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 4252, § 2, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4359, § 2, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 4413, § 2, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 4559, § 3, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4641, §§ 2, 3, 10, 1-23-18; Ord. No. 4786, § 2, 1-14-20)  
Sec. 24. - Twenty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 25 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Cedar Lane (SR 3159) from a point 0.19 mile west of US 25-A (Sweeten Creek Road) eastward to US 25-A (Sweeten Creek Road). 
Eliada Home Road (SR 1318) between New Leicester Highway and East corporate limits. 
Linden Street (SR 3172) from a point 0.04 mile south of SR 3159 northward to a point 0.03 mile north of SR 3159. 
Linden Street (SR 3205) from a point 0.15 mile south of SR 3162 northward to SR 3162. 
Peachtree Street (SR 3174) from SR 3159 northward to a point 0.18 mile north of SR 3159. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 25 miles per hour on the following portions of city system streets in the city: 
Albemarle Road, in its entirety. 
Allen Avenue from US 25 Hendersonville Road to the end of City maintenance. 
Allen Street, between State Street and Haywood Road. 
Altamont View, in its entirety. 
Annandale Avenue, in its entirety. 
Appalachian Way, between Huffman Road and Hi-Alta Avenue. 
Arlington Street, in its entirety. 
Arnold Road, from US 70 (Tunnel Road) to its dead-end. 
Asbury Road, from Wolfe Cove Road to Bassett Road. 
Aspen Way, in its entirety. 
Atkins Street from US 25 Hendersonville Road to the end of city maintenance. 
Azalea Road from US 25A Sweeten Creek Road to Rosscraggon Road. 
Azalea Road East from US 70 Tunnel Road to NC 81 Swannanoa River Road. 
Baird Street, in its entirety. 
Baker Drive, in its entirety. 
Ballantree Drive, between Sweeten Creek Road to Elmwood Lane. 
Bassett Road, from Wolfe Cove Road to Spooks Branch Road. 
Bear Creek Road, between Patton Avenue and Sand Hill Road. 
Bearden Avenue, from Cumberland Avenue to Montford Avenue. 
Beaucatcher Road, in its entirety. 
Beaverbrook Road from Windsor Road to the end of City maintenance. 
Beaver Valley Road from Beaverdam Road to end of city maintenance. 
Beechwood Road, in its entirety. 
Bell Road from SR 2236 New Haw Creek Road to Munn Drive. 
Belmont Avenue, from Haywood Road to Sulphur Springs Road. 
Beverly Road West from SR 3548 Haywood Road to Riverview Drive. 
Bevlyn Drive, in its entirety. 
Birch Court, in its entirety. 
Birch Lane, in its entirety. 
Birchwood Place, in its entirety. 
Blackwood Road, in its entirety. 
Blake Drive, in its entirety. 
Blanton Street, in its entirety. 
Boris Street, from King Arthur Place to Lancelot Lane. 
Braddock Way, in its entirety. 
Briarcliff Drive, from SR 3503 (Overlook Road) to Stancliff Drive. 
Broadview Drive between Fairview Road and Onteora Boulevard. 
Brooklyn Road, between Taft Avenue and Wyatt Street. 
Brookwood Road, all portions inside the city limits. 
Browndale Road, in its entirety. 
Brownwood Avenue, from Waynesville Avenue to Beverly Road. 
Buffalo Street, from Burton Street to a point 320 feet north of Ohio Street. 
Bull Mountain Road, between U.S. 70 and the city limits. 
Burnside Drive, in its entirety. 
Burton Street, between Haywood Road and Florida Avenue. 
Caledonia Road from Biltmore Avenue to Swannanoa River Road. 
Cameron Street, from Arlington Street to NC 694 (Town Mountain Road). 
Campbell Circle, in its entirety. 
Campground Road, from Maple Springs Road to Bull Mountain. 
Caribou Road, between Hendersonville Road and West Chapel Road. 
Carlton Place, from Providence Road to its dead-end. 
Carrier Street, between Sulfur Springs Road and Baker Place. 
Carroll Avenue, in its entirety. 
Carter Cove Road from SR 2053 Beaverdam to End of City Maintenance. 
Castle Street, in its entirety. 
Catawba Street from Broadway Street to Cumberland Avenue. 
Cedar Street, between Wood Avenue and Fairview Road. 
Chapel Park Place from West Chapel Road to Bostic Place. 
Charlotte Street from Orchard Street to Woodlink Road. 
Cherry Street (S. Asheville), between Royal Pines Drive and Birch Court. 
Chestnut Street, between Charlotte Street and Montford Avenue. 
Chestnut Street, between Furman Avenue and Charlotte Street. 
Chestnut Street, between Montford Avenue and Pearson Drive. 
Chicory Lane, in its entirety. 
Cisco Road from Old Haw Creek Road to end of city maintenance. 
Clarendon Road from School Road to School Road. 
Clayton Avenue, in its entirety. 
Clement Drive, in its entirety. 
Clinton Avenue, entirety. 
Coleman Avenue, in its entirety. 
College Street, between Beaucatcher Road and College Street (US 70). 
Columbine Road, from East Schenck Crescent to Pinchot Drive. 
Compton Place, from NC 63 New Leicester Highway to the end of city maintenance. 
Congress Street from Choctaw Street to Livingston Street. 
Country Club Road, in its entirety. 
Country Meadows Drive from NC 112 Sardis Road to end of city maintenance. 
Courtland Avenue, in its entirety. 
Craggy Avenue, in its entirety. 
Creasman Place, from Selwyn Road to a point 550 feet north of Selwyn Road. 
Crowell Farms Drive from West Oakview Road to West Pointe Drive. 
Crowell Road (SR 1455), from a point 0.12 mile west of Old Haywood Road eastward to Old Haywood Road. 
Cub Road, in its entirety. 
Culvern Street, in its entirety. 
Cumberland Avenue, in its entirety. 
Dailey Drive, in its entirety. 
Davenport Road from Brevard Road to end of city maintenance. 
Debra Lane, in its entirety. 
Delaware Avenue from SR 3412 Sand Hill Road to Sulphur Springs Road. 
Depot Street from Livingston Street to end of city maintenance. 
Dillingham Road, from New Haw Creek Road to Old Haw Creek Road. 
Dorchester Avenue, between Haywood Road and Florida Avenue. 
Dover Street, in its entirety. 
Dortch Avenue, between Hillside Street and Mount Clare Avenue. 
Druid Drive, between Patton Avenue and Mitchell Avenue. 
East Hawthorne Drive, in its entirety. 
East Maple Drive, between New Haw Creek Road and the dead end. 
East Oakview Road, in its entirety. 
Edgelawn Road, from Midland Drive to Stratford Road. 
Edgemont Road, in its entirety. 
Edgewood Road, Kimberly Avenue to University Boulevard. 
Edgewood Road (East), in its entirety. 
Edwin Place, in its entirety. 
Elizabeth Street, from Broadway to Cumberland Avenue. 
Elkmont Drive, in its entirety. 
Elmwood Lane, in its entirety. 
Enka Crescent Street from NC 112 Sand Hill Road to Enka Pine Street. 
Enka Oak Street from Enka Crescent Street to Enka Pine Street. 
Enka Orchard Street from NC 112 Sand Hill Road to Enka Pine Street. 
Enka Pine Street from Enka Crescent Street to Enka Orchard Street. 
Evelake Drive, in its entirety. 
Evelyn Place, in its entirety. 
Faircrest Road from Beaverdam Road to end of city maintenance. 
Fairfax Avenue, in its entirety. 
Fairview Avenue, in its entirety. 
Fairview Road from US 25A Sweeten Creek Road to Bleachery Blvd. 
Farrwood Avenue in its entirety. 
Fawn Drive, from Briarcliff Drive to Oakwilde Drive. 
Fernlawn Road, in its entirety. 
Finalee Avenue, in its entirety. 
Flint Street, in its entirety. 
Florida Avenue, between Burton Street and Dorchester Avenue. 
Forest Hill Drive, in its entirety. 
Forsythe Drive, from Woodrow Avenue to North Street. 
Fulton Street, in its entirety. 
Furman Avenue, in its entirety. 
Galahad Place, in its entirety. 
Galax Avenue from Virginia Avenue to the end of city maintenance. 
Garden Circle, in its entirety. 
Gardenwood Drive, in its entirety. 
Gardenwood Lane, in its entirety. 
Gashes Creek Road, between Azalea Road and the dead end. 
Gawain Street, from King Arthur Place to Lancelot Lane. 
Gibson Road from Wild Cherry Road to end of city maintenance. 
Gladstone Road, in its entirety. 
Glen Falls Road, in its entirety. 
Glencliff Road, in its entirety. 
Glendale Avenue, from Dogwood Lane to Fairview Road. 
Governors View Road, between Swannanoa River Road (N.C. Highway 81) and Tunnel Road (U.S. Highway 70). 
Gracelyn Road, in its entirety. 
Grandview Road, in its entirety. 
Griffing Boulevard, in its entirety. 
Gudger Road from Sand Hill Road to Sand Hill School Road. 
Guinevere Court, in its entirety. 
South Grove Street, in its entirety. 
Hampstead Road, from Manetta Road to Country Club Road. 
Hampton Street from Caribou Road to Brooklyn Road. 
Hansel Avenue, in its entirety. 
Hanover Street, from Haywood Road to Cordova Street. 
Haw Creek Circle, in its entirety. 
Hawthorne Drive, in its entirety. 
Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business), from Balsam Avenue to Cloyes Street (Saint Joan of Arc School zone, in effect from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after school begins and ends on school days only). 
Hazzard Street, between Charlotte Street and Knob Street. 
Hazzard Street, between Pine Street and College Street. 
Hazel Mill Road, from SR 1332 (Louisiana Avenue) to US 19-23-74A (Patton Avenue). 
Heathbrook Circle, in its entirety. 
Herron Avenue, from Haywood Road to Craggy Avenue. 
Hibernia Street, in its entirety. 
High Meadow Road from Brooklyn Road to end of city maintenance. 
Highland Street, in its entirety. 
Hilliard Avenue, from West Haywood Street to SR 3548 (Clingman Avenue). 
Hillside Street, in its entirety. 
Holborn Avenue, in its entirety. 
Holly Ridge Drive from Westridge Drive to Bevlyn Drive. 
Homeway Road from Appalachain Way to Lakeside Drive. 
Hudson Street, in its entirety. 
Huffman Road, between Bear Creek Road and Appalachian Way. 
Inglewood Road from Elk Mountain Scenic Highway to Windsor Road. 
Iris Street from Shady Oak Lane to London Road. 
Jeffress Avenue, in its entirety. 
Joyner Avenue, entirety. 
Kenilwood Place, in its entirety. 
Kensington Drive, in its entirety. 
Kentmere Lane, in its entirety. 
Kenton Lane, in its entirety. 
Kimberly Avenue, in its entirety. 
King Arthur Place, in its entirety. 
Klondyke Avenue, in its entirety. 
Lakeside Drive, between Old Haywood Road and Appalachian Way. 
Lakewood Drive, in its entirety. 
Lancelot Lane, in its entirety. 
Langwell Avenue, in its entirety. 
Lanvale Avenue, in its entirety. 
Le-An-Hurst Road from Edgewood Drive to Round Top Road. 
Liberty Street from Fairview Road to Merchant Street. 
Linden Avenue, in its entirety. 
Linden Street, in its entirety. 
Lionel Place, from Guinevere Court to the end of city maintenance. 
Livingston Street, in its entirety. 
London Road from Belvedere Road to West Chapel Road. 
Longview Road, in its entirety. 
Looking Glass Lane, between Wagon Road and Pleasant Ridge Drive. 
Looking Glass Lane, between Browndale Road and Wagon Road. 
Lower Edgewood Road (Enka), from Brookside Circle to the end of City maintenance. 
Luther Street, from Wilburn Road to Providence Road. 
Lyman Street, between SR 3556 (Amboy Road) to Riverside Drive. 
Macon Avenue, in its entirety. 
Majestic Avenue, in its entirety. 
Maney Avenue, in its entirety. 
Manila Street, from Springside Drive to Sand Hill Road. 
Mann Road, in its entirety. 
Maple Drive, between Old Haw Creek Road and New Haw Creek Road. 
Marlborough Drive, in its entirety. 
Martin Luther King Drive, from SR 3284 (South Charlotte Street) to US 70-74A (College Street). 
Mayfair Drive, in its entirety. 
Max Street, in its entirety. 
McDade Street, in its entirety. 
McDowell Street (U.S. 25), from Saint Dunstans Street to Memorial Mission Hospital Drive (Asheville High School zone, in effect from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after school begins and ends on school days only). 
Merchant Street, in its entirety. 
Merlin Way, from Compton Drive to the end of city maintenance. 
Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25), from a point 0.1 mile south of Hillside Street to a point 0.1 mile north of Hillside Street (Claxton Elementary School zone, in effect from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after school begins and ends on school days only). 
Michigan Avenue, in its entirety. 
Middlemont Avenue, in its entirety. 
Midland Drive from U.S. 25 Merrimon Avenue to U.S. 25 Merrimon Avenue. 
Mildred Avenue, from Haywood Road to Herron Avenue. 
Mimosa Drive, in its entirety. 
Mineral Springs Road from Beaucatcher Road to Tunnel Road. 
Mitchell Avenue, in its entirety. 
Morgan Avenue, in its entirety. 
Morningside Drive, in its entirety. 
Morris Street, from Talmadge Street to Brevard Road. 
Mount Clare Avenue, in its entirety. 
Mountain Street, between M. L. King, Jr. Boulevard and College Street. 
Mountain Terrace Road, in its entirety. 
Mulberry Street, in its entirety. 
Murdock Avenue, between Hillside Street and Merrimon Avenue. 
Nixon Terrace, in its entirety. 
North Griffing Boulevard, from South Griffing Boulevard to the city limits. 
North Oak Forest Drive, in its entirety. 
North Street, in its entirety. 
Oak Forest Boulevard, in its entirety. 
Oak Hill Road, between Hazel Mill Road and Leicester Road. 
Oakland Road, in its entirety. 
Oakley Road, in its entirety. 
Oakridge Road, from Beechwood Road to Crockett Avenue. 
Oakmont Terrace, in its entirety. 
Oakwilde Drive, from Briarcliff Drive to a point 650 feet west of Stancliff Drive. 
Old Fairview Road, from Fairview Road to the end of City maintenance. 
Old Stone Gate Place, in its entirety. 
Old Toll Road, in its entirety. 
Olney Street, in its entirety. 
Olmsted Drive, between Dearborn Street and Columbine Road. 
Oteen Church Road, in its entirety. 
Oteen Park Place from US 70 Tunnel Road to end of city maintenance. 
Overbrook Road, in its entirety. 
Park Avenue, entirety. 
Pearson Drive, in its entirety. 
Pennsylvania Avenue, in its entirety. 
Percivale Court, from Evelake Drive to the end of city maintenance. 
Pheasant Drive, in its entirety. 
Phifer Street, in its entirety. 
Pine Acre Boulevard from Midland Drive end of city maintenance. 
Pinecroft Road from Beaverdam Road to end of city maintenance. 
Pinedale Road from Bull Mountain Road to end of city maintenance. 
Pinehurst Road, in its entirety. 
Pleasant Ridge Road, in its entirety. 
Pressley Road, in its entirety. 
Pritchard Road, in its entirety. 
Providence Road, from Johnston Boulevard to Wilburn Place. 
Racquet Club Road, between Hendersonville Road and Boddington Court. 
Raleigh Road, in its entirety. 
Red Oak Road from Lakeshore Drive to Ellenwood Drive. 
Reed Street from US 25A Sweeten Creek Road to Fielding Street. 
Reed Street, West Chapel Road to I-40 right-of-way. 
Rhododendron Place, in its entirety. 
Ridgelawn Road, in its entirety. 
Riverside Drive, between Lyman Street to Hill Street. 
Riverview Drive, in its entirety. 
Roberts Street from Haywood Street-W to Clingman Avenue. 
Robindale Avenue, in its entirety. 
Robinhood Road, all portions inside the city limits. 
Royal Pines Drive from US 25 Hendersonville Road to US 25A Sweeten Creek Road. 
Rumbough Place, from US 19-23 (Patton Avenue) to Salola Street. 
Sabian Court, in its entirety. 
Salola Street, from Rumbough Place to Sand Hill Road. 
Samayoa Place, in its entirety. 
Savannah Woods Court, in its entirety. 
School Road East from Onteora Blvd. to end of city maintenance. 
School Road (Malvern Hills), in its entirety. 
Selwyn Place, from Selwyn Road to a point 300 feet north of Selwyn Road. 
Selwyn Road, in its entirety. 
Senator Reynolds Road, in its entirety. 
Schenck Parkway, from NC 146 Long Shoals Road to its southern intersection with East Schenck Crescent. 
Schenck Parkway, from its northern intersection with East Schenck Crescent to the end of city maintenance. 
Shady Oak Drive, from London Road to dead end. 
Shannon Drive, in its entirety. 
Shelburne Road from NC 191 Brevard Road to SR 3412 Sand Hill Road. 
Sherwood Road from Forest Hill Drive to the end of city maintenance. 
Shiloh Road, in its entirety. 
Skyview Terrace, in its entirety. 
Sleepy Hollow Drive, in its entirety. 
Soco Street, from Cumberland Avenue to Montford Avenue. 
Sondley Parkway, entirety. 
Sondley Drive, entirety. 
Sondley Drive North, entirety. 
Sondley Woods Place, entirety. 
South French Broad Avenue, from Choctaw Street to end of city maintenance. 
South French Broad Avenue, between Hilliard Avenue and Choctaw Street. 
South Oak Forest Drive in its entirety. 
South Sondley Drive, entirety. 
Spooks Branch Road from Beaverdam Road to end of city maintenance. 
Stancliff Drive from Overlook Road to Pheasant Drive. 
Starnes Avenue, in its entirety. 
Stockwood Road, in its entirety. 
Stockwood Road Extension, in its entirety. 
Stonebridge Drive, in its entirety. 
Stratford Road, in its entirety. 
Success Avenue from Wamboldt Avenue to Euclid Blvd. 
Sulphur Springs Road from US 19/23 Bus Haywood Road to Mimosa Road. 
Swannanoa Avenue in its entirety. 
Sweeten Creek Industrial Parkway from Sweeten Creek Road to end of city maintenance. 
Sycamore Drive, from US 25 Hendersonville Road to US 25A Sweeten Creek Road. 
Sycamore Terrace, from Sycamore Drive to Peachtree Street. 
Tacoma Street, in its entirety. 
Taft Avenue, in its entirety. 
Tanglewood Drive, in its entirety. 
Thompson Street, from US 25 (Hendersonville Road) to a point 750 feet north of Glendale Avenue. 
Tracey Drive, in its entirety from Hazel Mill Road to Skyview Terrace. 
Trinity Chapel, between New Haw Creek Road and Old Haw Creek Road. 
Vance Gap Road from NC 694 Town Mountain Road to end of city maintenance. 
Vanderbilt Park Drive, from Hendersonville Road to end of city maintenance. 
Vermont Avenue, in its entirety. 
Virginia Avenue, in its entirety. 
Wagon Road, in its entirety. 
Warwick Road, in its entirety. 
Warren Haynes Drive, in its entirety. 
Waters Road from Old Haw Creek Road to Rocking Porch Road. 
Waynesville Avenue between Haywood Road and Craven Street. 
Wellington Street, in its entirety. 
Wembley Road, from Merrimon Avenue to Windsor Road. 
Wendover Road, in its entirety. 
West Chapel Road, between London Road and Caribou Road. 
West Chapel Road, between Caribou Road and Sweeten Creek Road. 
West Haywood Street, from Hilliard Avenue to Park Avenue North. 
West Maple Drive, between Old Haw Creek Road and Hillview Road. 
West Street, from Forsythe Avenue to North Street. 
West Summit Avenue from US 25 Hendersonville Road to the End of City Maintenance. 
Westridge Drive from Overlook Road to Springside Road. 
Westwood Place, between Millbrook Road and Hazel Mill Road. 
Westwood Place from Waynesville Avenue to Millbrook Road. 
White Pine Drive, in its entirety. 
Whitson Road, in its entirety. 
Wilburn Road, from Wilshire Drive to Patton Avenue. 
Wilburn Place, from Wilburn Road to Providence Road. 
Wild Cherry Road, in its entirety. 
Wilmington Road, entirety. 
Wilmington Street, in its entirety. 
Windswept Drive, from College Street to Alexander Drive. 
Wilshire Drive, from Johnston Boulevard to Luther Street 
Windsor Road, in its entirety. 
Winthrop Road, in its entirety. 
Wolfe Cove Road, in its entirety. 
Wood Avenue, between Cedar Street and end of city maintenance. 
Woodrow Avenue, in its entirety. 
Woodvine Road, in its entirety. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.3; Ord. No. 1688, § 1, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 1790, § 4, 9-12-89; Ord. No. 1889, §§ 2, 3, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 1966, § 1, 3-31-92; Ord. No. 2062, § 1, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 2086, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 2087, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 2133, § 2, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 2178, § 2, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2236, §§ 3, 4, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2323, § 4, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 2338, § 2, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 2371, § 2, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2390, § 2, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2425, §§ 3, 4, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2432, § 1, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2474, § 3, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2746, §§ 3, 6, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2856, §§ 5, 8, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3053, § 7, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3242, § 7, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3620, § 1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 3631, § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3903, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3931, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 3962, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3967, § 1, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3991, § 1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 3996, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 4045, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 4086, § 2, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 4252, § 2, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4313, § 1, 6-10-14; Ord. No. 4359, § 3, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 4413, § 3, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 4477, § 2, 1-26-16; Ord. No. 4510, §§ 1, 3, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 4559, §§ 2, 4, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4609, § 2, 9-12-17; Ord. No. 4641, §§ 4, 5, 11, 1-23-18; Ord. No. 4693, § 3, 8-28-18; Ord. No. 4726, § 2, 2-12-19; Ord. No. 4786, § 3, 1-14-20)  
Sec. 25. - Thirty miles per hour. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 30 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Brevard Road (N.C. 191), between the westbound I-240 exit ramps and Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business). 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 30 miles per hour on the following portions of city system streets in the city: 
Alexander Drive, in its entirety. 
Beverly Road, between Tunnel Road (U.S. Highway 70) and New Haw Creek Road. 
Caribou Road, between West Chapel Road and I-40. 
Chunns Cove Road, between Piney Mountain Drive and the city limits. 
Craven Street, in its entirety. 
Deanwood Circle, in its entirety. 
Florida Avenue, between Burton Street and Patton Avenue. 
Forest Street, in its entirety. 
Forestdale Drive, in its entirety. 
Gerber Road, in its entirety. 
Hazel Mill Road, from the city limits to SR 1332 (Louisiana Avenue). 
Hill Street, between Montford Avenue and US 19-23-70. 
Hi-Alta Avenue, between Deaverview Road and old U.S. 19-23. 
Kenilworth Road, in its entirety. 
Lakeshore Drive, between Merrimon Avenue and Elkwood Road. 
Montford Avenue, entirety. 
Moody Avenue between Monte Vista Road and Brookside Circle. 
New Chunns Cove Road, between U.S. 70 and city limits. 
North Bear Creek Road, from US 19-23-74A (Patton Avenue) to Old County Home Road. 
Old Chunns Cove Road, in its entirety. 
Old Haw Creek Road, in its entirety. 
Onteora Boulevard, between School Road and the city limits. 
Pinchot Drive, in its entirety. 
River Hills Road, in its entirety. 
Rock Hill Road, between Sweeten Creek Road and West Chapel Road. 
South French Broad Avenue, between Choctaw Street and Livingston Street. 
Springside Road, in its entirety. 
State Street, in its entirety. 
Victoria Road, between Biltmore Avenue and Meadow Road. 
West Chapel Road, between Hendersonville Road and London Road. 
Woodfin Street, between North market Street and Oak Street. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.4; Ord. No. 1688, § 2, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 1790, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. 1889, §§ 4, 5, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 1942, § 2, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 2087, § 2, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 2105, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 2178, § 3, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2236, §§ 5, 6, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2323, § 5, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 2338, § 3, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 2371, § 3, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2425, § 5, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 2746, §§ 4, 7, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2856, § 6, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 3053, §§ 8, 12, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3242, §§ 8, 10, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3596, § 2, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 3620, § 2, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 4086, § 2, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 4252, § 1, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4359, § 1, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 4413, § 1, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 4477, § 1, 1-26-16; Ord. No. 4510, § 2, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 4559, § 1, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 4609, § 1, 9-12-17; Ord. No. 4641, § 6, 1-23-18; Ord. No. 4693, §§ 1, 2, 8-28-18; Ord. No. 4726, § 1, 2-12-19)  
Sec. 26. - Thirty-five miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 35 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25), from Hendersonville Road (U.S. 25) to Lodge Street (U.S. 25-A). 
Amboy Road (S.R. 3556), from I-240 to Meadow Road (S.R. 3556). 
Beaucatcher Tunnel (U.S. 70), from Asheville Crosstown Expressway (U.S. 70) to Tunnel Road (U.S. 70). 
Beaverdam Road (N.C. 694), from Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25) to Elk Mountain Scenic Highway (N.C. 694). 
Beaverdam Road (S.R. 2053), from Elk Mountain Scenic Highway (N.C. 694) to Sycamore Road (U.S. 19-23 Business). 
Biltmore Avenue (U.S. 25), from Southside Avenue (U.S. 25) to Aston Street. 
Broadway (S.R. 1781), from Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25) to Riverside Drive (N.C. 191). 
Bryson Street (N.C. 81), from Biltmore Avenue (N.C. 81) to Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81). 
Clingman Avenue (S.R. 3548), from Interstate 240 to Patton Avenue. 
Elk Mountain Scenic Highway (N.C. 694), from Beaverdam Road (S.R. 2053) to the northern corporate limits, approximately 0.55 mile north of Robinhood Road. 
Elkwood Road (S.R. 1674), from the northern corporate limits, approximately 0.20 mile south of Lakeshore Drive to Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25). 
Haywood Road (S.R. 3548), from Westwood Place to Craven Street. 
Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business), from Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23) to Oakwood Street. 
Henderson Road (U.S. 25), from Interstate 40 (I-40) to All Souls Crescent (U.S. 25). 
Johnston Boulevard (S.R. 1319), from the western corporate limits approximately 0.08 mile west of Bear Creek Road to Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23). 
Louisiana Avenue (S.R. 1332), from Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business) to the northern corporate limits, approximately 0.10 mile north of Hazel Mill Road. 
McDowell Street (U.S. 25), from Lodge Street (U.S. 25-A) to Southside Avenue (U.S. 25). 
Meadow Road (S.R. 3556), from Victoria Road to Biltmore Avenue (N.C. 81). 
Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 25), from Broadway (S.R. 1781) to the northern corporate limits, approximately 0.05 mile north of Beaver Drive. 
New Haw Creek Road (S.R. 2032), from Tunnel Road (U.S. 70) to the northern corporate limits, approximately 0.40 mile north of Dogwood Grove. 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from the western corporate limits, approximately 0.06 mile west of Old Haywood Road to Johnson Boulevard (S.R. 1319). 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from the western corporate limits to the intersection of Haywood Road and Johnson Boulevard. 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from the western corporate limits to North Hanover Street (N.C. 191), thence along Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23-N.C. 191) to Hall Street (N.C. 191). 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from Riverside Drive (N.C. 191) to Otis Street. 
Riceville Road (S.R. 2002), from U.S. 70 northward for a distance of 0.35 mile, the northern corporate limits of Asheville. 
Sand Hill Road (S.R. 3412), from the southern corporate limits, approximately 0.04 mile south of Wendover Road to Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business). 
Southside Avenue (U.S. 25), from McDowell Street (U.S. 25) to Coxe Avenue. 
Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81), from Biltmore Avenue (N.C. 81) to Bryson Street (N.C. 81). 
Sweeten Creek Road (U.S. 25-A), from Fairview Road to London Road. 
Town Mountain Road (N.C. 694), from Asheville Crosstown Expressway (U.S. 70) to Sunset Mountain Toll Road. 
Tunnel Road (U.S. 70), from the east end of Beaucatcher Tunnel (U.S. 70) to New Haw Creek Road (S.R. 2032). 
West Asheville Bridge (S.R. 3548), from Craven Street to Roberts Street. 
Woodfin Place (S.R. 3601), from Charlotte Street to Asheville Crosstown Expressway (I-240). 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.5; Ord. No. 1707, § 2, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 2071, §§ 1, 3, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 2323, §§ 6, 7, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 3053, §§ 9, 13, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 4763, § 2, 9-24-19)  
Sec. 27. - Forty miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 40 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Smoky Park Highway (U.S. 19-23), from a point 0.06 mile northeast of I-40 to Asheville School Board. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.6; Ord. No. 3242, § 11, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 28. - Forty-five miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 45 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Brevard Road (SR 3578), from I-240 southbound to Sardis Road. 
Charlotte Highway (U.S. 74), from I-240 to Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81). 
Henderson Road (U.S. 25), from S.R. 3162/S.R. 3552 (Royal Pines Road) to Interstate 40 (I-40). 
Hill Street (S.R. 1477), from Riverside Drive (S.R. 1477) to U.S. 19-23-70. 
New Leicester Highway (N.C. 63), from Compton Road to Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23). 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19 Bypass-23 Bypass), from Haywood Road (U.S. 19 Business-23 Business) to North Hanover Street (U.S. 19 Business-23 Business-N.C. 191), thence along Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23-N.C. 191) to Riverside Drive (N.C. 191). 
Patron Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from Haywood Road (U.S. 19-23 Business) to a point 0.05 mile west of Leicester Highway (N.C. 63) (except a 25-mph zone, in effect at Emanuel Lutheran school from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after school begins and ends on school days only). 
Patton Avenue (U.S. 19-23), from a point 0.05 mile west of Leicester Highway (N.C. 63) to North Hanover Street (I-240). 
Riverside Drive (S.R. 1477), from Hill Street (S.R. 1477) to Broadway (S.R. 1781). 
South Charlotte Street (S.R. 3284), from Biltmore Avenue (S.R. 3214) northward to U.S. 70 (Woodfin Place). 
Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81), from Bryson Street (N.C. 81) to South Tunnel Road (U.S. 74). 
Swannanoa River Road (U.S. 74-N.C. 81), from South Tunnel Road (U.S. 74) to Charlotte Highway (U.S. 74). 
Swannanoa River Road (N.C. 81), from U.S. 74 to Tunnel Road (U.S. 70). 
Sweeten Creek Road (U.S. 25-A), from a point 0.35 mile north of the Blue Ridge Parkway to London Road. 
Tunnel Road (U.S. 70), from South Tunnel Road (U.S. 74) to the Blue Ridge Parkway. 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.7; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 3-15-88; Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1897, §§ 3, 4, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2071, §§ 2, 4, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 2323, §§ 8, 9, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 3053, § 14, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 4641, § 7, 1-23-18; Ord. No. 4763, § 1, 9-24-19)  
Sec. 29. - Fifty miles per hour. 
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 50 miles per hour on the following portions of state highway system streets in the city: 
Asheville Crosstown Expressway (I-240-U.S. 70), from I-240-U.S. 19-23 to Charlotte Street (U.S. 70). 
Patton Avenue (I-240-U.S. 19-23), from North Hanover Street (I-240) to Asheville Crosstown Expressway (I-240-U.S. 70). 
U.S. 19-23-70, from Asheville Crosstown Expressway (I-240-U.S. 70) to Hill Street (S.R. 1477). 
(Code 1965, § 28-81.8; Ord. No. 30-53, § 15, 8-26-03  
Secs. 30—40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SCHOOL ZONES 
 
Sec. 41. - Twenty miles per hour when city schools are in session. 
The maximum speed limits for any vehicle upon the following city streets shall be 20 miles per hour between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day that the city schools are in session. 
Asheville High School. Victoria Road between a point approximately 400 feet north of and a point approximately 300 feet south of the Asheville High School driveway on Victoria Road. 
Asheville Middle School. South French Broad Avenue between Timothy Street and Phifer Street. 
Claxton Elementary School. Hillside Street between North Liberty and Hollard Street. 
Hall Fletcher Junior High School. Ridgelawn Road between Longview Road and Lanning Street; Lanning Street between Wellington Street and Bradley Street; Garden Circle between Ridgelawn Road and Bradley Street; and Bradley Street between Garden Circle and Lanning Street. 
Jones Primary School. Kimberly Avenue from Lorraine Avenue north to Country Club Road. 
Vance Elementary School. Sulphur Springs Road between a point 100 feet west of Clinton Street to a point 200 feet northeast of Lynndale Avenue; and Clinton Avenue between Sulphur Springs Road and Dunn Street. 
(Code 1965, § 28-82; Ord. No. 2001, § 1, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2109, § 1, 5-24-94; Ord. No. 2235, § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2748, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 42. - Twenty-five miles per hour while city schools are in session. 
The maximum speed limit for any vehicle upon the following city streets shall be 25 miles per hour between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day that the city schools are in session. 
Asheville High School. McDowell Street between Doctors Drive and St. Dunstans Road. 
Accelerated Learning Center (formerly Aycock Elementary School). Haywood Road between Brookshire Place and Michigan Avenue; and Hanover Street between Pennsylvania Avenue and the school driveway located on the access ramp to N.C. 191. 
Claxton Elementary School. Merrimon Avenue between Woodrow Avenue and a point four hundred feet north of Annandale Avenue. 
Isaac Dickson Elementary School. Hill Street between Jason Street and Greenley Street. 
Randolph Elementary School. Montford Avenue between Hill Street and Blake Street. 
(Code 1965, § 28-82.1; Ord. No. 2001, § 2, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2109, §§ 2, 3, 5-24-94)  
Sec. 43. - Twenty-five miles per hour while county schools are in session. 
The maximum speed limits for any vehicle upon the following city streets shall be 25 miles per hour on any day that the county schools are in session. 
Charles C. Bell Elementary School. Maple Springs Road between Camp Ground Road and the end of Maple Springs Road between the hours of 7:45 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
Haw Creek Elementary School. Trinity Chapel Road between New Haw Creek Road and Old Haw Creek Road, and New Haw Creek Road (SR 2032) between a point 0.18 mile north of Beverly Road and a point 0.38 mile north of Beverly Road; between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 2:15 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
Oakley Elementary School. Fairview Road between Springdale Avenue and Valleyview Road, and Oakley School Road between Fairview Road and a point 300 feet south of Onteora Boulevard; between the hours of 7:45 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
TC Roberson High School. Springside Road between Springside Park and Overlook Road, Overlook Road between Briarcliff Drive and Long Shoals Road, and Long Shoals Road between Overlook Road and a point 300 feet east of Miami Circle; between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. 
(Code 1965, § 28-82.2; Ord. No. 2858, § 1, 10-10-01)  
Sec. 44. - Twenty-five miles per hour while parochial and day schools are in session. 
The maximum speed limit is 25 miles per hour for any vehicle upon the following city streets on any day that the following schools are in session are as follows: 
Asheville Catholic School. Beaverdam Road (SR 2230) between Temple Avenue and a point 0.05 mile north of Culvern Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 2:45 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. 
Asheville Country Day School. U.S. 25 between a point 500 feet north of the school entrance and a point 500 feet south of the school entrance between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
Emmanuel Lutheran School. Patton Avenue from a point 150 feet northeast of Druid Drive to a point 150 feet southwest of Johnston Boulevard between the hours of 7:45 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(Code 1965, § 28-82.3; Ord. No. 1897, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2109, § 4, 5-24-94; Ord. No. 2858, §§ 2, 3, 10-10-01; Ord. No. 4641, § 8, 1-23-18)  
Sec. 45. - Thirty-five miles per hour while parochial and day schools are in session. 
The maximum speed limit is 35 miles per hour for any vehicle upon the following city streets on any day that the following schools are in session are as follows: 
Carolina Day School. Hendersonville Road (US 25) a point .10 mile from the Carolina Day School Entrance Road to the north and a point .20 mile from Carolina Day School Exit Road to the south from 7:30 a.m. to 8;30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during school days. 
(Ord. No. 2109, § 5, 5-24-94)  
APPENDIX D - HISTORIC LANDMARKS 
(a)  The city council of the City of Asheville has designated as historic landmarks the following: 
(1)  YMI Building, located on the corner of South Market and Eagle Streets, in Ordinance No. 1212. 
(2)  Ravenscroft, located at 29 Ravenscroft, in Ordinance No. 1213. 
(3)  Smith-McDowell House, located at 283 Victoria Road, in Ordinance No. 1214. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Old S&W Cafeteria, located at 54 Patton Avenue, in Ordinance No. 1260. 
(6)  Old Pack Memorial Library, located at Pack Square, in Ordinance No. 1261. 
(7)  Kress Building, located at 21 Patton Avenue, in Ordinance No. 1262. 
(8)  Albemarle Inn, located at 86 Edgemont Road, in Ordinance No. 1273. 
(9)  Zealandia, located on Vance Gap Road, in Ordinance No. 1337. 
(10)  Beaufort Lodge, located at 61 N. Liberty Street, in Ordinance No. 1338. 
(11)  Thomas Wolfe Cabin, located 1200 Oteen Church Road, in Ordinance No. 1339. 
(12)  Overlook (Seely's Castle), located at 710 Town Mountain Road, in Ordinance No. 1432. 
(13)  Cedar Crest (William Breese House), located at 674 Biltmore Avenue, in Ordinance No. 1437. 
(14)  The Gate House, located at 265 Charlotte Street, in Ordinance No. 1551. 
(15)  North Market Street and Langren Alley, in Ordinance No. 1552. 
(16)  The Manor, located at 265 Charlotte Street, in Ordinance No. 1553. 
(17)  Grove Arcade, located at Battle Square, in Ordinance No. 1554. 
(18)  Thomas Wolfe Memorial, located on Spruce Street and the adjoining lot on North Market Street, in Ordinance No. 1708. 
(19)  City Building, located at City/County Plaza, in Ordinance No. 1709. 
(20)  Samuel Harrison Reed House, located at 119 Dodge Street, in Ordinance No. 1743. 
(21)  O.B. Wright House and Carriage House, located at 235 and 233 Pearson Drive, in Ordinance No. 1744. 
(22)  Public Service Building, located at 89—93 Patton Avenue, in Ordinance No. 1809. 
(23)  Flat Iron Building, located at 20 Battery Park Avenue, in Ordinance No. 1885. 
(24)  Von Ruck House, located at 52 Albemarle Place, in Ordinance No. 1955. 
(25)  J.M. Westall House, located at 62 Edgewood Road, in Ordinance No. 2098. 
(26)  Loughran Building, located at 43 Haywood Street, in Ordinance No. 2158. 
(27)  St. Mary's Episcopal Church, rectory and grounds, 337 Charlotte Street, in Ordinance No. 2136. 
(28)  Stephens-Lee Community Center, in Ordinance No. 2320. 
(29)  Sign located at 65 Starnes Avenue, in Resolution No. 97-172. 
(30)  Sign located at 155 Tunnel Road, in Resolution No. 97-207. 
(31)  The Faith Tabernacle hand crafted metal sign located at 36 Michigan Avenue, in Resolution No. 98-8. 
(32)  The Drhumor Building located at 48 Patton Avenue, in Ordinance No. 2452. 
(33)  The public service building sign located at 93-89 Patton Avenue, in Resolution No. 98-38. 
(34)  The property known as Biltmore Industries, located at 111 Grovewood Road, in Ordinance No. 2533. 
(35)  The Kenilworth Inn located at 60 Caledonia Road, in Ordinance No. 2866. 
(36)  The property known as the Bynum House, located at 200 Macon Avenue, in Ordinance No. 2980. 
(37)  The property known as the Grove Park Country Club Clubhouse, located on Country Club Road, in Ordinance No. 2981. 
(38)  The property known as the Robert S. and Grace P. Carroll House, located at 19 Zillicoa Street. 
(39)  The property known as the South Asheville Cemetery, located at the end of Church Road, off Dalton Street, in Ordinance No. 2925. 
(40)  The property known as the Rice-Cornell-Brown House, located at 29 Rice Branch Road, in Ordinance No. 3177. 
(41)  The property known as the National Bank of Commerce, located at 11 Church Street, in Ordinance No. 3406. 
(42)  The property known as the Rankin/Bearden House, located at 5 Woodlawn Avenue, in Ordinance No. 3407. 
(43)  The property known as the Spinning Wheel, located at 1096 Hendersonville Road, in Ordinance No. 3778. 
(44)  The property known as the Williams-McQueen House, located at 105 Gudger Street, in Ordinance No. 1275. 
(45)  The property known as the Patton-Parker House, located at 95 Charlotte Street, in Ordinance No. 2679. 
(46)  The property known as the Hammond-Knowlton House, located at 30 Kimberly Knoll, in Ordinance No. 3602. 
(47)  The property known as the Princess Anne Hotel, located at 301 East Chestnut Street, in Ordinace No. 4694. 
(b)  The Buncombe County Board of Commissioners designated as an historic landmark a building and property which is now located within the corporate limits of the City of Asheville. That building and property are collectively known as follows: 
F.A. Sondley House, located on State Road 2032 and designated in Buncombe County Board of Commissioners Resolution No. 17308. 
(Ord. No. 1275, 6-3-82; Ord. No. 2128, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 2158, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 2136, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2320, 9-24-96; Res. No. 97-102, § 1, 9-23-97; Res. No. 97-207, § 1, 11-11-97; Res. No. 98-8, § 1, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 2452, § 1, 2-24-98; Res. No. 98-38, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2533, § 1, 12-15-98; Ord. No. 2679, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 2866, § 1, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2980, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 2981, § 1, 7-10-03; Ord. No. 3069, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 2925, 8-31-04; Ord. No. 3177, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 3406, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 3407, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 3602, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 3778, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 3902, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 4694, § 1, 8-28-18)  
APPENDIX E - PARKING METER ZONES 
The City Council of the City of Asheville has designated parking meter zones as follows: 
As designated by the traffic engineer pursuant to City Code Section 19-143, all parking spaces within the Central Business District not otherwise designated for other uses. 
(Ord. No. 2280, § 3, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3030, § 1(b), 6-10-03)  
APPENDIX F - SCHEDULE OF TAXICAB FARES[1] 
Within the City of Asheville, no person shall fix or charge a greater or lesser rate of fare for taxicab service than the following: 
1.  For the initiation (drop) of the meter ..... $2.50 
2.  For each one-tenth mile after initiation ..... 0.25 
3.  For each piece of luggage in excess of two average size traveling bags or their equivalent in size ..... 0.25 
4.  For each passenger in excess of two ..... 2.00 
5.  For each two minutes of waiting time or fraction thereof after the first two minutes ..... 0.40 
(Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while standing or waiting at the direction of the passenger; but, no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency or breakdown of the taxicab or for time consumed by premature response to a call.) 
Notwithstanding the above listing, the total fare may include the following surcharge: 
For each trip that initiates or terminates beyond a: 
Three-mile radius from the center of downtown = meter plus $3.00 
Five-mile radius from the center of downtown = meter plus $5.00 
Eight-mile radius from the center of downtown = meter plus $8.00 
(Ord. No. 3280, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2773, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2000, created App. F to read as herein set out. See chapter 18, articles I—III for taxicab regulations. 
 
Appendix G - RECREATIONAL FACILITIES WHERE CONCEALED HANDGUNS ARE PROHIBITED[1] 
Swimming Pools 
Malvern Hills 
Recreation Park 
Walton Street 
Athletic Fields 
Ballfields 
Carrier Park 
Charlie Bullman Park (3) 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Park 
McCormick Field 
Montford Complex 
Murphy-Oakley Park 
Ray L. Kisiah Park (4) 
Roger Farmer Memorial Park (3) 
Shiloh Park 
Valley Springs Middle School Ballfield (5) 
Walton Street Park 
Weaver Park 
West Asheville Park 
Soccer Fields 
Azalea Park (4) 
Carrier Park 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Park 
Memorial Stadium 
  
  
Athletic Facility 
Basketball Courts 
Aston Park (2) 
Burton St. Center (4) 
Carrier Park (2) 
East Asheville Center 
Kenilworth Park 
Lakewood Park 
Magnolia Park 
Montford Complex 
Murphy-Oakley Park 
Recreation Park (3) 
Roger Farmer Park (2) 
Shiloh Park 
Stephens-Lee Center 
W.C. Reid Center 
Walton Street Park 
Weaver Park 
West Asheville Center 
Shuffleboard Courts 
Harvest House 
Tennis Courts 
Aston Park Tennis Center 
Choctaw Street Park - 2 tennis courts 
Kenilworth Park - 2 tennis courts 
Livingston Street Park - 2 tennis courts 
Malvern Hills Park - 2 lighted tennis courts 
Montford Complex - 2 lighted tennis courts 
Murphy-Oakley Park - 3 tennis courts 
Shiloh Complex - 1 tennis courts 
Weaver Park - 2 tennis courts 
West Asheville Park - 2 tennis courts 
Climbing Wall 
The Montford Climbing Wall 
Disc Golf 
Richmond Hill Park 
Golf Course 
The Asheville Municipal Golf Course 
Gyms 
Montford Complex 
Shiloh Center 
Stephens-Lee Center 
W.C. Reid Center 
Lawn Bowling 
Carrier Park 
Velodrome 
Carrier Park 
Volleyball 
Carrier Park 
Jake Rusher Park 
Recreation Park 
Skate Park 
(Ord. No. 4031, Att., 11-22-11; Ord. No. 4251, Att., 11-12-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Firearms and weapons, § 12-42. 
 
APPENDIX H - DESIGNATED STREET PERFORMANCE HIGH IMPACT AREAS 
"WOOLWORTH WALK" - One hundred twenty (120) feet in all directions from the center of a mark on the sidewalk which adjoins the eastern side of Haywood Street near the intersection of Haywood Street and Battery Park Avenue. 
"FLAT IRON" - One hundred twenty (120) feet in all direction from the center of a mark on the sidewalk which adjoins the southern side of Battery Park Avenue near the intersection of Battery Park Avenue and Wall Street. 
(Ord. No. 4530, § 3, 10-25-16) 
