THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF ANGIER, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
ANGIER, NORTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
R.H. Ellington 
Mayor 
____________ 
Stanley Carney 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Joe Pleasant 
Craig Honeycutt 
Billy Surles 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Coley Price 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Ray Pleasant 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Joyce Valley, MMC 
Town Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
ANGIER, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Lewis W. Weatherspoon 
Mayor 
____________ 
Craig Honeycutt 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Loru Boyer Hawley 
Mike Hill 
Bob Smith 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Gerry Vincent 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Dan Hartzog, Jr. 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Veronica Hardaway 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Angier, North Carolina. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Joyce Valley, MMC, Town Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Angier, North Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Angier, North Carolina. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Angier, North Carolina. 2010. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-04 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF ANGIER, NORTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. THE ADOPTION OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES SHALL HAVE NO EFFECT ON THE TOWN'S CURRENT ZONING, SUBDIVISION OR FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the Town of Angier, North Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive, is adopted with changes as listed beginning on page 3 of this Ordinance. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 3, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in accordance with code section 1-6, unless provided otherwise. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 3, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall be effective August 3, 2010 . 
Passed and adopted by the Angier Board of Commissioners this  3rd  day of August , 2010. 
      R.H. Ellington      
      Mayor         ATTEST: 
      Joyce H. Valley, MMC      
      Town Clerk           
1st Reading: July 6, 2010 
2nd Reading: 8-3-2010 
Board Action Adopted 
Ayes: 3 
Noes: 0 
CODE CHANGES: 
1)  Chapter 2, Section 2-33 (b) Meetings Schedule adopted. The Town Board meets on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted and advertised pursuant to the general statutes. 
2)  Chapter 11, Section 11-101. Rules and Regulations-Skateboard Park 
3)  Chapter 14-Nuisances and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Section 14-11. Nuisances Declared 
Re-written: (2) Any weeds or other vegetation having an overall height of more than 12 inches above the surrounding ground provided that the following shall not be considered to be a part of this condition: trees and ornamental shrubs, cultured plants; flowers and growing and producing vegetable plants. 
4)  Add: 14.11(18) Vacant Lots-Every owner or person in possession of a vacant lot within the corporate limits shall shrub down, within twelve (12) inches of the ground, all weeds, grass, or other noxious growth from said lot as needed to remain in compliance with the ordinance. If said weeds or other noxious growth are not cut in compliance with this sub-section, the agent of the City shall proceed to have said weeds or other noxious growth cut, and the owner or person in possession of such lot shall be responsible to the Town of Angier for the cost thereof. 
5)  Chapter 15-Solid Waste Management: Addition: 
Section 15-29 c) Yard, leaf waste, grass clipping material and recycling material shall be properly prepared for collection by the resident and in accordance with the town's pre-collection procedure statement as established by the town manager and amended from time to time. A copy of this procedure statement is on file in the town clerk's office and is to be provided to a new water customer upon registering for garbage *and recycling services. 
6)  Chapter 15, Section 15-26. Purpose of article. (Delete last sentence: No unauthorized person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the town or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the town. 
7)  Chapter 17, Section 17-38. Definitions 
Air gap separation means an unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. An approved air gap vertical separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap be less than two inches. 
8)  Chapter 17, Section 17-171 Penalties (2) A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service terminated pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. In the event of subsequent violation, the reconnection fee shall be $250.00 for the second violation and $300.00 for each additional violation. 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the board of commissioners, held on the  3rd  day of August , 2010. 
/s/   
      Joyce H. Valley, MMC      
      Town Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 02010.1 12- 7-2010 Included Supp. No. 3 2011.01  7- 5-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 02012.01A  1- 3-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 02012.01  4- 3-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 2012.01  6- 5-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 2012.02 10- 2-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 2012.03 10- 2-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 2012.04 10- 2-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 2013.01  1- 8-2013 Included Supp. No. 3 Ord. of  6- 4-2013 Included Supp. No. 4 Ord. of  7- 2-2013 Included Supp. No. 4 Current Officials August, 2013 Included Supp. No. 4 Ord. of 10- 1-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 Ord. of  7- 1-2014 Included Supp. No. 5 Ord. of  5- 7-2013(1) Included Supp. No. 6 Ord. of  5- 7-2013(2) Included Supp. No. 6 Ord. of  5- 7-2013(3) Included Supp. No. 6 Ord. of  1- 3-2016(1) Included Supp. No. 7 Ord. of  1- 3-2016(2) Included Supp. No. 7 Ord. of  1- 3-2016(3) Included Supp. No. 7 Ord. of  2- 2-2016 Included Supp. No. 7 Ord. of  5- 3-2016 Included Supp. No. 7 Ord. of 11-18-2013 Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of 11- 1-2016 Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  6- 6-2017(1) Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  6- 6-2017(2) Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  7-11-2017(1) Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  7-11-2017(2) Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  9-12-2017 Included Supp. No. 8 015-2018  5-14-2018 Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of 11- 5-2018 Included Supp. No. 8 Ord. of  3- 5-2019 Included Supp. No. 8  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF ANGIER 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter set out herein is derived from Section 1 of Session Law 2008-63, House Bill 2278, as ratified by the general assembly on July 7, 2008. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Section 3 of the act provided as follows: 
"(a) The following acts or portions of acts, having served the purposes for which they were enacted, or having been consolidated into this act, are hereby repealed: 
"(1) Chapter 652 of the 1975 Session Laws (current charter). 
"(2) Chapter 502 of the 1991 Session Laws, as to the Town of Angier only (utility billing and termination, consolidated in Section 5.1). 
"(3) S.L. 2005-308 as to the Town of Angier only (weeded lot ordinance, consolidated in Section 5.2). 
"(b) This act does not affect any of the following acts: 
"(1) Chapter 626 of the 1969 Session Laws, as amended (relating to liquor control stores). 
"(2) Chapter 144 of the 1971 Session Laws (relating to liquor control stores). 
"(3) Chapter 75 of the 1991 Session Laws (relating to liquor control stores). 
"(4) S.L. 2002-40 (relating to liquor control stores)." 
State Law reference- Modification of form of government, G.S. 160A-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS, AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The Town of Angier and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate under the name of the Town of Angier, hereinafter at times referred to as the "Town." 
Section 1.2. - Powers. 
    The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities conferred upon the Town of Angier specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The term 'general law' is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1. 
Section 1.3. - Corporate Limits. 
    The corporate limits shall be those existing at the time of ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and as they may be altered from time to time in accordance with law. An official map of the Town, showing the current municipal boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State, the Harnett County Register of Deeds, and the appropriate board of elections. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Section 2.1. - Town Governing Body. 
    The Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the 'Board,' and the Mayor shall be the governing body of the Town. 
Section 2.2. - Board of Commissioners; Composition; Terms of Office. 
    The Board shall be composed of four members to serve staggered terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. The Town is divided into single-member wards; and candidates shall reside in and represent the districts according to the apportionment plan adopted, but all candidates shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Town. A member for each of Wards 1 and 3 shall be selected in 2009 and quadrennially thereafter for a four-year term, and a member for each of Wards 2 and 4 shall be selected in 2011 and quadrennially thereafter for a four-year term. A map of the wards shall be maintained by the Town Clerk's office and filed with the board or boards of elections conducting town elections. Until changed by the Board of Commissioners, the boundaries of the wards on January 1, 2008, shall remain in effect. 
Section 2.3. - Mayor; Term of Office; Duties. 
    The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Town for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall be the official head of the Town government and shall preside at meetings of the Board. The Mayor shall have the right to vote only when there is an equal division on any question or matter before the Board and shall exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the Board. 
Section 2.4. - Mayor Pro Tempore. 
    In accordance with general law, the Board shall elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform the duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability. 
Section 2.5. - Meetings. 
    In accordance with general law, the Board shall establish a suitable time and place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held as provided by general law. 
Section 2.6. - Quorum; Voting. 
    Official actions of the Board and all votes shall be taken in accordance with the applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The quorum provisions of G.S. 160A-74 shall apply. 
Section 2.7. - Compensation; Qualifications for Office; Vacancies. 
    The compensation, qualifications, and filling of vacancies of the Mayor and Commissioners shall be in accordance with general law. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS 

Section 3.1. - Regular Municipal Elections. 
    Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina. Elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined by a plurality as provided in G.S. 163-292. 
Section 3.2. - Election of Mayor. 
    At the regular municipal election in 2011, and quadrennially thereafter, a Mayor shall be elected to serve a term of four years. 
Section 3.3. - Election of Commissioners. 
    At the regular municipal election in 2009, and quadrennially thereafter, two Commissioners shall be elected to four-year terms. At the regular municipal election in 2011, and quadrennially thereafter, two Commissioners shall be elected to four-year terms. 
Section 3.4. - Special Elections and Referenda. 
    Special elections and referenda may be held only as provided by general law. 
ARTICLE IV. - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.1. - Form of Government. 
    The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government as provided in Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. 
Section 4.2. - Town Attorney. 
    The Town Board shall appoint a Town Attorney licensed to practice law in North Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to represent the Town, advise Town officials, and perform other duties required by law or as the Board may direct. 
Section 4.3. - Town Clerk. 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the Board, to maintain official records and documents, to give notice of meetings, and to perform such other duties required by law or as the Board may direct. 
Section 4.4. - Tax Collector. 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes owed to the Town and perform those duties specified in G.S. 105-350 and such other duties as prescribed by law or assigned by the Board. 
Section 4.5. - Other Administrative Officers and Employees. 
    The Town Board may authorize other positions to be filled by appointment and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate, subject to the requirements of general law. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 5.1. - Utility Billing and Termination. 
    The Town may provide that any fee imposed pursuant to G.S. 160A-314 for the purpose of G.S. 160A-311(2), 160A-311(3), and 160A-311(6) may be billed together in one itemized statement. The board of commissioners may provide by ordinance the order in which partial payments are to be applied among services. In the case of nonpayment within a period of not less than 30 days, the Town may terminate any or all such service for which full payment has not been made. 
Section 5.2. - Weeded Lot Ordinance. 
    The Town may notify a violator of the municipality's weeded lot ordinance that if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the ordinance again in the calendar year in which notice is given, the Town shall, without further notice, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of that action shall be charged to the violator. The notice may also provide that for each additional violation the Town shall charge the violator the expense of the action and a surcharge of up to fifty percent (50%) over the expense to remedy the preceding violation. Notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail. 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Angier, North Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Angier Town Code" or "Angier Municipal Code." 
(Code 1975, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Code of ordinances, G.S. 160A-77; pleading and proving municipal ordinances, G.S. 160A-79. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Board of commissioners; board. The term "board of commissioners" or "board" means the mayor and commissioners, or governing body, of the Town of Angier, North Carolina. 
    Code. The terms "the Code" and "this Code" mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Angier, North Carolina. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, G.S. 1-593, 1A-1, Rule 6. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Harnett, in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
    Fees, etc. Any reference to a fee, license tax or other monetary term, where the amount is not specified, means an amount determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
    Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Governor. The term "governor" or "the governor" means the governor of North Carolina 
    Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May; shall. The term "may" is permissive; the term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. The term "official time standard" means that whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this town. 
    Officials, departments, etc. Whenever references are made to officials, boards, commissions, departments and other agencies by title only, they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments and agencies of the Town of Angier. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to any property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes moneys, goods, chattels, choses in action and evidences of debt, including all things capable of ownership, not descendible to heirs at law. 
    Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The terms "state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
    Street. The term "street" means the entire width between property or right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- "Street" defined, G.S. 20-4.01(46). 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "the town" or "this town" means the Town of Angier, in the County of Harnett, in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
    Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing, engraving, lithographing and any other mode of representing terms and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; and the term "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
(Code 1975, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction for statutes, G.S. 12-3, 160A-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the ordinances included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes following sections, and the references and notes throughout the Code, are not legally substantive but are merely for the benefit of the user of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance shall be a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00 as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(b)  Violations of any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance shall subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a period of time prescribed by the court after he has been cited for such violation. 
(c)  Any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the town for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law. 
(d)  Any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular. In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code or such ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the town may execute the order of abatement. The town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of the superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. 
(e)  The provisions of this Code and any other town ordinance may be enforced by any one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section. 
(f)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing violation of any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1975, § 1-6; Ord. of 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Injunctions, G.S. 1A-1, Rule 65; liability of defendant for costs in criminal actions, G.S. 6-47, 6-48; enforcement of ordinances, G.S. 160A-175, 14-4. 
Sec. 1-7. - Procedure when amending or adding to Code. 
    Every ordinance introduced, if it proposes to amend or repeal any existing portion of the Code, shall show by proper reference the chapter, article and section proposed to be amended; or, if it proposes to add to the Code a new chapter, article or section, it shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter, article or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may be contained in the text of such proposed ordinance, such indication shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2) 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness. 
(2)  Any ordinance providing for public improvements and assessments therefor. 
(3)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual budget or for the transfer of funds. 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town or discontinuing territory as a part of the town. 
(5)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right. 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement. 
(7)  Any ordinance relating to the status of specific streets or the names or prefixes of streets. 
(8)  Any fees, license taxes or other monetary amounts that are not specified in the Code. 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to no-parking areas, speed limits, stop intersections or through streets. 
(10)  Any zoning, subdivision or land development ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of this code. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to omit designated classes of ordinances from Code, G.S. 160A-77. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Supplementation of Code, G.S. 160A-77(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local development, G.S. 158-7.2 et seq.; local government finance, G.S. 159-1 et seq.; cities and towns, G.S. 160A-1 et seq.; elections, G.S. 163-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    The boundaries of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, according to and as authorized by G.S. 160A-360, extend to distances not exceeding one mile from the corporate limits of the town, as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the Town of Angier," such map being made an integral part of this section. 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Duties of mayor. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor to: 
(1)  Preside over all meetings of the town board. 
(2)  Keep himself informed as to the town's business. 
(3)  Appoint such committees and outline their powers and duties as the town board may direct. 
(4)  Make such recommendations as he deems necessary or expedient to the town board. 
(5)  Appear on behalf of the town at public occasions. 
Sec. 2-32. - Compensation of commissioners. 
    Each member of the town board shall receive compensation as set forth by G.S. 160A-64. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regular and special meetings, G.S. 160-71. 

Sec. 2-33. - Meetings schedule adopted. 
(a)  During any regular meeting or any duly called special meeting, the board may call or schedule a special meeting, provided that the motion or resolution calling or scheduling any such special meeting shall specify the time, place and purpose of such meeting and shall be adopted during an open session. 
(b)  The town board meets on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted and advertised pursuant to the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 1), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 2-34. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the actual membership of the board of commissioners plus the mayor, excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum. A member who has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the remaining members present shall be counted as present for the purposes of determining whether or not a quorum is present. 
Sec. 2-35. - Minutes. 
    Full and accurate minutes of the proceedings of the board of commissioners shall be kept, and shall be open to the inspection of the public. 
State Law reference- Minutes to be kept, ayes and noes, G.S. 160A-72. 
Sec. 2-36. - Election of mayor pro tempore. 
    At the organizational meeting, the board of commissioners shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore to serve at the pleasure of the board. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-70. 
Sec. 2-37. - Presiding officer. 
    The mayor shall preside over all meeting of the board of commissioners, and in his absence the mayor pro tempore shall preside at meetings and perform the duties assigned to that office. 
Sec. 2-38. - Rules of procedure. 
    Except where otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the procedure of the business of the board of commissioners shall be governed by Suggested Rules of Procedure for Small Local Government Boards, published by the Institute of Government, UNC Chapel Hill. 
Secs. 2-39-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 2-51. - Ordinances to be proposed in writing; approval of form by town attorney. 
    Every ordinance amending or repealing any ordinance, and every new ordinance, shall be proposed in writing, confined to one subject, excepting ordinances for appropriations which shall be confined to the appropriations, and approved as to form by the town attorney. 
Sec. 2-52. - Official copies. 
    A true copy of any ordinance or resolution, which has been duly enacted by the town board, and has been signed by the clerk, and the official seal of the town has been attached thereto shall be known and recognized as the official copy. 
State Law reference- True copies of ordinances, G.S. 160A-78. 
Secs. 2-53-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-81-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN MANAGER 

Sec. 2-101. - Designated; duties. 
    The town manager shall be the chief administrator of the town. The town manager shall be responsible to the town board for administering all municipal affairs placed in his charge by them, and shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Appoint and suspend or remove all town officers and employees not elected by the people, and whose appointment or removal is not otherwise provided for by law, except the town attorney, in accordance with such personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the town board may adopt. 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the town, subject to the general direction and control of the town board, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the town board and recommend any measures that he deems expedient. 
(4)  See that all laws of the state, town Charter and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the town board are faithfully executed within the town. 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the town board. 
(6)  Annually submit to the town board and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town as of the end of the fiscal year. 
(7)  Make any other reports that the town board may require concerning the operations of the town departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and control. 
(8)  Perform any other duties that may be required or authorized by the town board. 
State Law reference- Administration of council-manager cities, G.S. 160A-147 et seq. 
Secs. 2-102-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOWN CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- City clerk, G.S. 160A-171. 

Sec. 2-131. - Designation; duties. 
    There shall be a town clerk who shall give notice of meetings of the town board, keep a journal of the proceedings of the town board, be the custodian of all town records, and perform any other duties that may be required by law or the board. 
Sec. 2-132. - Deputy clerk. 
    The town manager may provide for a deputy town clerk who shall have full authority to exercise and perform any of the powers and duties of the town clerk that may be specified by the town board. 
Secs. 2-133-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TOWN ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City attorney, G.S. 160A-173. 

Sec. 2-141. - Designation; duties. 
(a)  At the first meeting of the town board after their election and qualification, or as soon thereafter as possible, they shall appoint (or reappoint) a town attorney. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the town attorney to: 
(1)  Prosecute for and defend suits against the town. 
(2)  Advise the mayor, town board or any other officer of the town in regard to matters connected with town business. 
(3)  Attend meetings of the town board when requested to do so by them. 
(4)  Draw such deeds, contracts, bonds, notes and other legal papers as may be required for the proper conduct of the town's business. 
(5)  Draw all ordinances granting franchises. 
(6)  Approve all ordinances as to form before their introduction. 
Secs. 2-142-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TOWN FINANCE DIRECTOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Finance officer, G.S. 159-24. 

Sec. 2-151. - Designated; duties. 
(a)  The town finance director, or finance officer, is appointed by the town manager. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to: 
(1)  Receive and faithfully keep monies which he shall receive on behalf of the town. 
(2)  Keep an accurate account of all monies deposited with him or by him and disbursed by him for the town. 
(3)  Supply the town board with such information as they may require of him relative to finances. 
(4)  Make a monthly report available to the town board of all receipts and disbursements of funds of the town. 
(5)  Honor all orders drawn on him signed by the mayor; attested by the clerk and under the seal of the town, and for which purpose an appropriation has been made, that are presented to him. 
(c)  The finance director is authorized to invest idle funds of the town. 
Secs. 2-152-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TAX COLLECTOR 

Sec. 2-161. - Designated; duties; interlocal agreement for tax collection. 
(a)  The tax collector is appointed by the town manager. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the tax collector to: 
(1)  Collect all taxes due to the town. 
(2)  Make an accounting to the finance director at the end of each month. 
(3)  Pay over to the finance director such monies as are collected by him for the account of each separate fund according to the tax levy. 
(4)  Deliver a list of all unpaid taxes with the reason therefor as ascertainable to the town board. 
(5)  Supply the town manager and the town board with such information as they may require of him relative to his department. 
(6)  Make a monthly report to the town board, listing therein all funds collected by him. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the town from entering into an interlocal agreement with county or state agencies for the collection of taxes and other duties of the tax collector. 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, G.S. 18B-100 et seq.; manufacture, sale, etc., forbidden except as expressly authorized, G.S. 18B-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine in public places generally prohibited. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, malt beverages and unfortified wine means malt beverages and unfortified wine as defined by Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to consume malt beverages or unfortified wine on any property owned, occupied, or controlled by the town, including, but not limited to, public streets, parks, and recreational areas, except as permitted by section 3-2. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to possess open containers of malt beverages or unfortified wine on any property owned, occupied, or controlled by the Town, including, but not limited to, public streets, parks, and recreational areas, except as permitted by section 3-2. 
(Ord. No. 015-2018, 5-14-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 015-2018, adopted May 14, 2018, amended § 3-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, § 2.1-1; and Code 1991, § 3-1. 
State Law reference- Purchase, possession and consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, G.S. 18B-300. 
Sec. 3-2. - Possession and consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine at town sponsored events. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, malt beverages and unfortified wine means malt beverages and unfortified wine as defined by Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(b)  Possession and consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, as defined by Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General Statutes, is permitted within the boundaries and during the event hours of any public, town-sponsored event being conducted within a public street or other publicly owned area pursuant to a written permit issued by the town manager. This permit may also allow the sale, service, and distribution of malt beverages and unfortified wine on designated public streets and areas reserved for the event, subject to all applicable ABC regulations. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the town manager must establish the boundaries of the event and temporarily close the streets within the boundaries. 
(d)  The town manager may impose reasonable requirements to ensure that the sale, distribution, service, possession, or consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine does not extend beyond the boundaries of the function or celebration. 
(Ord. No. 015-2018, 5-14-2018) 
State Law reference- Purchase, possession and consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, G.S. 18B-300. 
Secs. 3-3-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this article are derived from sections 4-6 of Chapter 626, Senate Bill 423, ratified by the General Assembly on May 28, 1969; from section 1 of Chapter 144, House Bill 161, ratified by the General Assembly on April 1, 1971; and from section 1 of Session Law 2002-40, House Bill 1599, ratified by the General Assembly on July 29, 2002. These provisions are inserted into the code upon direction by the town to the codifier. 

Sec. 3-31. - Composition and terms of board. 
    The mayor and board of commissioners of the town shall immediately appoint a town alcoholic beverage control board to be composed of a chairman and four other members who shall be well known for their character, ability and business acumen. Said board shall be known and designated as "The Town of Angier Board of Alcoholic Control." The chairman of said board shall be designated by the board of commissioners of the town and shall serve for his first term a period of three years, and each other member shall serve for a period of three years. All terms shall begin with the date of their appointment, and after the first terms shall have expired, their successors in office shall serve for a period of three years. Their successors, or any vacancy occurring in the board, shall be named or filled by the board of commissioners of the town. The board of alcoholic control shall report quarterly to the town board the status and financial condition of the alcoholic control board and the books of the said board of alcoholic control shall be available for inspection and examination by the members of the town board at any time. 
(Ord. of 6-6-2017(1)) 
Sec. 3-32. - Powers of board. 
    The Town of Angier Board of Alcoholic Control shall have all of the powers and duties imposed by G.S. 18B-701, except as otherwise provided herein, and shall be subject to the powers and authority of the state alcoholic beverage control commission. The Town of Angier Board of Alcoholic Control and the operation of any town liquor store authorized under the provisions of this Act shall be subject to and in pursuance with the provisions of state statutes, except to the extent which the same may be in conflict with the provisions of the session laws from which this section is derived. 
Sec. 3-33. - Distribution and use of profits. 
    The net profits, as determined by quarterly audit, shall be distributed and used as follows: 
(1)  Ten percent of the net profit shall be paid to the Angier Community Library. 
(2)  Ten percent of the net profit may be used by the town alcoholic control board, in its discretion, for educational programs as to the effect of the use of alcoholic beverages and for the rehabilitation of alcoholics. 
(3)  The remainder of the net profits shall be allocated to the general fund of the town. The board of commissioners of the town is hereby authorized to appropriate such funds for any proper governmental purpose. Out of the funds allocated to it, the board of commissioners of the town is authorized, at their discretion, to expend up to 25 percent of such funds for recreational programs in the town. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ord. adopted Nov. 18, 2013, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-13, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2008-02, §§ 4.1-4.13, adopted Jan. 8, 2008; and Ord. No. 02012.01, § (c), adopted April 3, 2012. 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, G.S. 14-360 et seq.; protection of livestock running at large, G.S. 14-366 et seq.; protection of animals, G.S. 19A; dogs, G.S. 67; allowing livestock to run at large forbidden, G.S. 68-16; agriculture, G.S. 106; rabies, G.S. 130A-184 et seq.; municipal regulation of animals, G.S. 160A-182, 160A-186 et seq.; municipal animal taxes, G.S. 160A-212; municipal animal shelters, G.S. 160A-493. 

Sec. 4-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide and define authority of the Harnett County Animal Services department within the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and Lillington. Harnett County Animal Services now has charge of protecting the citizens of these towns from rabies transmitted by unconfined, uncontrolled or un-immunized animals, to regulate animals that may be a nuisance, to insure that all animals are treated in a humane manner and in the promotion of responsible pet ownership and animal welfare. Harnett County Animal Services in cooperation with the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and Lillington are hereby charged with the responsibility of animal services in conjunction within these town's jurisdictions. This chapter will supersede all town animal services ordinances and shall pertain to the towns of Angier, Erwin, Coats and Lillington only. The most current Harnett County Animal Services ordinance shall also pertain to the towns in agreement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-2. - Establishment of bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and all land owned or leased by the town outside the corporate limits is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise kill, within a sanctuary hereby established, any native wild bird. It shall be lawful to trap birds or fowl specifically declared a nuisance by the town board when such birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property. 
(c)  The bird clubs of the town are hereby granted permission to erect artistic signs, giving notice of the regulations therein provided, at such places and of such design as may be approved by the town board. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Bird Sanctuary establishment, G.S. 160A-188 
Sec. 4-3. - Hunting, killing, and trapping of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or kill any animal within the territorial limits of the towns. Trapping may be done with permission from the Harnett County Animal Services Department. This section does not apply to the Police Departments or Harnett County Animal Services, or duly authorized agents when enforcing the provisions provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-4. - Keeping livestock and fowl. 
    No person may keep within the town any livestock and/or fowl except in accordance with this section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, house or stable any: horse, mule, pony, cow, sheep, goat, swine or any other livestock including ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or house any cattle, goat, horse, swine, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas or any other Livestock on a fenced lot with in the corporate limits of town. 
(c)  Any chickens kept within the corporate limits of the town must be contained by a fence, building or other enclosure that will ensure that the chickens will not run at large. 
(d)  Any fowl found running at large may be taken into possession and/or destroyed by Harnett County Animal Services anywhere within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-5. - Number of chickens. 
(a)  A maximum of six hens (Gallus domesticus) will be allowed per household. 
(b)  NO Roosters or other poultry breeds will be permitted. 
(c)  No free-ranging permitted. Hens must be kept in a chicken coop or enclosed runs at all times and are not permitted to roam freely on the Owner's lot. 
(d)  The location of the coop and in closed run must be in the rear of the Owner's lot as determined by the line projected along the rear of the dwelling to each sideline and be 20 feet away from the adjoining Lots. 
(e)  The coop and enclosed run must be a minimum of ten feet in length and ten feet in width and a maximum of 16 feet in length and 16 feet in width. 
(f)  Coop design should provide ample ventilation to avoid odors and be made predator proof. 
(g)  All manure and wood shavings from the coop must be disposed of properly by removing off-site by the owner or professional removal service. 
(h)  Prior to beginning construction, a land use application shall be submitted and approved by the zoning administrator, for all coop and run designs. 
(i)  The code enforcement officer, and its designees, has the right to enter onto the property for the purpose of inspecting the coop and run to ensure compliance with these requirements. The home owner will be notified no less than three days prior to the inspection date and has the right to be present during the inspection 
(j)  Owners who are determined to be in violation may be allowed to correct the violation(s) and/or be subject to a fine, as per the town's code. Daily penalties will be assessed in the event that the violation(s) continue. The town may revoke this privilege if an owner has had three or more violations during one calendar year. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-6. - Number of dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises within the corporate limits more than three dogs. This limitation shall not apply to dogs less than four months of age. Any person wanting to keep more than three dogs will apply to the town for a license to operate a dog kennel. Prior to the issuing of such license it shall be determined that the kennel would be in compliance with all town and state regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-7. - Number of cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises within the corporate limits more than three cats. This limitation shall not apply to cats less than four months of age. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-8. - Confinement and running at large. 
(a)  No person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal may cause, permit or allow the animal to stray or in any manner to run at large upon any public street, sidewalk or other public property or to stray, run at large or otherwise trespass upon the private property of another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow such animal to be at large on any town property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal to fail or refuse to remove feces deposited by the animal on any street, sidewalk, park or other publicly owned property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail or refuse to remove feces deposited by the animal on any private property. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-9. - Possession of animals and strays. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the town knowingly and intentionally, unless with consent of the owner, to harbor, feed and keep in their possession by confinement or otherwise allow to remain on their property any animal which does not belong to them unless they notify Harnett County Animal Services within 48 hours from the time such animal came into his possession. 
(b)  Any person who feeds a stray animal and/or allows the animal to stay on their property for at least two days will be considered the legally responsible for such animal and any violations caused by the animal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any such stray animal to the police department or Harnett County Animal Services or person duly authorized upon demand. 
(d)  The purpose of this section is to aid in rabies control and to prevent the intentional or unintentional possession of pets belonging to other persons. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-10. - Impoundment and reclaiming of captured animals. 
(a)  Any animal within the town without an owner, any animal running at large within the town, or any animal whose owner fails to have the animal vaccinated in accordance with the laws of the state, or an animal appearing within the town without a rabies vaccination tag shall be taken by Harnett County Animal Services and confined for a period of time until reclaimed by the owner with a pre-paid rabies voucher, adopted with a pre-paid rabies voucher or euthanized by the Harnett County Animal Services Department. 
(b)  If any animal is not redeemed by the owner within three days from the time animal control takes possession of the animal, the animal shall be put up for adoption or disposed of under the regulations set forth by the Harnett County Animal Services Ordinance and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(c)  In order for the owner to redeem an animal, such owner must first show that the rabies vaccination tag has been procured. In addition the owner shall pay a penalty of $50.00 for allowing the animal to run at large. The fee may be adjusted in the new fiscal years in the Harnett County Animal Services fees. The owner must pay daily expenses for boarding and caring for the animal. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-11. - Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a citizen to keep a dog within the corporate limits of the town a dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous or Dangerous by Harnett County Animal Services. 
(b)  Any owner found in violation of this section will be required to release the dog to the Harnett County Animal Services Department for euthanasia and will face a civil fine of $400.00. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-12. - Inherently dangerous exotic animals. 
    Shall be in accordance with the Harnett County Animal Services Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 4-13. - Enforcement, penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Enforcement administration. Primary responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this chapter is assigned to the Harnett County Animal Services Department. Municipal police departments will assist when needed. 
(b)  Penalties and remedies. Penalties and remedies shall be in accordance with the Harnett County Animal Services Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-18-2013) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference- Compliance of federal buildings with local building codes and zoning laws, consideration of local laws and cooperation with local officials required, 40 USC 3312. 
State Law reference- Building inspection, G.S. 160A-411 et seq.; state building code and building code council, G.S. 143-136 et seq.; warrants to conduct inspections, G.S. 15-27.2; fire limits, G.S. 160A-435 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.S. 160A-441 et seq.; contractors, G.S. 87; public building contracts, G.S. 143-128 et seq.; manufactured housing and mobile homes, G.S. 143-143.8 et seq.; North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board, G.S. 143-151.8 et seq.; enforcement of building code insulation and energy utilization standards, G.S. 143-151.26 et seq.; technical ordinances, G.S. 160A-76; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; investigation of fires and inspection of premises, G.S. 58-79-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Applicability of chapter provisions and regulatory codes adopted. 
    The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter shall apply to the following: 
(1)  The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure. 
(2)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof. 
(3)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and appurtenances thereof. 
(4)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 4-1; Code 1991, § 5-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Compliance. 
    No wall, structure, building or part thereof shall be built, altered or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No building already erected or hereafter to be built shall be razed, altered, removed or repaired in any manner in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 4-2; Code 1991, § 5-2) 
Sec. 5-3. - Fire limits established. 
    The fire limits of the town shall be as set forth on the official map of town fire limits, maintained on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3; Code 1991, § 5-3) 
State Law reference- Municipal fire limits, G.S. 160A-435 et seq. 
Sec. 5-4. - Fire limits; construction restrictions. 
    In addition to the requirements of G.S. 160A-436, within the fire limits, no building or structure of metal construction on wood framing shall be erected, altered, repaired or removed, except upon permit of the building inspector, approved by the board of commissioners and by the state insurance commissioner. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4; Code 1991, § 5-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-436. 
Sec. 5-5. - Building inspector-Office created; duties. 
    Under the authority granted to the town by G.S. 160A-411, the office of building inspector for the town is hereby established. The building inspector, so appointed, shall have all of the duties vested in such office by the general statutes of the state. 
(Code 1975, § 4-5; Code 1991, § 5-5) 
State Law reference- Duties and responsibilities of inspectors, G.S. 160A-412. 
Sec. 5-6. - Same-Right of entry for inspection purposes. 
    The building inspector of the town has the right, at any reasonable time, to enter upon a lot or site for which a building permit has been requested or issued, but for which a certificate of occupancy has not yet been issued, for the purpose of inspection of the premises in accordance with this chapter, the town's zoning ordinance and the building code of the town. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6; Code 1991, § 5-6) 
Sec. 5-7. - Registration of contractors. 
    Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing contractor, heating and air conditioning contractor or electrical contractor within the town shall register at the office of the building inspector, giving his name and place of business. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1991, § 5-7) 
Secs. 5-8-5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATORY CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Building codes, etc., applicable in municipalities, G.S. 143-138(e); adoption of technical codes by reference, G.S. 160A-76. 

Sec. 5-20. - Compliance. 
(a)  All buildings or structures which are constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or moved, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other provisions of either the state building code, general construction, volume I, or the state uniform residential building code, whichever is applicable, or of both if both are applicable. 
(b)  Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the state plumbing code. 
(c)  All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment and appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the state heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code. 
(d)  All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the state electrical code. 
(e)  All electrical wiring installed or placed in buildings in the designated fire district in the town shall be installed in conduit of the size and quality and in the manner required by the state electrical code. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16; Code 1991, § 5-26) 
Sec. 5-21. - Official copies. 
    An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this article, and official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the inspections department. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the amendments. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17; Code 1991, § 5-27) 
Sec. 5-22. - Building code. 
    The current edition of the state building code, volume I, general construction, as adopted by the state building code council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this section as the building code of the town to the extent such code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards and use of materials in buildings or structures erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise constructed or reconstructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1975, § 4-9; Code 1991, § 5-29) 
Sec. 5-23. - Residential code. 
    The current edition of the state residential code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Inspectors Association and as published by the state building code council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this section as the residential building code for one- and two-family residential buildings in the town. 
(Code 1975, § 4-10; Code 1991, § 5-30) 
Sec. 5-24. - Electrical code-Generally. 
    There is hereby adopted the current edition of the state electrical code, being the National Electrical Code, as amended. Such code shall have full force and effect as if set out in its entirety in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 4-11; Code 1991, § 5-31) 
Sec. 5-25. - Same-Additional rules applicable to permanent buildings or structures. 
    The following rules are intended to apply to permanent buildings or structures covered by the National Electrical Code: 
(1)  Wiring. All wiring on or in permanent buildings or structures located within a defined first (number one or primary) fire district shall utilize approved raceways or metal-jacketed cables such as MI or type MC metal-clad (type AC not allowed) as permitted by the National Electrical Code. Sound equipment, communication circuits, class 2 and class 3 remote control and signal circuits and fire protection signaling circuits, as permitted in the National Electrical Code, are excepted from this section. 
(2)  Requirements for buildings with an emergency system power source. All permanent buildings, wherever situated, which are required to have an emergency system power source by the state building code shall have the service entrance conductors enclosed in an approved raceway; and, in addition to the above, all portions of the required emergency lighting system for the entire building shall be wired in a metal raceway, nonmetallic raceways encased in not less than two inches of concrete, mineral insulated, metal sheathed cable, or type MC cable as permitted by the state electrical code. The total area of any specific place of assembly shall include the area of balconies and the area of connecting rooms with movable partitions. Sound equipment, communication circuits, class 2 and class 3 remote control and signal circuits and fire protection signaling circuits as permitted in the National Electrical Code are excepted from this section. 
(3)  Buildings transferring volatile fuels. Each individual gasoline pump, dispenser, lighting standard or other electrical device, located where gasoline or other volatile flammable liquids or liquefied flammable gases are transferred to the fuel tank of any motor vehicle, shall be supplied through an individual rigid metal conduit. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the consolidation of such individual conduits outside of the hazardous areas or consolidation within an approved junction box flush with the dispensing island surface. 
(4)  Service equipment. Service equipment shall not be located in any attic, clothes closet, kitchen storage cabinet, bathroom, toilet room or coal or trash bin. 
(5)  Panelboards. All panelboards, which have spare pole spaces or space overcurrent devices and are set flush in masonry or finished walls, shall be provided with at least one one-inch approved raceway or other equivalent provision for future extension. Such raceways, when required, shall be installed to the casement, crawl space, accessible ceiling space or attic, or to a junction box in the ceiling or side wall at the ceiling line. 
(Code 1975, § 4-11.1; Code 1991, § 5-32) 
Sec. 5-26. - Plumbing code. 
    There is hereby adopted the current edition of the state plumbing code. Such code shall have full force and effect as if set out in its entirety in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 4-12; Code 1991, § 5-33) 
Sec. 5-27. - Heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code. 
    There is hereby adopted the current edition of the state heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code. Such code shall have full force and effect as if set out in its entirety in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 4-13; Code 1991, § 5-34) 
Sec. 5-27.1. - Fire-resistance ratings. 
    The county fire marshal's office conducts fire inspections and maintains fire-resistance ratings and conducts all fire inspections within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 4-14; Code 1991, § 5-35) 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-28.01. - Findings; purpose; authority. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe and unsanitary, and dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, as authorized by G.S. 160A-441 et seq., it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-444. 
(c)  In addition, it is hereby found and declared, under the authority of G.S. 160A-174, that there exist in the town dwellings which, although not meeting the classification as unfit for human habitation, fail to fully comply with all the minimum standards for housing fitness as established herein and therefore have present one or more conditions which are inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions, if not corrected can lead to deterioration and dilapidation of dwellings which render them unfit for human habitation. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.01)) 
Sec. 5-28.02. - Scope. 
(a)  This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, apartment houses, roominghouses or buildings, structures or premises used or intended for use as such. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. Portable, mobile or demountable buildings or structures, including trailers, manufactured homes and mobile homes when used or intended for use for housing within the jurisdiction, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article. This article establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall also apply to abandoned structures which are found by the board of commissioners to be a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary conditions. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.02)) 
Sec. 5-28.03. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned structure means any structure, whether designed and intended for residential or other uses, which has been vacant or not in active use, regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is determined by the code enforcement officer to be unfit for human habitation or occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this article. 
    Basement means a portion of a building which is located partly underground, having access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Code enforcement officer means the person appointed by the town manager to carry out the administration and enforcement of this article. 
    Deteriorated dwelling means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this article, at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by finding of the code enforcement officer. 
    Dilapidated dwelling means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this article at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by finding of the code enforcement officer. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any accessory buildings and structures and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the code enforcement officer. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public. 
    Manufactured home (mobile home) means a structure as defined in G.S. 143-145(7). 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporation who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof. 
    Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the town, county, or state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the town. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group or rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage and ashes, and the term shall include, but not be limited to, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
(b)  Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" and "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.03)) 
Sec. 5-28.04. - Office of code enforcement officer created; powers and duties. 
    For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, the office of code enforcement officer is hereby created. The code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the town manager, and shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in addition to others herein granted, the following powers: 
(1)  Investigations. To investigate the dwelling and building conditions in the town in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in such examination of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this article. 
(2)  Oaths, witnesses, etc. To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)  Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and dwellings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)  Warrants, citations, etc. To swear criminal warrants, issue civil citations and to take such other actions as may be necessary to carry out the enforcement procedures of this article. 
(5)  Delegation of functions, etc. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.04)) 
Sec. 5-28.05. - Inspections. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article, the code enforcement officer, upon proper identification, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, roominghouses, rooming units and premises, including abandoned structures. The owners or occupants or every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or roominghouse, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the code enforcement officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.05)) 
Sec. 5-28.06. - Preliminary investigations; notices; hearings. 
(a)  Whenever a petition is filed with the code enforcement officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the code enforcement officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the code enforcement officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the town therein fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing pursuant to this section, the code enforcement officer may cause the filing of a notice of lis pendens, with a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing attached thereto, in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, to be indexed and cross indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the North Carolina General Statutes. The code enforcement officer shall cause a copy of the notice of lis pendens to be served upon the owners and parties in interest in the dwelling at the time of filing in accordance with G.S. 160A-445, as applicable. Upon compliance with the requirements of any order issued based upon such complaint and hearing, the code enforcement officer shall direct the clerk of superior court to cancel the notice of lis pendens. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.06)) 
Sec. 5-28.07. - Dwelling unfit for human habitation. 
(a)  Determination of unfit conditions. The code enforcement officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that any one of the following conditions exist in such dwelling: 
(1)  Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
(2)  Supporting member or members which show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering which shows 50 percent or more of damage or deterioration. 
(3)  Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
(5)  Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in the town or jurisdiction. 
(6)  Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic. 
(7)  Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities. 
(8)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the town. 
(9)  Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required by this article which constitutes a definite health or safety hazard. 
(10)  Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap. 
(b)  Dwelling fitness standards. In addition to the ten conditions stated above, any one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that a dwelling fails to fully comply with seven or more of the following enumerated standards of dwelling fitness: 
STRUCTURAL STANDARDS 
(1)  Structural integrity. Walls, partitions, supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents. 
(2)  Supports. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(3)  Foundations. Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged. 
(4)  Steps. Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse. 
(5)  Egress. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided. 
(6)  Interior materials. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be furnished of suitable materials which will, by use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces. 
(7)  Weatherization. The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so as to be weather and watertight. 
(8)  Chimneys. There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard. 
(9)  Floors. There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the ground. 
PLUMBING STANDARDS 
(10)  Facilities. Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen, sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap. 
(11)  Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the town plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order. 
(12)  Accessible. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the use. 
HEATING STANDARDS 
(13)  Generally. Every dwelling shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance with either subsection (b)(13)a or (b)(13)b of this section. Such facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair and good working order. 
a.  Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during average winter conditions. 
b.  Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling shall be provided with sufficient electrical receptacles, fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured three feet above, the floor during average winter conditions. 
c.  Portable kerosene heaters are not acceptable as a permanent source of heat as required by this section, but may be used as a supplementary source in single-family dwellings and duplex units. An owner who has complied with subsection (b)(13)a or (b)(13)b of this section shall not be held in violation of this section where an occupant of a dwelling unit uses a kerosene heater as a primary source of heat. 
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS 
(14)  Wiring. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two floor or wall type electrical convenience receptacles, connected in such manner as determined by the town electrical code. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each such habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall type electric convenience receptacles. 
(15)  Hall lights. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural light is not sufficient. 
(16)  Maintenance. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the town electrical code. 
VENTILATION STANDARDS 
(17)  Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light obstructions are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such a room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. 
(18)  Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum, window area size or minimum skylight type window size as required, or shall have other approved equivalent ventilation. 
(19)  Bathroom and water closet room. Every bathroom equipped with more than one water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms. 
SPACE, USE AND LOCATION STANDARDS 
(20)  Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the town residential building code. (Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for not more than ten percent of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over, and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age. 
(21)  Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches. 
(22)  Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes unless: 
a.  The floor and walls are substantially watertight; 
b.  The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height are equal to those required for a habitable room; 
c.  The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the windows face a stairwell, window well or accessory. 
SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
(23)  Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance of penetration of moisture or the weather. 
(24)  Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(25)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(26)  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(27)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every bathroom and kitchen floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(28)  Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. 
(29)  Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water. 
(30)  Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors. 
INSECT, RODENT AND INFESTATION CONTROL STANDARDS 
(31)  Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects every dwelling shall have: 
a.  Supplied and installed screens on every door opening leading directly from the dwelling to outdoor space. Except that sliding doors, doors with self-closing devices, doors on mobile homes with self-closing devices and doors that open into rooms of living spaces that are artificially ventilated or air conditioned are exempt from this provision. 
b.  Supplied and installed screens on every window or other device with an opening to outdoor space, except that this requirement shall not apply for any room or rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated yearround with an operable and installed heating and air conditioning system. 
(32)  Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(33)  Infestation. Every dwelling shall be maintained in a manner to be free of any infestation of insects, rodents or other pests. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(34)  Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by town ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
(35)  Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the code enforcement officer, in the structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage container as required by town ordinances. 
ROOMINGHOUSE STANDARDS 
    All of the provisions of this article, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this article, shall be applicable to roominghouses and to every person who operates a roominghouse or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except as provided in the following subsections: 
(36)  Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served, shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall not be more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar. 
(37)  Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age. 
(38)  Sanitary conditions. The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the roominghouse; and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the roominghouse is contained is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(39)  Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by subsection (b)(36) of this section shall be located within the roominghouse and within rooms which afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the roominghouse or through any other room therein. 
Note: Full compliance with a standard means that if any part of the stated standard is not complied with by a particular dwelling then that dwelling has failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard. For example, in regard to standard number 10, if all standards are met in a dwelling except that a supply of hot water is not provided, then the dwelling fails to fully comply with standard number 10. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.07)) 
Sec. 5-28.08. - Dwellings not in compliance but not unfit for human habitation. 
    In any case where the code enforcement officer determines that a dwelling fails to fully comply with one or more but less than seven of the above enumerated standards of dwelling fitness, such dwelling shall not be found to be unfit for human habitation and shall not be subject to the procedures and remedies as provided for in this article for dwellings unfit for human habitation. Each such failure or noncompliance, however, shall constitute a violation of the terms of this article and shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement procedures, civil or criminal or both, of section 1-6. In making the determination as described in this section, the code enforcement officer shall not be required to make notice and hold the hearing as called for in section 5-28.06, but the code enforcement officer may do so if the determination of the severity and classification of dwelling fitness is not clear to the code enforcement officer upon preliminary investigation. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.08)) 
Sec. 5-28.09. - Procedure after hearing; order. 
(a)  If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation in accordance with the standards set forth in section 5-28.07, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a cost of less than 50 percent of the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation, based upon the code enforcement officer's standards for closing dwellings; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a cost of less than 50 percent of the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to remove or demolish such dwelling. 
(b)  If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is not unfit for human habitation but is not in full compliance with one or more standards of dwelling fitness as set forth in section 5-28.07, he may proceed with the enforcement procedures of section 1-6, civil or criminal or both. 
(c)  Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this section that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions of the section, notice of the order shall be given by first class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the code enforcement officer, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The code enforcement officer shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certifications shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the code enforcement officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.09)) 
Sec. 5-28.10. - Failure to comply with order. 
(a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the code enforcement officer may: 
(1)  Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed. 
(2)  Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve or remove or demolish the dwelling, the code enforcement officer may: 
(1)  Cause such dwelling to be vacated and removed or demolished. 
(2)  Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The duties of the code enforcement officer set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be exercised until the board of commissioners shall have by ordinance ordered the code enforcement officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the code enforcement officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. For the purposes of this subsection, a period of 90 days following the date of the code enforcement officer's order shall constitute a reasonable opportunity. This article shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
(d)  The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the code enforcement officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. 160A-216 et seq. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the code enforcement officer, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixture or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the code enforcement officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of the decree of the court. 
(e)  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate dwelling, the code enforcement officer may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any persons occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the code enforcement officer produces the certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners pursuant to subsection (c) of this section authorizing the code enforcement officer to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this subsection unless such occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the board of commissioners has ordered the code enforcement officer to proceed to exercise his duties under subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling. 
(f)  If the board of commissioners shall have adopted an ordinance, or the code enforcement officer shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in section 5-28.09(a)(1), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the board of commissioners shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the town in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in the town, then in such circumstances, the board of commissioners may, after the expiration of such one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 
(1)  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then-current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or 
(2)  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then-current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. 
This article shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with this article, the code enforcement officer shall effect the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.10)) 
Sec. 5-28.11. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to an ordinance adopted under this article, except those being prosecuted under section 1-6, shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. 
(b)  If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this article. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.11)) 
Sec. 5-28.12. - Appeals. 
(a)  The board of adjustment is hereby appointed as the housing appeals board to which appeals from any decision or order of the code enforcement officer may be taken. Except where this article provides for different rules or procedures, the board of adjustment acting as the housing appeals board shall follow its rules of procedure, which may be amended to provide specifically for this function. 
(b)  An appeal from any decision or order of the code enforcement officer may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the town. Any appeal from the code enforcement officer shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order by filing with the code enforcement officer and with the board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the code enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement officer refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any such act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the board, unless the code enforcement officer certifies to the board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the code enforcement officer, by the board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the code enforcement officer, but the concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the code enforcement officer. The board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the article, to adapt the application of the article to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(d)  Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the board, but not otherwise. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the code enforcement officer or a decision rendered by the board may petition the superior court for an injunction, restraining the code enforcement officer from carrying out the order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the code enforcement officer pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the court on a petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.12)) 
Sec. 5-28.13. - Alternative remedies. 
(a)  Nothing in this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this article shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in section 1-6. 
(b)  No dwelling shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or changed in occupancy without a certificate of occupancy. In any case where the code enforcement officer, after notice and hearing as required herein, finds that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for human habitation. In addition, in any case where the code enforcement officer, after preliminary investigation as provided for herein, concludes, based upon that investigation, that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation and believes that the occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit could cause imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for human habitation. 
(c)  If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this article or of any valid order or decision of the code enforcement officer or board made pursuant to any ordinance or code adopted under authority of this article, the code enforcement officer may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or occupancy, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwellings, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.13)) 
Sec. 5-28.14. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the town's jurisdiction shall prevail. The state building code, current edition, shall serve as the standard for all alterations, repairs, additions, removals, demolitions and other acts of building made or required pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.14)) 
Sec. 5-28.15. - Violations. 
    In addition to the conditions, acts or failures to act that constitute violations specified in this article above, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the code enforcement officer duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 5-28.09, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing, or vacation and removal or demolition. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.15)) 
Sec. 5-28.16. - Repeal and reenactment of existing housing code. 
    The rewriting of this article in part carries forth by reenactment some of the provisions of the existing housing code of the town and it is not intended to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have been accrued are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the housing code which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of the housing code in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this article, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this article had not been adopted; and any and all violations of the existing article, prosecutions for which have not been instituted may be filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this article shall be so construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or which may have been instituted or prosecuted. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2006, pt. I(5-28.16)) 
Chapter 7 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 7-31-7-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 7-36. - Organization. 
    The police department of the town shall consist of a police chief and as many more police officers as the manager and town board shall from time to time determine. 
Sec. 7-37. - Duties of police chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the police chief to: 
(1)  Supervise, subject to the town manager, the police department. 
(2)  Preserve the peace by suppression of all disturbances and apprehension of all offenders. 
(3)  Assign such duties as he deems best to the police officers of the town. 
(4)  Do such other and further duties as the town board may assign. 
(5)  Submit a monthly report to the town board, concerning the activities of the department. 
Sec. 7-38. - Police chief to assign duties. 
    The police chief shall have charge of the police force and as such shall assign such duties to the police officers as he thinks best for the good order of the town, and he shall be responsible to the town manager in seeing that the police officers faithfully perform their duties. 
Sec. 7-39. - General supervision. 
    Regular and special police officers shall be under the supervision and direction of the police chief. 
Sec. 7-40. - Duties of police officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers to: 
(1)  Preserve public peace, prevent crimes, detect and arrest offenders, suppress riots and unlawful gatherings which obstruct the free passage of public streets, sidewalks, parks and public places. 
(2)  Protect the rights of persons and property. 
(3)  Guard the public health. 
(4)  Preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages. 
(5)  Regulate the movement of tours and vehicles in the streets, bridges, parks, public squares and highways. 
(6)  Provide proper police attendance at fires. 
(7)  Carefully observe and inspect all places of public amusement, all places of business having license to carry on such business and suppress and restrain all unlawful and disorderly conduct or practice therein. 
(8)  Enforce and preserve the laws and ordinances in the town. 
(9)  Arrest all persons committing actions constituting probable cause of violating any law or ordinance. 
(10)  Prevent as far as possible any injury to town property and buildings, streets and sidewalks. 
(11)  Report to the police chief any repairs needed to any public property. 
(12)  Serve all processes issued to them. 
(13)  Perform any and all other duties as may be assigned to them by the police chief. 
Sec. 7-41. - Interfering with police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper, molest, resist or hinder a police officer in the lawful discharge of his duty. 
Sec. 7-42. - Identification. 
    An identification card and such other insignia or evidence of identity as the police chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the police force who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and who must surrender them upon the termination of employment. 
Secs. 7-43-7-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AUXILIARY POLICE 

Sec. 7-50. - Auxiliary police division established. 
    There is hereby established within the town police department, as a division thereof, an auxiliary police division. The auxiliary police division shall be an organization, composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined by the town board. Each such member shall be duly certified by the North Carolina Criminal Justice Training and Standards Council. 
Sec. 7-51. - Police chief to control; appointments and removals. 
(a)  The auxiliary police division shall be under the direct control of the police chief, acting under the general supervision of the town manager. All appointments and removals of members of the auxiliary police division shall be made in the same manner and under the same policies and procedures as may from time to time be established for appointment and removal of the regular police officers. 
(b)  Each member of the auxiliary police division shall take the oath of office of a regular police officer. The police chief shall provide for adequate training of members of the auxiliary police division, and of candidates for membership. 
Sec. 7-52. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the auxiliary police division, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the police chief, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by the police chief. The police chief shall by order establish rules and regulations to govern the auxiliary police division, to fix the specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the auxiliary police division shall obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out their duties. 
(b)  The police chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned in this section to be performed by the auxiliary police division, with approval of the town manager. 
Sec. 7-53. - Identification. 
    An identification card and such other insignia or evidence of identity as the police chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the auxiliary police division who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and who must surrender them upon the termination of membership. 
Secs. 7-54-7-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRIMES AND OFFENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-60-7-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC, VEHICLES AND PARKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate noise, G.S. 160A-184. 

Sec. 7-77. - Powers of police department. 
    The police department of the town shall have the power: 
(1)  To enforce the provisions of the laws regulating the operation or operating of vehicles on the public streets within the town limits. 
(2)  To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation committed in their presence. 
(3)  At all times to direct traffic in conformance with law, and in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to ensure safety, to direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of law. 
(4)  When on reasonable belief that any vehicle is being operated in violation of any provisions of law, to require the drive of such vehicle to stop and submit his driver's license and the registration card issued for the vehicle and submit to an inspection of such vehicle, the registration plates, registration card thereon and to an inspection and test of the equipment of such vehicle. 
(5)  To inspect any vehicle of a type to be required to be registered hereunder in any public garage or repair shop or in any place where such vehicles are held for sale or wrecking for the purpose of locating stolen vehicles and investigating the title and registration thereof. 
(6)  To serve all warrants relating to the enforcement of the laws regulating the operating of vehicles or the use of public streets. 
(7)  To investigate traffic accidents and secure testimony of witnesses of persons involved. 
(8)  To investigate reported thefts of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. 
(9)  To enforce all parking regulations. 
State Law reference- Powers of local authorities, G.S. 20-169. 
Sec. 7-78. - Motor vehicles required to be registered; period of registration; fee. 
    Every resident motor vehicle operated in the town, except motor vehicles temporarily operated for a period of time not exceeding a total of 14 days during any one year, and except motor vehicles operated for display or exhibition purposes by manufacturers or dealers and displaying dealer's license plates issued by the state, shall be registered with the county. The period of registration shall include the 12 months beginning with January 1 of the year of registration; namely, from January 1 to December 31. The fee for registration shall be set from time to time and a schedule of such fee is on file and available in the town offices. 
Sec. 7-79. - Applicability of state law definitions and rules of construction. 
    The definitions and rules of construction in G.S. 20-4.01 shall apply throughout this division, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Sec. 7-80. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6 unless otherwise stated. 
Secs. 7-81-7-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Vehicle control signs and signals, G.S. 20-158. 

Sec. 7-90. - Obedience of traffic control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of state law, this chapter and other ordinances of the town, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted by this chapter to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
Sec. 7-91. - Placement, change and removal. 
(a)  Traffic control devices of the town shall be placed, erected, installed, changed or removed only upon order of the board of commissioners pursuant to action taken by the board and entered upon its minutes. Any such action shall be by ordinance when so required by law. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by the board of commissioners in any instance, such orders of the board shall be executed under the direction of the chief of police. 
Sec. 7-92. - Authorized types of signs. 
    Traffic control devices of the town within the purview of this article shall include, but not be limited to, those indicating stop and yield intersections, speed restrictions, limited or prohibited turning movements, one-way streets, prohibited and restricted parking areas, truck routes and other restrictions as to vehicle types permitted to be driven upon the streets, school zones, safety zones, zones of quiet, play streets, bus stops, taxicab stands, loading zones, and business and residence districts. 
Sec. 7-93. - Signs required for enforcement of certain provisions. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. 
Secs. 7-94-7-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, G.S. 20-138.1 et seq. 

Sec. 7-100. - Squealing of tires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an automobile or other motor vehicles in the town by suddenly starting the movement of any such vehicle in such a manner as to cause scratching-off or screeching of tires resulting in noise and damage to pavement or other surfaces. 
Sec. 7-101. - Horns; mufflers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily blow the horn or other audible signal device of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to disturb the peace and tranquility of the citizens and people in the vicinity. Such horn or other device shall be used only as a reasonable warning, without any unreasonably loud or harsh sound. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in the town without a device attached and in operation sufficient to muffle the sounds of the exhaust and noises incident to such operation. Such device shall be of the type installed at the time of manufacture, in good working order and in constant operation. 
Sec. 7-102. - Driving through funeral procession. 
    No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except authorized emergency vehicles when responding to calls. 
Sec. 7-103. - Persons riding to stay inside vehicle. 
    No person when riding shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond the limit of the vehicle in which he is riding, except to give such signals as are required by law. 
Sec. 7-104. - Carrying passengers on bicycles, motorcycles. 
    No operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall carry any person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. 
Sec. 7-105. - Bicycle helmets required. 
(a)  Every person under the age of 16 years operating a bicycle on a public right-of-way shall wear a protective helmet on his head. Such helmet should be fitted to the size of the operator and shall meet or exceed the standards for bicycle helmet use and wear as set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or subsequent standards, or the Snell Memorial Foundation, or subsequent standards. 
(b)  No parent or guardian of any juvenile bicycle operator shall knowingly allow a violation of this section by allowing a minor to ride without a helmet as stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Written notice and/or educational material will be provided to any individual violating this section. 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, G.S. 20-171.1 et seq. 
Sec. 7-106. - Speed limitations generally. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, no person shall drive a vehicle on any street of the town in excess of the following speeds: 
(1)  In any business district, 20 miles per hour; 
(2)  In any residential district, 35 miles per hour. 
(b)  When signs have been erected giving notice that a particular speed limit is applicable to a certain street or portion of street as adopted by the board of commissioners, no persons shall operate a vehicle in excess of such speed limit. 
Secs. 7-107-7-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, G.S. 160A-301 et seq. 

Sec. 7-120. - Rule of evidence for enforcement of parking regulations. 
    When signs are erected or painted on streets giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time, except in emergencies, park any vehicle within the area designated as no parking zones. The chief of police shall direct the erection of signs at locations designated as no parking zones. 
Sec. 7-121. - No parking zones. 
    There shall be no parking in front of any fire hydrant, driveway, in traffic lane, or on sidewalk within the municipality or at any location designated as no parking zones. 
Sec. 7-122. - Stopping in streets prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall stop a vehicle in any street except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this article, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian or by some emergency. In any case covered by these exceptions such vehicle shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection if such can be avoided. 
Sec. 7-123. - Parking restrictions for specific streets. 
(a)  Where parking restriction signs have been erected giving notice that certain streets or portions of streets are subject to certain restrictions or limitations on the parking of vehicles, no person shall park any vehicle on such streets or portions of streets except in conformity with the directions of such sign. 
(b)  There shall be no parking on the north side of McIver Street from Highway 55 east to Broad Street from the hours of 6:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, seven days of the week. Towing shall be enforced. 
Sec. 7-124. - Penalty for violators. 
    Persons violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of $5.00 for each violation within 24 hours of the issuance of written notice of any such violation. If such sum is not paid as required in this section, such violation shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
DIVISION 6. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING AND TRAFFIC CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping and parking, G.S. 20-161 et seq.; parking in municipalities, G.S. 160A-296 et seq. 

Sec. 7-125. - Obstructing traffic generally. 
    No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt, or interfere with, the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles. 
Sec. 7-126. - Warning devices on service vehicles. 
    No person shall permit or cause to permit any construction, service or maintenance vehicles to stand or to be parked within the right-of-way of public roads and street of the town in such a manner as to obstruct, impede or interfere with the normal traffic use on said streets; provided that such vehicles may be temporarily used outside of the rights-of-way or on a necessary portion thereof, facing in the same direction as the flow of traffic; provided, further, that the vehicle is equipped with the industry standard flashing equipment and signals that shall be displayed as long as such vehicle is being so used. 
Sec. 7-127. - Manner of parking generally. 
    Where not otherwise indicated by this article and where the street is not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches there from. 
Sec. 7-128. - Illegal parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any thoroughfare street within the town limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Parking shall be allowed on residential street where not otherwise prohibited by a sign erected by the town. Further, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the public streets or public vehicular area (such as a parking lot, whether public or private) for the purposes of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other vehicle. 
(4)  Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another. 
(5)  Storage of any commercial vehicle for more than 24 hours. 
Sec. 7-129. - Advertising. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of advertising. 
Sec. 7-130. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On the sidewalk. 
(2)  Within 15 feet of an intersection or in front of a private driveway. 
(3)  On a crosswalk. 
(4)  Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or roadway. 
(5)  On either side of any street approaching a railroad underpass, or overhead bridge, within 50 feet in any direction of the outer edge of such underpass or overhead bridge. 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(7)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure. 
(8)  Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel, theater, hospital, or any public building, or a fire hydrant or a fire station. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(10)  Within 25 feet from the intersection of curblines or if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways or streets. 
(11)  Upon any area designated as a fire lane in any public vehicular area, street, highway or roadway or in any shopping center, unless the parking is temporary for the purpose of loading or unloading supplies or merchandise and the vehicle is not left unattended. 
(12)  In any area than those designated by lines indicating parking spaces in town-owned parking lots. 
(13)  In a space designated in conformance with G.S. 20-37.6(d) for handicapped or visually impaired persons, when the vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard as required by state statute. 
(14)  In a manner so as to obstruct a curb ramp or curb cut for handicapped persons, as provided for by the state building code or as designated in G.S. 136-014.14. 
(15)  In any area upon a public street which has been clearly marked as a bicycle travel lane. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 20-162. 
Sec. 7-131. - Parking prohibited in designated places at all times. 
    When signs are placed, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portions of streets. 
Sec. 7-132. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    The displaying of lights upon a vehicle, when lawfully parked at night upon a street in accordance with this chapter, shall not be required when there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon such street. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, G.S. 20-134. 
Sec. 7-133. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
Sec. 7-134. - Parking of oversized vehicles and trailers prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or trailer greater than two axles or any trailer not affixed to a vehicle on the streets within the corporate limits of the town at any time except for the duration of the following activities: 
(1)  When actively engaged in loading or unloading; 
(2)  Temporary parking for emergency services to a vehicle or trailer to repair a mechanical breakdown; 
(3)  Temporary parking at a construction site during the period of active construction. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any mass transit buses or to school buses, when the school buses are parked in conformity with permits issued by the police department. 
Sec. 7-135. - Parks and recreation facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on any roadway or in any designated parking space within a town park or recreation facility except for specific use of the park or facility. Parking at all town parks and recreation facilities shall be for parks and recreation patrons only. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and vehicles in violation will be issued a citation and/or may be towed at vehicle owner's expense. 
Sec. 7-136. - Operation of unlicensed motorized vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle on the town streets or thoroughfares unless said vehicle is a properly license motor vehicle. The use of go-carts, scooters, and golf carts is hereby prohibited. Violation of this section shall be either in the form of a civil penalty or a misdemeanor and vehicles in violation will be issued a citation and/or may be towed at the owner's expense. 
Secs. 7-137-7-150. - Reserved 
ARTICLE IV. - REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned and derelict motor vehicles, G.S. 20-137.6 et seq.; removal and disposal of junked and abandoned motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-303. 

Sec. 7-151. - Administration. 
    The town manager shall designate the departments or persons responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. Currently, the police department and the planning department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The police department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town. The planning and/or police department shall be responsible for administering the removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on private property. The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or tow businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of the town police department and fire department in enforcing other laws, or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(Code 1991, § 10-131; Ord. of 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 7-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means, as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, a motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; 
(2)  Is left on a public street or highway for longer seven days; 
(3)  Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours; or 
(4)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours. 
    Junked motor vehicle means, as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.00. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
    Nuisance vehicle means a vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height; 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; 
(4)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials, as evidenced by odor; 
(5)  One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.; 
(6)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; 
(7)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; 
(8)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(9)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1991, § 10-132) 
Sec. 7-153. - Abandoned vehicles unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined in this article. 
(b)  Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1991, § 10-133) 
Sec. 7-154. - Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the town building inspector may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1991, § 10-134) 
Sec. 7-155. - Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as defined in this article, on the premises of public or private property. A single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, upon investigation, the town building inspector may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this article after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents. 
(e)  Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles is as follows: 
(1)  One junked motor vehicle. One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, may be located in the rear yard as defined by the town's zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The town building inspector has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of the ordinance from which this article derived. 
(2)  More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit, and which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. 
(Code 1991, § 10-135) 
Editor's note- The objectives in the ordinance are "to promote or enhance: the quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the town; the protection of property values throughout the town; the preservation of the liveablity and attractiveness of neighborhoods; the promotion of tourism, conventions and other opportunities for economic development of the town; the attractiveness of the town's thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the primary, public visibility to visitors and to passers-by of the town; and the promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of occupants of property in the vicinity of junked motor vehicles." 
Sec. 7-156. - Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 7-157, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notices shall retain a written record to show the names and addresses to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield, or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle, a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed. The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. 
(b)  With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the board of commissioners in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
(Code 1991, § 10-136) 
Sec. 7-157. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement. 
    The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions, or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice includes: 
(1)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the board of commissioners hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
a.  Obstructing traffic; 
b.  Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking; 
c.  Parked in a no stopping or standing zone; 
d.  Parked in loading zones; 
e.  Parked in bus zones; or 
f.  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under Code sections. 
(2)  Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstruction ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
(Code 1991, § 10-137) 
Sec. 7-158. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may be, as directed by the town, removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following: 
(1)  The description of the removed vehicle; 
(2)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
(b)  The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
(c)  If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
(d)  Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(Code 1991, § 10-138) 
Sec. 7-159. - Right to probable cause hearing. 
    After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-222. 
(Code 1991, § 10-139) 
Sec. 7-160. - Conditions for removal of vehicles from private property. 
    As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the town planning department. The town may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 10-142) 
Sec. 7-161. - Protection against criminal or civil liability. 
    No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 10-143) 
Sec. 7-162. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle which is: 
(1)  Located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard," as defined in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq.; 
(2)  In an enclosed building; 
(3)  On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner, if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or 
(4)  In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town. 
(Code 1991, § 10-144) 
Sec. 7-163. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code, unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Code 1991, § 10-145) 
Secs. 7-164-7-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 7-171. - State fire prevention code. 
    It shall be the duty of the county fire marshal's office to enforce the provisions of the state fire prevention code, and to make all necessary inspections to determine whether or not the provisions of the code are being complied with. The fire prevention code is hereby adopted as reference as if it were copied herein fully. 
State Law reference- State building code including fire code mandatory throughout the state, G.S. 143-138(e). 
Sec. 7-172. - Burning trash within corporate limits prohibited. 
    No person shall burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, shavings, paper, leaves, litter or other material of any kind outside any house, on or in the street, sidewalk, alley, lot or yard within the corporate limits. This is mandated by the NCDENR Division of Air Quality. 
Sec. 7-173. - Burning of trash in extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Trash or rubbish shall not be burned on any private lot in the extraterritorial jurisdiction except within a safely constructed enclosure made of wire mesh or in a similar safety device. This is mandated by the NCDENR Division of Air Quality. 
Sec. 7-174. - Use of fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized town employee or authorized fire official to withdraw, or cause to be withdrawn, water from any fire hydrant within the town limits. 
Sec. 7-175. - Interference with fire alarm system. 
    No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the town fire alarm system or injure the poles, wires, boxes or other apparatus connected therewith. 
Sec. 7-176. - Enforcement by town officials. 
    Within said codes adopted by the ordinance from which this article is derived, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the town who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official in so far as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
State Law reference- Required standards and certificates for code enforcement officials, G.S. 143-151.13. 
Secs. 7-177-7-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Federal law reference- Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act of 1986, 42 USC 11011-11050; comprehensive emergency response plans, 42 USC 11003; federal preparedness assistance funding for state and local governments dependent upon compliance with National Incident Management System, HSPD-5 [Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5, Management of Domestic Incidents ]. 
State Law reference- Riots and civil disorders, G.S. 14-288.1 et seq.; local states of emergency, G.S. 14-288.12; ordinances relating to public safety, welfare and peace, G.S. 160A-174. 

Sec. 7-201. - Emergency management agency established. 
    The board of commissioners hereby authorizes and establishes an emergency management agency under the authority of and in accordance with G.S. 166A-7. 
(Code 1975, § 5-6; Code 1991, § 6-1) 
Sec. 7-202. - Authority of mayor to contract for mutual aid. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized to execute contracts or agreements with such other political subdivisions of the state as to him may seem advisable, pursuant to G.S. 160A-461 and 166A-10, whereby the parties agree to render mutual aid and assistance by the loan of law enforcement officers or equipment in time of emergency, to include prevention, detention or control of civil disorders. 
(b)  Such contracts or agreements shall provide that they shall take effect upon ratification by the governing bodies of each party thereto and recordation in the minutes thereof. 
(c)  Such contracts or agreements shall specify when they shall take effect and shall be presented to the board of commissioners of each party for ratification at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose. Such agreement or contract executed on behalf of this town shall be in all respects valid and binding on the town between the time of its final execution and the next regular special meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1975, § 5-7; Code 1991, § 6-2) 
Sec. 7-203. - State of emergency-Qualifying conditions. 
    A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, for any reason municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety or property. 
(Code 1975, § 5-1; Code 1991, § 6-3) 
State Law reference- Local emergency authorizations, G.S. 166A-8. 
Sec. 7-204. - Same-Proclamation; imposition of curfew. 
    In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the town or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order more effectively to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the town, to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1975, § 5-2; Code 1991, § 6-4) 
Sec. 7-205. - Limitation of and exemptions from curfew. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of a curfew imposed pursuant to this chapter to any area specifically designated and described within the corporate limits of the town and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from the curfew policemen, firefighters, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3; Code 1991, § 6-5) 
Sec. 7-206. - Prohibited acts during state of emergency. 
    During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, when a curfew has been imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to such curfew: 
(1)  To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property, unless in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of himself his family or some member thereof. 
(2)  To possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind. 
(3)  To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind or to possess or consume beer, wines or intoxicating beverages off one's own premises. 
(4)  To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4; Code 1991, § 6-6) 
Sec. 7-207. - End of state of emergency and curfew. 
    The mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency and curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5; Code 1991, § 6-7) 
Secs. 7-208-7-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FIRE PROTECTION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Setting fires unlawfully, G.S. 14-136 et seq.; fire protection, G.S. 69-25.1 et seq.; firemen's pension fund authorized for municipal employee enrollment, G.S. 160A-163; municipal fire protection, G.S. 160A-291 et seq.; insurance laws relating to fire, G.S. 58-78 et seq. 

Sec. 7-235. - Use of fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized town employee to withdraw, or cause to be withdrawn, water from any fire hydrant within the town limits without permission from the public works director. 
(Code 1975, § 6-1; Code 1991, § 7-1) 
Sec. 7-236. - Interference with fire alarm system. 
    No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the town fire alarm system or injure the poles, wires, boxes or other apparatus connected therewith. 
(Code 1975, § 6-2; Code 1991, § 7-2) 
Sec. 7-237. - False alarms. 
    Each establishment in the town is allowed a total of two free false alarms per calendar year. In the event there is a third false alarm for an establishment within a calendar year, a civil citation will be issued in the amount of $100.00; for the fourth, a citation in the amount of $150.00 will be issued, and for the fifth, an amount of $200.00 will be issued. For each false alarm thereafter within a calendar year, the civil citation will apply in $50.00 increments. 
(Ord. No. 0202-1, § 1, 2-5-2002) 
Chapter 9 - LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Commerce and business, G.S. 66; discrimination in business, G.S. 75B; occupational licensing boards, G.S. 93B; Occupational Safety and Health Act of North Carolina, G.S. 95-126 et seq.; license taxes, G.S. 105-33 et seq., 160A-194, 160A-211 et seq.; municipal regulation of places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181; Sunday closing ordinances, G.S. 160A-191; general business license, G.S. 105-102.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-30. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES 

Sec. 9-31. - Tax levied. 
    In addition to the tax on property, and under the power and authority conferred in the laws of the state, there shall be levied and collected annually a business and privilege license tax on trades, professions, agencies, business operations, and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out by the laws of the state. All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the town board of commissioners from imposing from time to time, as they may see fit, such license taxes as are not specifically defined in this article, or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from prohibiting or regulating the business or acts licensed, and all licenses are granted subject to the provisions of existing ordinances or those thereafter enacted. A schedule of privilege license taxes is not set out in this article but is on file and available in the town clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-31, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-32. - Unlawful to conduct business without a license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on a business in the town for which there is required a license, without first having paid the license tax and obtained the license. For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of business, or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or carrying on such business; and each day that such person shall engage in or carry on such business as provided in this section, shall be construed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-32, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-33. - Payment and collection of taxes. 
(a)  All taxes levied by this article are due and payable in advance at the finance office and shall be in effect from July 1 to June 30 of the following year. 
(b)  The taxes imposed by this article shall be collected by the tax collector of the town in like manner as other taxes which are levied and assessed and shall be accounted for as other taxes are accounted for by the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-33, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-34. - License requirement, posting. 
    Every person, before engaging in a business, trade, profession, or occupation within the corporate limits of the town, shall first apply for and obtain from the finance office a license to be signed by the tax collector, indicating that the tax imposed by this article has been paid. The license shall be at all times posted in some conspicuous place in the building or place where such business, trade, profession, or occupation is carried on, practiced or conducted where it can be inspected at any time by the proper municipal official. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-34, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-35. - Application for license; transfer. 
    No license shall be issued under this article except upon application in writing, to be signed by the applicant or his agent and filed with the tax collector. The application shall indicate the nature or kind of business or profession proposed to be maintained or engaged in and the amount of tax required to be paid for such business or profession, and shall also indicate the section of this chapter under which such license is desired. All licenses shall be signed by the tax collector and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-35, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-36. - Abatement of license tax. 
    No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof be made, in any case where the licensee discontinues his business before the end of the period for which such license was issued. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-36, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-37. - Schedule of license taxes. 
    Taxes will be levied and collected to the extent permitted by law for all businesses listed in G.S. 160A-29. Taxes also shall be levied and collected for all businesses not otherwise taxes or excluded from municipal taxation. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-37, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 9-38-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 9-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant merchant means any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods and who, for this purpose, uses or occupies any building or premises; provided that no person shall be relieved from complying with the provision of this section merely by conducting a transient business in association with any permanently established merchant. 
    Peddler means any person who transports goods from place to place and sells or offers for sale such goods, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device; provided that any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. 
    Solicitor means any person who travels from place to place taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance, and any person who uses or occupies any building or premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-61, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-62. - Prohibited acts for solicitors and peddlers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any privately owned premises or business, without permission or invitation of the owner or occupant of such premises or business, for the purpose of soliciting orders for immediate or future delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, including the taking of subscriptions for magazines and the procuring of applications and contracts without first receiving a permit issued by the code enforcement division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit to fail to display the permit and state-issued photo identification, upon demand of a police or code enforcement officer, while engaged in soliciting or peddling within the town. 
(c)  It is unlawful for persons authorized to work for a permit holder to fail to display a certified copy of the permit and recognized state identification, upon demand of a police officer or code enforcement officer, while engaged in soliciting in the town. A person working for a permit holder shall be listed as an authorized person on the face of the permit. 
(d)  Even if a permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to conduct any business, as listed in subsection (a) of this section, during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, nor at any time on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-62, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-63. - Prohibited acts for itinerant merchants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as an itinerant merchant without first receiving a permit issued by the code enforcement division. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any itinerant merchant to conduct any business any closer to a public roadway than 20 feet from the edge of the nearest roadway pavement. Such edge shall be maintained as a buffer and no tables, merchandise, items or parking, or any other obstructions, shall be allowed within said 20-foot buffer. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the buffer area clear of all vehicles and any other items at all times. All itinerant merchants shall provide to the town, in the application for a permit, a plan for parking which shall provide areas outside of the above-mentioned buffered area. It shall be unlawful for itinerant merchants to conduct business during the hours between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and at no time on Sunday. 
(c)  Itinerant merchant activity shall be allowed only on commercially zoned locations. It shall be allowed only on premises owned or controlled by the itinerant merchant or with the written permission of the property owner. 
(d)  Itinerant merchant activities shall not be allowed on town property except for town-sponsored events and with invitation of the town. The town property includes but is not limited to sidewalks, parking lots, streets, parks, or any other town owned or controlled property. 
(e)  Itinerant merchant activities shall comply with town sign regulations. 
(f)  Itinerant merchant activities shall not impede vehicular or foot traffic. 
(g)  Itinerant merchant activities shall not occupy designated parking spaces of the town. 
(h)  The duration for operating as an itinerant merchant shall not be in excess of ten consecutive days and not more than three permits per year may be issued to any one itinerant merchant or business whether or not said permit is obtained by a different individual, it shall be limited to three per business. Upon termination of the permit, all temporary buildings erected for the purpose of such use and all trash and debris generated in connection with said use shall be removed by the applicant or owner of the premises by the close of the sale or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
(i)  The itinerant merchant selling or providing any unprepared food or consumable items shall comply and provide proof of compliance with regulations of the state department of agriculture. The itinerant merchant selling or providing prepared food shall obtain a permit from the county environmental health department. 
(j)  No person shall operate as an itinerant merchant within the town corporate limits without complying with the above regulations and permit requirements unless one of the exemptions in section 9-64 apply. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-63, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-64. - Exemptions. 
    The following salespersons or representatives are exempt from a privilege license tax, bond requirements and permit application fee; however, they must comply with other permit requirements as set forth in section 9-63(a)-(i): 
(1)  Churches, civic organizations and nonprofit organizations that are tax-exempt under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code are exempt for activities involving craft fairs, flea markets and yard sales; provided that such activities will not be held on more than four days in any 12-month period. 
(2)  Children under the age of 18 years who are students in a public or private school and who conduct door to door solicitations for magazine subscriptions or donations for school activities. 
(3)  Vendors at special events such as Christmas parade, Crape Myrtle Festival, etc., selling goods only for that event. Food vendors will need to obtain necessary permits from the state and county health departments. 
(4)  Seasonal sales of Christmas trees, pumpkins or locally grown produce. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-64, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-65. - Application for permit for peddler, solicitor and itinerant merchant; fees. 
(a)  Each person requesting a permit under this article shall file with the code enforcement division a written application, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the individual filing the application. 
(2)  The name and address of the principal or employer if the applicant is an agent or employee. 
(3)  A complete physical description of the applicant including height, weight, sex, race, date of birth, and any distinguishing characteristics. 
(4)  A description of the goods or services to be sold or offered. 
(5)  A statement as to whether the applicant intends to receive payment or deposit for goods or services to be delivered or rendered in the future. 
(6)  The inclusive dates which the applicant wishes to have a permit to carry on business within the town. 
(7)  A statement as to which days of the week the applicant wishes to conduct business within the town. 
(8)  A complete description of the vehicle or method of transportation the applicant intents to use for business purposes while in the town including license number. 
(9)  A statement as to whether the applicant, his principal or employer, or other person having management or supervisor function in the applicant's business, has been convicted of a criminal offense, and if so, the name of the person convicted, the nature of offense, the punishment assessed and when and where the offense occurred. 
(10)  A statement as to the exact location in the town the applicant intends to conduct business along with any necessary permission from the owner and a diagram showing designated parking to be provided for said business as it may apply to itinerant merchants. 
(11)  A list of all persons, other than the applicant, who would be authorized by the applicant to engage in soliciting in the applicant's behalf. 
(b)  Each person filing an application for issuance of a permit to solicit, peddle or be an itinerant merchant in the town shall present a valid driver's license or an approved state-issued identification card with a photograph, at the time of filing the application. 
(c)  At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall present proof of a current town privilege license evidencing that the business or organization has paid the required privilege license tax for the current fiscal year if same applies. 
(d)  A fee of $20.00, made payable to the town, will be collected at the time application is made. The fee is for processing of the application and is nonrefundable. Any renewal or reapplication for the same type of permit within the same calendar year shall be $10.00 per application and shall be limited to the two renewals per year as stated in section 9-63(h). 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-65, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-66. - Term of permit; renewal. 
    A permit shall be issued for the period requested in the application not to exceed ten days for the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Upon expiration of the permit due to time, the applicant may apply for a renewal of the permit upon a form designated by the code enforcement officer, which shall indicate what changes, if any, have occurred since the date that the original application was completed and said renewal is within the calendar year and furthermore, there shall be no more than one original and two renewals allowed per calendar year as stated above. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-66, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-67. - Transfer of permit. 
    A permit issued under this article is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-67, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-68. - Bond required. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall furnish a bond in the penal amount of $5,000.00 to the town signed by the applicant and as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned upon the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material and workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal on such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to any agent or employee of the principal. The principal shall be in effect for 180 days from expiration of this permit. 
(b)  Only one bond shall be required of each applicant, even though such applicant shall have one or more agents or employees, provided such bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such agents or employees. 
(c)  Applicants soliciting for recognized charitable organizations, churches, schools, civic organizations, and similar neighborhood associations performing fundraising activities for their organization are exempt from such bond. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-68, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-69. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant within five working days of filing the application, if it is determined that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this article and proposes to engage in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise. 
(1)  The permit will be issued on code enforcement division letterhead signed by the code enforcement officer or his designee. The applicant must carry the signed original of this permit along with an approved state identification card with a photograph at all times while engaged in business. Certified copies of the letter will be provided by the code enforcement division for each agent or employee doing business with or for the applicant for a charge of $1.00 each. The employee's or agent's name must appear on the initial application and will be included on the permit. Each agent or employee must carry the signed certified copy of this permit along with an approved state identification card with a photograph at all times while engaged in business. 
(2)  The permit and identification must be displayed upon demand of any police officer or code enforcement officer. Failure to produce the required permit and identification may result in the revocation of all copies and the original permit issued for the applicant and the listed agents or employees. 
(3)  Photograph identification used by a private company or organization will not be accepted as a substitute for an official state-issued identification card with photograph. The issuing state, however, is not mandated to be North Carolina. 
(b)  Any applicant denied a permit will be mailed a letter within five working days after making application, stating the reason for denial. Denial will be made if it is determined that provisions of this article have not been met or the applicant does not propose to engage in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise. Conviction of criminal offenses by the applicant or principals in the business, which indicate a propensity for violence, theft, fraud, or similar offenses, may be cause for denial of a permit. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer or any sworn officer or any other designee of the code enforcement officer may revoke a permit issued under this article when there is a reasonable factual basis that doing so would be in the best interest of the health, safety, welfare or morals of the public. The code enforcement officer shall mail a letter to the address listed for the applicant on the application notifying them of the reason for the revocation. The code enforcement officer or any sworn officer upon observing violation of the safety provisions contained herein may revoke the permit of the operator and order the operator to cease operations until such time as the violations are corrected and furthermore, may cite the permit holder for violation and the penalties as stated in section 9-71 shall be applicable to any of said violations of the permit issue. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-69, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-70. - Parking; special hazards; enforcement. 
    All parking of vehicles shall be done in compliance with all applicable laws and town ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any itinerant merchant sale activities. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-70, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-71. - Penalty. 
    This article may be enforced by any or both of the following ways as provided by law: 
(1)  A violation of this article shall subject the violator to issuance of a citation in the amount of $100.00 for each citation. A citation remaining unpaid to the town after 15 days shall subject the violator to a civil penalty, which may be recovered by the town in a civil action. A violation which is a continuing violation shall subject the violator to a separate citation for each day the violation continues. 
(2)  Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 20 days. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-71, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 9-72-9-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driver means every person in charge of operating a taxicab. 
    Driver's permit means a permit granted to the driver of a taxicab. 
    Owner means any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of the revenue of taxicabs, or any person who holds the legal title of a vehicle. If a vehicle is subject to an agreement of conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase dependent upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with the immediate mortgagor of a vehicle entitled to possession, the conditional vendee, lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of this article. 
    Owner's permit means a permit granted to the operator of a taxicab business. 
    Street means any street, alley, avenue, land, public place, or highway within the limits of the town and within a radius of two miles beyond the corporate limits in all directions. 
    Taxicab means every vehicle driven or propelled by gasoline, other than motorbuses operating in and through the town, which shall be used for the purpose of carrying, transporting, or conveying any person from one place to another, for which services a charge or fee is made. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-76, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-77. - Compliance with laws. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with state law and this Code and other ordinances of the town and with due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of passengers, the safe and careful transportation of property, and the safety of the general public. 
(b)  No taxicab shall be operated at a rate of speed greater than that established by state law or by this Code or other ordinances of the town, not in any event without proper regard for the general safety of the passengers or the public. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-77, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-78. - Use of unlicensed vehicles. 
    The use of any unlicensed vehicles for taxicab purposes is hereby prohibited. Any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire in any manner shall have the necessary state and town licenses. Any violation of this section shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of the owner's permit to operate taxicabs in the town. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-78, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-79. - Privilege license. 
    Every taxicab owner operating in the town who shall be issued an owner's permit for the operation of motor vehicles for hire shall pay the required annual privilege license tax as provided by the schedule of license taxes on file in the finance office. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-79, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-80. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  The operator of every taxicab engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire over the public streets of the town shall furnish and keep in effect for each taxicab a policy of insurance which shall conform to the minimum requirements set by the town board, on file in the finance office. The policy of insurance shall set forth a description of each taxicab operating under the terms of such policy, including the year, make, model, vehicle identification number and state license number for each taxicab. The minimum insurance requirements set by the town board are as follows: Business automobile, $100,000.00 bodily injury per person, $300,000.00 bodily injury per accident, $50,000.00 property damage. 
(b)  Any person failing to comply with this section and failing to furnish the policy of insurance as provided in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-80, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-81. - Record of owner's name and address, etc. 
    Every owner shall maintain on file with the finance office his name, business address, all business telephone numbers, and the names of all of his drivers, their driver's license numbers and addresses, and the owner shall within two days report any change to the finance office. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-81, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-82. - Accident reports. 
    All accidents from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in personal injury or damage to any property shall be reported to the police department as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-82, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-83. - Amounts of fares. 
    No owner or driver of any taxicab shall charge for its use within the town an amount greater than an amount which is in accordance with the rates established by the town board. These rates are set from time to time, and a schedule of such rates is on file in the finance office and must be posted in the taxicab so it is visible to the public. The current fare in effect is $1.95 per mile. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-83, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-84. - Color scheme and insignia. 
    Subject to the approval of the town board, each owner of a taxicab business shall adopt a color scheme for lettering his cabs which is distinct from that of any other owner, or he may adopt an identifying design, monogram, or other insignia. All taxicabs of each owner shall be of the same color scheme. A name identifying the taxicab company, taxicab number, and telephone number shall be painted with permanent paint or have permanent vinyl letters applied on both sides and the rear of each cab with letters and numbers at least four inches high. The colors of paint or vinyl to be used for lettering and numbering shall be in sharp contrast with the colors of the surface paint to which they are applied, so as to be evenly visible at a reasonable distance, especially at nighttime by the illumination of streetlights. No lettering or numbering shall be acceptable which has been painted upon or vinyl letters adhering to a sheet of metal or other material, which in turn can be removed or detached to conceal the identification of the cab company and cab number. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-84, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-85. - Limitations on number of persons in front seat. 
    No driver shall permit or cause any person to ride in the front seat of any taxicab unless the rear seat is occupied to full seating capacity, and at no time shall more than one person, in addition to the driver, ride in the front seat of any taxicab provided that this section shall not apply to the transportation of handicapped persons and unattended children under ten years of age. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-85, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 9-86-9-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OWNER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 9-96. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to engage in the business of operating one or more taxicabs or to permit any taxicab of which the person is the owner to be driven, unless an owner's permit shall have been issued and be in effect. The permit shall constitute a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-96, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-97. - Application. 
    No taxicab owner's permit shall be issued to any person until and unless the person shall have made and filed with the town clerk, directed to the town board, an application therefor, sworn to before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths, on application forms provided by the town. The sworn application for the permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, owner, and, if the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation. 
(2)  The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of such application, if any. 
(3)  The number of vehicles to be operated under the owner's permit applied for. 
(4)  The make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, and passenger capacity of each taxicab to be operated under the owner's permit applied for. 
(5)  The court record of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the court record of the officers, directors, and supervisors of employees thereof. 
(6)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-97, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-98. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  After giving due consideration to the information set forth in the application for a taxicab owner's permit and such other pertinent information and evidence as may be presented, the town board shall authorize the issuance of an owner's permit to the applicant, upon such conditions as the town board may deem that the public interest and welfare require, unless the town board shall find and determine that: 
(1)  The applicant (owner) has not complied with all the provisions of this article; 
(2)  There are unpaid or unbonded judgments of record against such applicant (owner); or 
(3)  The criminal record of the applicant, or of the officers, directors, or supervising employees of a corporate applicant, if any, is such that it would be against the public interest and welfare for such application to be granted. 
(b)  If the town board shall so find and determine adversely to the applicant in any instance, the town board may refuse to grant and to authorize the issuance of an owner's permit. 
(c)  The town board may refuse to issue an owner's permit to any person who has been convicted of a felony or of a violation of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors; any federal or state statute relating to prostitution; any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of any habit-forming drugs or narcotic drugs; or to a person who has been an habitual violator of traffic laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-98, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-99. - Forms and contents. 
(a)  The taxicab owner's permit shall contain the name and address of the owner to whom it is granted, the number, kind, and description of the vehicles the operation of which is authorized by such owner's permit, and a statement that the permit is issued subject to full compliance with the provisions of this article and is subject to revocation as provided by this article. Each owner's permit shall bear the signature of the town manager and the official seal of the town. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of this article, a taxicab owner's permit shall remain in force and effect until midnight on the June 30 following the date of issue. The taxicab owner's permit holder shall renew the permit, through the finance office, by June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-99, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-100. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  A taxicab owner's permit may be suspended or revoked by the town board at any time in case the town board finds and determines that: 
(1)  As many as three traffic law violation convictions plus one additional conviction for each taxicab line operated, or one liquor or narcotics law violation conviction have occurred among the drivers of the applicant's company, or by the owner himself, within the 12 months from January 1 through December 31; 
(2)  The past record of the holder of the owner's permit is unsatisfactory, and it is detrimental to and not in the public interest to permit the continued operation of a taxicab business by such person; 
(3)  The owner has failed to operate a taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  The holder of a permit has failed to register properly with the state or with the town, in the correct and true owner's name, any taxicab covered in the owner's permit; 
(5)  The holder of the permit is using private cars or cars not licensed to be operated as taxicabs, either not having state or town licenses, for the purpose of transporting passengers for various sums or fees, whether such fees are reported or not; or 
(6)  The holder of an owner's permit has been convicted of a felony or a violation of any federal or state statute or provision of this Code or other town ordinance relating to prostitution; any federal or state statute or provision of this Code or other town ordinance relating to the use, possession, or sale of narcotic drugs or intoxicating liquors; repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances; or has become an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. 
(b)  No owner's permit shall be suspended or revoked unless and until at least five days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall have been given to the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-100, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-101. - Revocation on change of ownership. 
    Change of ownership of or title to any taxicab shall automatically revoke any permit previously granted, to the extent applicable to the operation of the taxicab. The purchaser of any such taxicab shall not operate the vehicle as a taxicab, unless and until he has applied for and has been granted an owner's permit in the manner provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-101, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-102. - Surrender of permits; operation of taxicabs to cease. 
    Taxicab owner's permits which shall have been suspended by the town board shall be surrendered to the town clerk, and the operation of any taxicabs covered by the permits shall cease. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-102, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-103. - Surrender of permits on retirement of taxicabs. 
    Any owner who shall permanently retire any taxicab from taxicab service and does not replace the taxicab within 45 days shall immediately surrender any permits granted for the operation of the taxicab to the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-103, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 9-104-9-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 9-115. - Required. 
    No person shall drive any taxicab within the corporate limits or within a radius of two miles beyond the corporate limits in all directions, unless he shall have been issued a taxicab driver's permit by the town manager which is then in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-115, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-116. - Application. 
(a)  Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall file application with the chief of police, directed to the town manager, on forms to be provided by the town clerk, and shall, among other items, show his full name; address; physical condition with particular reference to hearing, eyesight, and use of intoxicating liquors and drugs; physical description; age; race; place of birth; length of time he has resided in the town; whether he is a citizens of the United States; previous places of employment for three years prior to date of application; whether he is married or single; his court record; and his state driver's license number. 
(b)  The application and statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant, and any false statement made by an applicant in applying for a driver's permit shall invalidate the permit issued to the applicant, and upon conviction, the applicant shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6, pertaining to general penalties, enforcement of ordinances, and continuing violations. 
(c)  The applicant's fingerprints shall be impressed on each application form or other form furnished by the town in the space provided. 
(d)  Each application shall have attached thereto two recent photographs of the applicant, of such size as may from time to time be designated by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-116, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-117. - Investigation of applicant by police department. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause a thorough investigation to be made of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit. In the discretion of the chief of police, or at the direction of the town manager, an examination authorized by section 9-118 may be required. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-117, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-118. - Examination of applicant by chief of police; medical examination. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit may be examined by the chief of police as to his knowledge of the provisions of this article, and each applicant may be required to have a medical examination as to his physical condition and to exhibit a current health certificate. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-118, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-119. - Qualifications of applicant; fee. 
    No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Produce, on forms provided by the town, affidavits establishing his good character from three reputable citizens of the town who have known him personally and observed his conduct during one year immediately preceding the date of his application; 
(3)  Hold a valid state driver's license issued by the authority of the state; 
(4)  Be clean in dress and in person; 
(5)  Be not addicted to the use of narcotic or other habit-forming drugs or intoxicating liquors; 
(6)  Be of sound psyche, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body of mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab; 
(7)  Pay the current fee for the issuance of a permit, payable to the town. The town currently does not have a permit fee, only the privilege license tax of $15.00. State law, G.S. 20-97(d), allows a tax of $15.00 on each cab, as well as the privilege license tax. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-119, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-120. - Issuance; contents. 
(a)  Should the town manager find that the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit has satisfactorily complied with the conditions and requirements of this division, he shall cause to be issued a driver's permit, in a form the town manager may prescribe. 
(b)  The driver's permit shall bear a recent photograph of the driver to whom it is issued and shall show the name, address, height, weight, and age of the driver and the expiration date of the permit. The driver's permit shall specify the holder of an owner's permit for whom such driver shall drive, and no driver shall operate a cab for any other holder without securing a new permit from the town manager designating the new owner. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-120, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-121. - Refusal; appeal. 
(a)  The town manager shall refuse to grant or renew a taxicab driver's permit in the case of an application from any person who: 
(1)  Within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application has been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  With a period of three years immediately prior to the date of his application has had his state automobile driver's license or permit suspended or revoked; 
(3)  With a period of three years immediately prior to the date of his application shall have been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated; 
(4)  Within a period of three years immediately prior to the date of his application shall have been convicted of a violation of any law, city, state, or federal, relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors; 
(5)  Within a period of three years immediately prior to the date of his application shall have been convicted of any law, city, state or federal, relating to prostitution; 
(6)  In or, within a period of three years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been a habitual user of intoxicating liquors, narcotic drugs, or barbiturate drugs; 
(7)  Has been convicted of any criminal court of two or more violations of traffic laws or ordinances within any period of 12 months during the 36 months immediately preceding the date of the application for such taxicab driver's permit; or 
(8)  Is a person of such bad character or reputation that it would be clearly contrary to the public interest, safety, and welfare to permit such applicant to driver a taxicab. 
(b)  If the town manager refuses to grant a permit under this section, the applicant shall have the right, within ten days after such refusal, to appeal to and be heard by the town board, whose decision on the question of granting or refusing the permit shall be final and conclusive. Notice of appeal to the town board shall be given in writing and filed with the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-121, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-122. - Revocation or suspension by town board. 
    At any time after the issuance of a taxicab driver's permit to any person to drive a taxicab, the town board may revoke such permit if the person holding the permit is convicted of a felony; a violation of any federal or state statute or provision of this Code or other town ordinance relating to the use, possession, transportation, or sale of intoxicating liquors; a violation of any federal or state statute or provision of this Code or other town ordinance relating to the use, possession, or sale of narcotic drugs or barbiturate drugs; two or more violations of traffic laws or ordinances of the town; or if he becomes an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. The town board may suspend the permit for the time it may deem proper on any ground sufficient for a revocation of a permit, or if the person holding such permit shall be found to have in his possession or custody any quantity whatsoever of intoxicating liquor, within his cab or on his person, or if he has violated any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-122, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-123. - Suspension by town manager. 
    The town manager shall have the authority to suspend any taxicab driver's permit and require the surrender thereof for a period not to exceed 30 days upon conviction of a violation of this Code or any town ordinance, or of any statute dealing with the public safety or public morals, or upon any grounds sufficient for a revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-123, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-124. - Expiration; renewal. 
    Subject to the provisions of this article, a taxicab driver's permit shall remain in force and effect until midnight on the June 30 following the date of issue. The taxicab driver's permit holder shall renew the permit through the finance office by June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-124, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181. 

Sec. 9-126. - License required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling alley, or other table or alley for any game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or indirectly, unless he shall first have secured a license from the town board to do so. Such license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-126, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-127. - Application for license. 
    Applications for a license under this article shall be made upon forms provided by the town clerk, and shall contain all information necessary for the town board to act intelligently upon such applications. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-127, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-128. - When license refused. 
    The town board shall not issue such license to any person: 
(1)  Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; 
(2)  Who is of immoral character; or 
(3)  Who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-128, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-129. - Form and content of license. 
    Every license issued pursuant to this article shall specify the premises for which it is issued, the number of tables or alleys to be operated thereunder, the name of the owner or operator, and the dates upon which the license begins and shall expire. Such license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-129, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-130. - Posting of license. 
    A license under this article shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-130, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-131. - Licensee responsible. 
    The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-131, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-132. - Certain prohibitions to be observed by licensee and employees. 
    Licensees under this article shall not, and neither shall their employees: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time; nor the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parlay cards or gambling boards. 
(2)  Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly; or permit any profane, obscene or indecent language thereon. 
(3)  Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be sold, kept or consumed on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Suffer or permit any person under the age of 16 years to enter or remain on the licensed premises, unless such person be accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. 
(5)  Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. 
(6)  Suffer or permit any device to be attached to or placed upon any tables. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-132, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-133. - Revocation of licenses. 
    A second conviction of a licensee, or his agent or employee, for any violation of any provision of this article shall by operation of law constitute an automatic revocation of the license of such licensee. In addition, the town board may at any time, for cause, and after a hearing, of which such licensee shall be given such reasonable notice as the town board may direct, revoke any license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-03, § 9-133, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 9-134-9-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers Modernization Act of 1989, G.S. 91-A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-151. - License required. 
    All licenses issued to pawnbrokers shall be subject to the provisions of this article and G.S. 91A, which is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 02008-08, § 9-151, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 9-152. - Application for license. 
    Every person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of pawnbroker shall petition the town for a license to conduct such business. Application to conduct such business shall be made on forms provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 02008-08, § 9-152, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 9-153. - Required records; inspection of records. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of pawnbroker within the town shall require identification from every person from whom any article is taken as pledge or by purchase, and shall keep a record and description of the person. 
(b)  A record shall be kept of every article or item pawned or purchased, except purchases by invoices of new merchandise. 
(c)  The records shall specify the article required by pawn or purchase, giving a full description thereof, such as a number, mark, and all other details as will make identification of the articles clear and positive. 
(d)  The records shall be kept at the place of business and open to visitation and inspection by the chief of police at any reasonable time. 
(e)  If any pawnbroker shall refuse to submit to a visitation or inspection of his records by the chief of police or his duly authorized agent, the business may be immediately closed by the mayor or town manager. 
(f)  Invoices for all purchases of new merchandise from wholesalers, jobbers and manufacturers shall be kept by pawnbrokers and shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police in the same manner as the records of other purchases. 
(Ord. No. 02008-08, § 9-153, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 9-154. - Information to be furnished to chief of police. 
    Every person engaged in the business of pawnbroker within the town shall furnish to the chief of police, upon request, a list of names and addresses and descriptions of articles pawned or purchased over any specified period of time. 
(Ord. No. 02008-08, § 9-154, 9-2-2008) 
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Discharge of guns, firearms, firecrackers, etc., regulated. 
(a)  No person shall fire or otherwise discharge any type of gun, firearm, firecracker, cannon cracker, pistol, or other explosive within the town limits, unless: 
(1)  When lawfully used in defense of person or property or pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement officers; or 
(2)  The fireworks are those which are permitted under applicable state statute at the time, in which case they may be discharged. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the discharge of nonexplosive firearms such as BB guns, pellet guns, air rifles, crossbows, and bows and arrows, only by persons over the age of 16 years and provided that there is a minimum of 200 feet from the point of discharge to the nearest adjacent property line. 
(c)  Law enforcement officers performing official duties are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall be punished by a class 1 misdemeanor or a civil penalty of $100.00 pursuant to G.S. 160A-175, at the discretion of the charging officer. In determining whether the remedy sought against the offender is criminal or civil, the officer shall take into the following considerations: 
(1)  The extent to which the violation creates an unsafe situation for either the offender, adjacent landowners, or the public in general, and the severity of that unsafe situation; 
(2)  The responsiveness of the offender to voluntarily comply with the requirement of this section; and 
(3)  The amount and nature of previous violations of this section. 
The fine for violation of this section, regardless of whether a civil or criminal remedy is sought, shall be $100.00. Each offense shall constitute a separate and continuing violation and shall be a distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-2. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on town property and at athletic events. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume or make any public display of any liquor or malt beverage on any property owned or controlled by the town or at any athletic contest or athletic event within the town. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-2, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-3. - Halloween activities. 
    Persons participating in Halloween trick-or-treat shall not be more than 12 years of age and shall be off the streets by 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-3, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-4. - Injuring property of town. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or in any way to interfere with any of the public property of the town, or under its jurisdiction and control, and this section shall be construed to embrace the town hall, the water and sewerage system, the fire department, the town parks and places of amusement, and all other property, whether enumerated in this section or not, including pavements, curbs and gutters. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-4, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-5. - Writing or drawing obscene words or pictures on streets or walls of buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful to do any obscene act in any public place, or to write obscene language or to make obscene markings or drawings on any wall of any public or private building, or upon the streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-5, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-6. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to litter on any public street, right-of-way, alley, park or other public place within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-6, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-7. - Injuring trees or shrubbery along street or sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure or mutilate any shade tree, ornamental tree or shrubbery on any sidewalk or street within the town; except that the town manager may grant a permit in writing, when necessary, to interested persons to prune such shade trees, ornamental trees and shrubbery for the proper protection of such trees and shrubbery in order that they may be properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-7, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-8. - Entering town lake prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or on the waters of the town lake. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-8, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-9. - Protection of crape myrtles. 
    The crape myrtle tree shall be a protected tree in the town. If a property owner must move or destroy a crape myrtle tree for any reason, he shall contact the town manager to discuss replacing it. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-9, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-10. - Financial responsibility for underground utility installations. 
(a)  Any fees or amounts charged or due in connection with the placing, installation or hookup of underground power or utility lines shall be borne by the owners or occupants of the property to be benefited by such lines. 
(b)  The town shall have no obligation for or responsibility to pay for any charges or amounts whatever due in connection with such underground lines. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-10, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-11. - Loitering. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "public place" means any area generally accessible to the public for common usage and access, including any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, playground, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, the doorways and entranceways, stairway, hall, courtyard, passage way or common area to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle located at any of those places, or any property owned by the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and under the circumstances manifesting the intent to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. 90-5. Such circumstances shall include: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passersby, or repeatedly attempting to engage passersby in conversation; 
(2)  Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles; 
(3)  Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons; 
(4)  Behaving in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
(5)  Repeatedly passing to or receiving from passersby, whether on foot or in a vehicle, or to or from a courier, money or objects; 
(6)  Taking flight upon the approach or appearance of a law enforcement officer; or 
(7)  Loitering at a location frequented by persons who use, possess, or sell drugs. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-11, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 11-12-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 11-21-11-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 11-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number, the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
    Yard sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation where not more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-31, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-32. - Permit required. 
    No yard sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor from a representative of the code enforcement department. Members of more than one residence may join in obtaining a permit for a yard sale to be conducted at the residence of one of them. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-32, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-33. - Written statement required. 
    Prior to the issuance of any yard sale permit, the individuals conducting such sale shall file a written statement with a representative of the code enforcement department, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of applicant. 
(2)  The location at which the proposed yard sale is to be held. 
(3)  The date when the sale shall be held. 
(4)  An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-33, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-34. - Permit fee. 
    There may be an administrative processing fee for the issuance of such permit, established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-34, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-35. - Permit conditions. 
    The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such yard sales. No more than three such permits for no more than two consecutive days only for each permit may be issued to one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered having been issued for each and all such residences. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-35, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-36. - Hours of operation. 
    Such yard sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of the day for which the permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-36, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-37. - Exceptions. 
(a)  If sale is not held because of inclement weather. If a yard sale is not held on the date for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, a representative of the code enforcement department may issue another permit to the applicant for a yard sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the sale was to be held. No additional permit fee will be required. 
(b)  Fourth sale permitted. A fourth yard sale shall be permitted in a calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of the real property is first presented to the code enforcement department or its duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-37, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-38. - Pre-permit investigation. 
    Before issuing a permit, a representative of the code enforcement division may conduct an investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-38, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-39. - Display of permit. 
    Any permit in possession of the holder or holders of a yard sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public and the town code enforcement officer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-39, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-40. - Advertising; signs. 
(a)  Signs permitted. Only the following signs may be displayed in relation to a pending yard sale: 
(1)  A yard sale shall be allowed one sign on the lot of the yard sale, provided the sign does not exceed 42 inches in height, four square feet per side, and eight square feet total aggregate. 
(2)  A yard sale shall be allowed two additional directional signs located off-premises provided written permission to erect said signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be place and the signs do not exceed 42 inches in height, four square feet per side and eight square feet total aggregate. 
(b)  Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than three days prior to the day such sale is to commence. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Signs must be removed at the close of the yard sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-40, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-41. - Public nuisance. 
    The individual to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on which sale of activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire department of the town in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-41, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-42. - Inspection; arrest authority of inspector. 
    A police officer or any other official designated by the town ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance, or to enforce the same, shall have the right of entry of any premises showing evidence of a yard sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a sale, or authorize arrest of any individual who violates the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-42, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-43. - Parking. 
    All parking of vehicles shall be done in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any yard sale. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-43, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-44. - Revocation and refusal of permit. 
(a)  False information. Any permit issued under this division may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the code enforcement department if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(b)  Conviction of violation. If any individual is convicted of an offense under this division, the code enforcement department is not to issue such individual another yard sale permit for a period of two years from the time of conviction. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-44, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-45. - Persons exempted. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-45, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-46. - Separate violations. 
    Every article sold and every day of a sale conducted in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-46, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-47. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-47, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 11-48-11-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE 

Sec. 11-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purposes of preventing, or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an existing or imminent peril. 
    Nighttime means between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
    Outdoor amplified sound means any sound emitted from amplifying equipment positioned outside or where the sound source is inside and the sound permeates to the outside through open doors or windows or other openings or through the walls in a building or vehicle. 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound including, but not limited to jukeboxes, stereos and radios. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-61, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-62. - Loud and disturbing noises. 
(a)  General regulation. It shall be unlawful to create, cause or allow the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, annoying or frightening noise, particularly during nighttime, which seriously interferes with neighboring residents' reasonable use of their properties. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited. 
(b)  Prohibited sounds or activities. Such prohibited noises deemed unreasonably loud, disturbing, annoying or frightening may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on the public streets or private property at nighttime. 
(2)  Noisy parties. Unreasonably loud noise generated by the congregating of people (or those participating in any party or gathering of people), during nighttime. 
(3)  Loading operations. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans or other similar objects during nighttime. 
(4)  Repair of motor vehicles. The repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle during nighttime. 
(5)  Service stations. The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom during nighttime. 
(6)  Noisy businesses. The conducting, operating or maintaining of any business or service establishment in the vicinity of any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises, music or other outdoor amplified sound to be emitted there from. 
(7)  Radios, audio equipment, televisions, electronic devices or musical instruments. The playing of any radio, audio equipment, musical instrument, television, electronic device or any such device during nighttime as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(8)  Sirens. The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle. 
(9)  Animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(10)  Compressed air. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(11)  Construction. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or lot in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the code enforcement office, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
(12)  Schools, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while the school, institution of learning or court is in session, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the street is a school, court or hospital street. 
(13)  Churches. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any church or worship center while services are being held, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets adjacent to churches indicated that the street is a church street. 
(14)  Bells, gongs. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises, other than those expressly exempted by this division, which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-62, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-63. - Specific acts requiring a permit. 
(a)  Horns and signaling devices. The intentional sounding of any horn or signaling device of a motor vehicle on any street or public place continuously or intermittently, except as a danger or emergency warning. 
(b)  Engine noise. Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle, motorboat, motorcycle or any internal combustion engine not equipped with a muffler or other device in good working order so as to effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(c)  Overloaded vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(d)  Exterior loudspeakers. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanical device or loudspeaker, without a permit to do so, in a fixed or movable position exterior to any building or any motor vehicle. 
(e)  Amplified sound. The use or operation of any radio, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or sound amplifying device with a building or motor vehicle in a manner that disrupts or interferes with an individual's enjoyment of his property. The police chief, however, may permit musical programs, speeches or general entertainment as exception to this provision for limited time periods. 
(f)  Power equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any power saw, sander, drill, grinder, leaf blower, lawn mower, or other garden equipment or tools of a similar nature outdoors during nighttime. 
(g)  Explosives. The use or firing of explosives, firearms, fireworks, or similar devices which create impulsive sounds. 
(h)  Security alarms. The sounding of a security alarm, for more than 20 minutes after law enforcement or emergency response personnel are notified. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-63, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-64. - Exceptions. 
    The following are exempt from the provisions of this division: 
(1)  Construction. Construction operations from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays or weekends for which building permits have been issued or construction operations not requiring permits due to ownership of the project by an agency of government; providing all equipment is operated in accordance with manufacturer's mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(2)  Community noises. Noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relieve valves and all church bells, including simulated church bells. 
(3)  Emergency noises. Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to any emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(4)  Permit issued. Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the town department of public safety in accordance with the above. Regulations of noises emanating from operations under permit shall be according to the conditions and limits stated on the permit and contained in this division. 
(5)  Street fairs. Unamplified and amplified sound at street fairs conducted by the town. 
(6)  Aircraft. All noises coming from the normal operations of properly equipped aircraft. 
(7)  Truck and vehicles. All noises coming from normal operation of motor vehicles properly equipped with the manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-reducing equipment. 
(8)  Celebrations. Noise from lawful fireworks and noisemakers on holidays, religious ceremonies and town festivals. 
(9)  Lawn care. Lawnmowers, agricultural equipment and landscape maintenance equipment used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when operating with all the manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and proper operating condition. 
(10)  Military ceremonies. Musical accompaniment or firearm discharge related to military ceremonies. 
(11)  Businesses. Sound amplification equipment used in conjunction with telecommunications systems on business properties to notify employees of that business of incoming phone calls, providing that a permit has been issued by the town and that the subject property is located in the midst of a business district and is not in the hearing range of a residential, church or school property and providing that the sound system be used only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(12)  Emergency work. Noise resulting from work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster, or to restore public utilities, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger. 
(13)  Public services. Noises resulting from the provision of government services or from the provision of sanitation services. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-64, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-65. - Violations. 
(a)  When a formal complaint has been received, any person found to be in violation of any portion of this division shall receive an oral order to cease or abate the noise immediately, or within a reasonable time period. 
(b)  During nighttime, or if a second violation occurs within 60 days, an oral order to cease or abate need not be issued prior to issuing a citation for violation of any portion of this division. 
(c)  If the order to cease or abate is not complied with, the person or persons responsible for the violation may be charged under this division and may be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-65, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 11-66-11-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARADES, PICKET LINES AND DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 11-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block means that portion of any street lying between its intersections with other streets. 
    Group demonstration means any assembly together or concert of action between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention of such assembly. 
    Parade means any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public grounds or places. 
    Picket line means any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or on behalf of any organization or class of persons. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-81, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-82. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the town unless a permit therefor has been issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-82, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-83. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(3)  A group of ten or less. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-83, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-84. - Requirements and issuance of permits. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall issue permits as required in this division, and in the issuance thereof he shall: 
(1)  Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than 24 hours in advance of such parade, picket line, or group demonstration which application shall specify the time and place for the commencement of any such picket line and the time, place, route, and duration of any such parade or group demonstration. 
(2)  Require that the application for a permit specify whether or not minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate. 
(3)  Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit shall designate the person or persons in charge of the activity. Such person shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group demonstration and shall carry such permit with him at that time. Such permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other person. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-84, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-85. - Certain activities prohibited. 
    The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line, or group demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful: 
(1)  The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon or article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; 
(2)  The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether leashed or unleashed. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-85, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-86. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes: 
(1)  The violation by any participant of section 11-85; 
(2)  The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-86, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-87. - Interference prohibited. 
    No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit duly issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-87, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-88. - Additional regulations applicable to picketing. 
    Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional regulations: 
(1)  Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one time; 
(3)  Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in height promoting the objective for which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not defamatory in nature; 
(4)  Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-88, 5-12-2008) 
Secs. 11-89-11-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 11-100. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Town means the Town of Angier. 
    Town board means the town board of commissioners. 
    Participant means a person engaged in a hazardous recreational activity at a skateboard park as defined herein. 
    Person means an individual of any age. 
    Recreation department means the town recreation department. 
    Skateboard park means a facility provided by the town for skateboarding and inline skating and located within the town or on property owned by the town. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-100, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-101. - Rules and regulations-Skateboard Park. 
(a)  A participant shall at all times wear elbow pads, kneepads, and a safety helmet. 
(b)  The town shall not be required to furnish any supervision of skateboarding activities, and a participant shall be at his or her own risk. 
(c)  A participant shall be responsible for doing all of the following: 
(1)  Acting within the limits of his or her ability and the purpose and design of the equipment used; 
(2)  Maintaining control of his or her ability and the purpose and design of the equipment used; and 
(3)  Refraining from acting in any manner that may cause or contribute to death or injury of himself or herself or other persons. 
(d)  No person may consume any food or drink in the designated skating area at a skateboard park. 
(e)  No person may possess or consume any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances at a skateboard park. 
(f)  No person may consume tobacco products at a skateboard park. 
(g)  No person may use, wear, possess, or display any lewd, indecent, or obscene gear, clothing, items, publications, or other materials at a skateboard park. 
(h)  No person shall use, attempt to use, or enter the premises of a skateboard park except during regular stated or advertised hours of operation. 
(i)  The recreation department shall be authorized to post such additional rules as the department determines appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-101, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 2), 8-3-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 2), adopted Aug. 3, 2010, amended § 11-101 title to read as herein set out. Former § 11-101 title pertained to similar subect matter. 
Sec. 11-102. - Waiver and helmet decal required. 
(a)  A participant, prior to using the skateboard park for the first time, shall be required to sign a waiver of liability on a form furnished by the town or the recreation department. In the event the participant is under 18 years of age, the waiver shall be signed by a parent or legal guardian. The waiver shall apply to each and every use of the skateboard park thereafter by the participant; provided that the town may, in its discretion, periodically require that a new waiver of liability be signed. The participant shall be required to present a copy of the waiver to provide proof of membership when using the skateboard park facility. The participant will also be furnished a helmet decal at the time of registration must be displayed in a conspicuous place on their helmet prior to use of the skateboard park facility. 
(b)  The recreation department shall be authorized to post such additional rules as the Department determines is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-101, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-103. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police department shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or harass the employees, agents, contractors, or authorized representatives of the recreation department or the town in the performance of their duties as prescribed by this division. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-103, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 11-104. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. Notwithstanding any civil penalties which may be assessed under subsection (b) of this section, any person violating any of the provisions of this division may be found guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor under G.S. 14-4 and 160A-175. For a continuing violation, each day's violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(b)  Civil penalties. In addition to, and not in lieu of, the criminal penalties and other remedies provided by this division or by state law, a violation of any of the provisions of this division may also subject the offender to the civil penalties hereinafter set forth. The police department shall be authorized to issue a citation to such person, giving notice of the violation. Citations so issued may be delivered in person or mailed by registered or certified mail to the person charged if such person cannot otherwise be readily located. The civil penalty set forth in the citation must be paid within seven days of receipt of the citation and shall be paid to the finance department. For purposes of this subsection (b), a citation is deemed received on the date it is delivered to the person charged, or, in the case of registered or certified mail, on the date the return receipt is signed. If the person charged fails to pay the civil penalty within the time prescribed, the town may recover said penalty by civil action in the nature of debt; or a criminal summons may be issued against such person charging a misdemeanor violation of this division under subsection (a) of this section, and upon conviction, such person shall in addition to the penalties prescribed for said misdemeanor violation of this division be punished as the court prescribes for failure to pay the civil penalties imposed hereby; or the town may pursue both of said remedies, provided there shall only be one recovery for the civil penalty imposed. The civil penalties for a violation of this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense ..... $ 25.00 
(2)  Second offense .....   50.00 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense .....  100.00 
(4)  Fourth offense, suspension from skateboard park facility use. 
(c)  Equitable remedies. This division may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction, including but not limited to injunctions and orders of abatement. 
(d)  Cumulative remedies. The remedies and penalties for violation of this division shall be cumulative, and the election of a remedy or enforcement of a penalty hereunder shall not preclude the election of any other remedy or enforcement of any other penalty which may be provided under this section or by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-04, § 11-104, 5-12-2008) 
Chapter 12 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Annexation by municipalities of less than 5,000, G.S. 160A-33 et seq.; planning and regulation of development, G.S. 160A-360 et seq.; interlocal cooperation, G.S. 160A-460 et seq.; procedure for adopting or amending certain ordinances relating to planning and development, G.S. 160A-364. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Adoption of land use plan and map. 
    The town's land use plan book and map are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1991, § 13-1; Mo. of 5-16-1989) 
State Law reference- Municipal planning agency, G.S. 160A-361. 
Sec. 12-2. - Adoption of soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
    The town's soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1991, § 13-2; Mo. of 1-3-1989(3)) 
State Law reference- Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973, G.S. 113A-50 et seq.; municipal erosion and sedimentation control, G.S. 160A-458. 
Sec. 12-3. - Public hearings. 
    The town clerk shall set public hearing requests relating to planning for the first meeting in the month after the planning board has met. 
(Code 1991, § 13-3; Mo. of 12-15-1987(2)) 
Sec. 12-4. - Application fee for zoning change, conditional use permit. 
    A minimum fee in an amount as established in the rate and fee schedule from time to time shall be charged to cover administrative costs and the costs of advertising when an application for a zoning change or for a conditional use permit is submitted. This fee is due when the application is submitted. If the cost exceeds the established minimum fee, the person requesting the change will be responsible. 
(Code 1991, § 13-4; Mo. of 3-5-1985; Mo. of 10-21-1986) 
State Law reference- Changes in zoning regulations, G.S. 160A-385. 
Sec. 12-5. - Written findings for conditional use permit. 
(a)  A conditional use permit may be granted when written findings provide that: 
(1)  The applicable regulations of the district in which the property for which a conditional use permit is sought are fulfilled; and 
(2)  The following provisions are fulfilled: 
a.  The use requested is listed among the conditional uses in the district for which application is made; 
b.  The requested use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare; 
c.  The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the surroundings or adjoining districts, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare; 
d.  The requested use will be in conformity with the land development plan; 
e.  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided; 
f.  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and 
g.  The conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the board pursuant to the recommendations of the planning board. 
(b)  The findings under this section shall also include the application to which findings are applicable. 
(Code 1991, § 13-5; Mo. of 5-20-1986) 
Secs. 12-6-12-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD 

Sec. 12-66. - Created. 
    There shall be a planning board for the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction established under the authority of the General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-01, § 13-66, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 12-67. - Membership, term and vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be a planning board consisting of seven members. Four members, appointed by the town board, shall reside within the town limits. Three members, appointed by the county board of commissioners, shall reside within that portion of the town's extraterritorial planning area that lies within the county. If, despite good faith efforts, a resident of the extraterritorial planning area within each county cannot be found to fill the seat reserved for residents of such area, then the county board of commissioners may appoint any other resident of the county (including residents of the town) to fill such seat. If the county board fails to make an appointment within 90 days after receiving a resolution from the town board requesting that an appointment be made, the town board may make the appointment. 
(b)  Planning board members shall be appointed for two-year staggered terms, but members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. In-town and ETJ residents will serve two-year staggered terms. 
(c)  Members may be appointed to no more than three successive terms. Once a member serves three successive terms, the member shall not be eligible to reapply for two years. 
(d)  Faithful attendance at the meetings of the planning board is considered a prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the planning board. Planning board members may be removed by the town board at any time for failure to attend three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings or for failure to attend four or more of the meetings within any 12-month period or for any other good cause related to performance of duties. In the absence of regular planning board members, the town board may appoint alternates as it deems necessary. 
(e)  All members may participate in and vote on all issues before the planning board, regardless of whether the issue affects property within the town or within the extraterritorial planning area. 
(f)  Terms for in-town and extraterritorial members of the planning board shall expire on December 31. Members of the planning board shall serve until the expiration of their terms or until their successors have been appointed. 
(g)  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term by the town board for in-town members of the planning board and by the town board for the extraterritorial members of the planning board. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-01, § 13-67, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 12-68. - Organization, rules, meetings and records. 
(a)  The planning board shall elect a chair and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The term of officers shall be one year or until successors shall have been elected and installed, with eligibility for reelection. Vacancies in officers' positions prior to expiration of terms shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term by the planning board. The planning board shall adopt rules of transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public record. 
(b)  The planning board shall hold at least one meeting monthly unless there is no business to be discussed or acted upon, and all of its meetings shall be in accordance with G.S. 143-318.9 et seq., so as to process appeals and permit applications as expeditiously as possible. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the planning board (four) for the purpose of taking any official action. All members of the planning board shall have voting power on all matters of business. However, any member of the planning board who is a party at interest to matters under consideration by the planning board shall declare such interest prior to a vote of the planning board on the question, and shall abstain from voting on the question. This provision shall not prohibit such members from participation in discussions of the planning board on such matters prior to a vote. 
(c)  Since the board has only advisory authority, it shall conduct its meetings so as to obtain necessary information and to promote the full and free exchange of ideas. 
(d)  Minutes shall be kept of all board proceedings. 
(e)  All board meetings shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible, the agenda for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting. 
(f)  The planning board is charged with the responsibility to carry out its duties for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the community. Their responsibility is to ensure that the development and use of land occur in compliance with federal, state and local statutes, regulations and ordinances. The planning board shall review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners; however, in the absence of a recommendation from the planning board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the question has been submitted in writing to the planning board, the town board of commissioners may take final action without receiving the recommendation, or may extend the time within which the planning board may report. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-01, § 13-68, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 12-69. - Powers and duties of board. 
(a)  The planning board shall have the powers and duties given it by the General Statutes and the town board including the power to: 
(1)  Make studies and recommend to the town board plans, goals and objectives relating to the growth, development and redevelopment of the town and the surrounding extraterritorial planning area; 
(2)  Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner; 
(3)  Make recommendations to the town board concerning proposed conditional use permits and proposed zoning map changes; 
(4)  Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of various means for carrying out plans that the town board may direct; 
(5)  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance of a development plan for the town; 
(6)  Promote public interest in and an understanding of its recommendations. 
(b)  The planning board may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and operations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The planning board shall have no power to incur any debt or obligation of the town, nor shall it have any power to make any expenditure of funds of the town unless such funds are specifically provided for in the budget of the town and appropriation made for such purposes by the town board. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-01, § 13-69, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 12-70. - Compensation. 
    All members of the planning board shall serve with compensation as set forth in the annual budget recommended by the town manager and adopted by the town board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O-2008-01, § 13-70, 2-5-2008) 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement of health and safety nuisances, G.S. 160A-193. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Other remedies. 
    The procedures set forth in this article shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances, and this article shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person violating the provisions of this article as provided in G.S. 14-8. 
Secs. 14-2-14-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 14-11. - Nuisances declared. 
(a)  The following enumerated and described conditions are hereby found, deemed and declared to constitute a detriment, danger, and hazardous to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and are found, deemed and declared to be public nuisances wherever the same may exist and the creation, maintenance or failure to abate any nuisances is hereby declared unlawful. The Town of Angier shall charge the violator the expense of the action and a surcharge of up to 50 percent over the expense to remedy the following violations. 
(1)  Any condition which is a breeding ground or harbor for rats, snakes, or other pests or has the potential for becoming a breeding ground or harbor for such pests. 
(2)  Any weeds or other vegetation having an overall height of more than 12 inches above the surrounding ground provided that the following shall not be considered to be a part of this condition: trees and ornamental shrubs, cultured plants; flowers and growing and producing vegetable plants. 
(3)  A place of growth of noxious vegetation, including poison sumac (Rhus vernix), poison ivy (Rhus radicans) or poison oak (Rhus toxicodendron), in a location likely to be accessible to the general public. 
(4)  An open place of collection of water for which no adequate natural drainage is provided and where insects tend to breed or which is or is likely to become a nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(5)  An open place of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires and tubes, trash, refuse, brush, old clothes, rags or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature. 
(6)  An open place of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or any other rotten matter of any kind; further, no owner or occupant of any premises shall bury therein any animal or vegetable matter which, upon decaying, may become dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or constitute a nuisance. 
(7)  Hides, dried or green provided the same may be kept for sale in the town when thoroughly cured and odorless. 
(8)  Any furniture, appliances, automotive parts or pieces or other wood or metal products of any kind or nature openly kept which have jagged edges of metal or glass, or areas of confinement, or areas which may provide a habitat for rats, snakes, insects, or other pests. 
(9)  Any improper or inadequate drainage on private property which causes flooding, interferes with the use of, or endangers in any way the streets, sidewalks, parks or other town owned property of any kind. 
(10)  Any ditch, natural or artificial channel, stormwater retention or detention pond or other impoundment device which is operating improperly and/or found to prohibit or obstruct the natural drainage flow of stormwater, as determined by the Town's authorized designee. 
(11)  Any ditch, trench, or below ground portion of a construction project which remains open for more than 14 days without being completed or which is not protected with barricades, flags or other means so as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians or motor traffic. 
(12)  Failure to clean or clear a public street of mud and debris related to a construction, timbering or other similar land use project within 12 hours after notification by the town manager or his designee for major and minor thoroughfares or within 24 hours after such notification for collector and local streets; however, if it is found by the town manager or his designee that the situation is causing a clear and present danger or hazard to traffic or the general public, such cleaning or clearing may be required to take place as soon after notification as practicable. 
(13)  Any condition which violates the rules and regulations of the county health department. 
(14)  Any building or other structure which has been burned, partially burned or otherwise partially destroyed and which is unsightly or hazardous to the safety of any person, is a continuing fire hazard or which is structurally unsound to the extent that the town manager or his designee can reasonably determine that there is a likelihood of personal or property injury to any person or property entering the premises. 
(15)  No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the town any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the town. 
(16)  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other place upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the town, except in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the town manager or his designee. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(17)  Any other condition specifically declared to be a danger to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of inhabitants of the town and a public nuisance by the town board of commissioners which proceeding may be initiated by the town manager or his designee before the board after giving written notice thereof. Such notice shall state the condition existing, the location, and that the board will be requested on a day certain, after a public hearing at which the person notified may appear and be heard, to declare that the conditions existing constitute a public nuisance. After such declaration by the board, the condition will be abated as provided for in this chapter, subsequent to any appeal taken from the decision by the town manager or his designee before the town board of commissioners. 
(18)  Any owner or person in possession of a vacant lot, or a developed lot with an undisturbed area, within the corporate limits found to contain a second and/or subsequent violations of Section 14-11(5,6,8,19) shall shrub down, within 12 inches of the ground, all weeds, grass, or other noxious growth from said lot as needed to remain in compliance with the ordinance. In addition to the undergrowth, low hanging tree branches shall be trimmed to create a canopy of at least six feet in height to discourage the camouflaging of litter, debris, unlawful inhabitance, etc. All limb trimmings and other debris shall be removed immediately. Once the owner has been properly notified of the violation, there shall be a 30-day time period for compliance. The administrator shall have the ability to amend this time period of compliance if considerable work has been done in an attempt to remedy the violation or if such violation is determined to be a potential risk to the public health, safety, and general welfare. If said weeds, limbs, or other noxious growth are not cut in compliance with this subsection, the agent of the town shall proceed to have said weeds or other noxious growth cut, and the owner or person in possession of such lot shall be responsible to the Town of Angier for the cost thereof. 
(19)  Any tents, structures, or housing not permitted by the landowner are unlawful and shall not be allowed within the Town of Angier. Any such violation(s) shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to properly resolve, including, but not limited to, abatement and legal costs. Once the owner has been properly notified of the violation, there shall be a 30-day time period for compliance. The administrator shall have the ability to amend this time period of compliance if considerable work has been done in an attempt to remedy the violation or if such violation is determined to be a potential risk to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  If any of the nuisances specified in this section are found to exist, the responsibility for abatement shall rest with the owner, occupant or person in possession of the property or their agent, notwithstanding that the nuisance is found to exist, wholly or in part, within a town easement which crosses private property. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-04, §§ 3), 4), 8-3-2010; Ord. of 7-2-2013; Ord. of 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-12. - Duty to cause investigation of possible nuisances. 
    The town manager or his designee, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of the conditions described in this article, shall cause to be made by the appropriate county health department or official, or town official, such investigation as may be necessary to determine whether in fact such condition exists as to constitute a public nuisance. 
Sec. 14-13. - Duty to give notice of existence of nuisance and require abatement. 
(a)  Upon a determination that a public nuisance as described in this article exists, the town manager or his designee shall notify in writing the owner, occupant or person in possession of the premises in question of the condition constituting such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof within the ten days from the receipt of such written notice. 
(b)  Within the ten-day period mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the town manager or his designee made pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the town board of commissioners by given written notice of appeal to the town clerk. The filing of the appeal shall stay the abatement of the nuisance by the town until a final determination by the board, unless the town manager or his designee certifies to the board that, because of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that, because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with the effective enforcement of this chapter. In that case, abatement proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the town. 
Sec. 14-14. - Abatement of nuisance by town; violator may have town abate nuisance. 
(a)  If any person, after having been ordered to abate a public nuisance described in this article, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within ten days from receipt of the order, the town manager or his designee shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having employees of the town or a private contractor hired by the town go upon such premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the supervision of an officer or employee designated by the administrative officer. In such instances, weeds or grass shall always be cut to a height satisfactory to the town manager or his designee. 
(b)  Any person who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may within the time allowed by this article request the town manager in writing to remove such condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making such request. 
Sec. 14-15. - Cost of nuisance abatement to be charged to owner of premises; statement of charges. 
(a)  Upon a determination that a public nuisance as described in this article exists, the town manager or his designee shall notify in writing the owner, occupant or person in possession of the premises in question of the condition constituting such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof within the ten days from the receipt of such written notice. 
(b)  Within the ten-day period mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the town manager or his designee made pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the town board of commissioners by given written notice of appeal to the town clerk. The filing of the appeal shall stay the abatement of the nuisance by the town until a final determination by the board, unless the town manager or his designee certifies to the board that, because of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that, because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with the effective enforcement of this chapter. In that case, abatement proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the town board of commissioners or a court, issued on application of the party seeking the stay, for due cause shown, after notice to the town manager or his designee. In the event no appeal is taken, the town may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  The board, in the event an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (b) of this section and after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings of the town manager or his designee, may reverse the findings made pursuant to subsection above; but if the board shall uphold the findings of the town manager or his designee made pursuant to such subsection, the board shall adopt an ordinance specifically declaring the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and public nuisance and directing the appropriate town employees to cause the condition or conditions to be abated. 
Sec. 14-16. - Lien created upon failure to pay nuisance abatement costs. 
    In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance described by this article are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of the statement of charges as provided for in this section, such charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
Sec. 14-17. - Second and subsequent violations. 
    Upon second and subsequent violations of section 14-11(2), during the same calendar year, no notice of the violation as required in section 14-13 shall be given, but the town, through its agents and employees, may enter upon such lots or premises and cut and destroy such weeds, and the costs and expense thereof shall be paid by the owner, lessee, occupant or agent or it shall become a lien against the property the same as taxes as enacted by The General Assembly in House Bill 1078. For each additional violation, the municipality shall charge the violator the expense of the action and a surcharge of up to 50 percent over the expense to remedy the preceding violation. Notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail. 
Sec. 14-18. - Civil penalty provided. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this article, as set forth in section 1-6, pertaining to enforcement of ordinances. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00. No penalty shall be imposed if the offender abates the nuisance within the prescribed time or requests the town to abate the nuisance as allowed in section 14-14. If the offender does not abate the nuisance within the prescribed time limit, the penalty may be imposed for each day the nuisance remained after the written notice of violation was given and terminating on the date the nuisance was abated by the town. 
(c)  The offender shall be issued a written citation by delivery in person or mailed by certified or registered mail. The civil penalty must be paid within the ten days of its receipt by the offender. 
(d)  The penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has been issued a citation. 
Chapter 15 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means all nonputrescible waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass, yard clippings and similar materials. 
Sec. 15-2. - Accumulation of refuse. 
    Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 15-3. - Deposit of refuse. 
(a)  No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the town any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied premises within the town. 
(b)  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other place upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the town, except in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the supervisor. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
Sec. 15-4. - Use of town refuse receptacles by nonresidents. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person residing outside the corporate limits of the town to bring quantities of garbage, refuse, or rubbish accumulated outside of the town and deposit them in any refuse receptacle maintained by the town along the streets or elsewhere within the corporate limits of the town. 
Sec. 15-5. - Hazard Communication Right to Know Program. 
    The town's Hazard Communication Right to Know Program is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if set out at length herein. 
Secs. 15-6-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 15-26. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a program for the collection of compostable yard waste as well as white goods and bulky trash items such as household furnishings. Further, this article requires the mandatory separation of certain compostable yard and leaf waste material from garbage, rubbish and other trash by the resident's curbside for collection by the town. All refuse accumulated in the town shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the town, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 6), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 15-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulky trash means waste produced by a residential consumer other than what is ordinarily disposed of on a weekly basis which cannot be processed by the weekly trash collection. 
    Director of public utilities means the director of public utilities of the town or his agents. 
    Land clearing debris means solid waste which is generated solely from land clearing activities, including, but not limited to stumps, trees, brush and other vegetative waste incidental to tree, brush and stump removal. 
    Light Household Items means household furniture, TVs, mattresses, and box springs. Light household items shall be no larger than seven feet and weigh no more than 300 pounds. 
    Ordinances means the ordinances of the town. 
    White goods means household appliances such as refrigerators, washers, dryers, water heaters, water softeners, stoves, ovens, or other appliances either containing chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants or not. White goods shall be no larger than seven feet and weigh no more than 300 pounds. 
    Yard and leaf waste means solid waste consisting of vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance, including, but not limited to leaves, grass, twigs, certain limbs, hedge trimmings, hay, straw, pine straw, pine cones, and shrubs. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-28. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The collection and removal of yard and leaf waste, white goods, and bulky trash from premises in the town shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of public utilities. Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be upon the advice of the director of public utilities and/or the county health officer. 
Sec. 15-29. - Disposal of yard and leaf waste. 
(a)  The town will endeavor to pick up yard and leaf waste, as defined pursuant to section 15-27, on a weekly basis. Any person desiring to place yard and leaf waste for collection as refuse shall place that material in piles upon the occupant or owner's private property between existing curblines of street and sidewalks or where no such curblines or sidewalks exist on their premises off street rights-of-way and ditches. All leaf, limbs, cuttings and household items should be placed beside the road by 7:00 a.m. on Monday morning. Yard and leaf waste shall be kept separate from and shall not be mixed with any other solid waste material for the purpose of residential collection by the town or its agents. The limbs in each pile should be placed perpendicular to the street and not intertwined or bundled. Each pile should be placed three feet apart and away from the roll out containers, large tree branches and power lines. 
(b)  No person shall burn yard and leaf waste material on the street or sidewalks or on private property within the corporate limits. Burning may be permitted for land clearing or right-of-way maintenance material, provided a state burning permit is obtained and burning is done in compliance with all conditions stated in the permit. 
(c)  The Town will collect two piles of yard waste per property each week, which shall be no longer than four feet wide, four feet deep, and four feet tall. The maximum size of the piles should not exceed five feet in length and four feet in height. Limbs may not exceed five feet in length and six inches in diameter. Residential customers using a commercial landscaper or tree service should insure that the service provider remove the cuttings from the property and not place at the curbline. If yard waste placed for collection exceeds these standards, the town may not be able to collect the yard waste. To the extent the town is unable to collect the yard waste, residents may be notified to remove the debris. If debris is not moved within ten days after notice, such debris will be considered a nuisance pursuant to section 14-11. If the debris is deemed to be a hazard to the safety of the public as stated in section 14-11, the resident or property owner shall remove the debris within 24 hours. 
(d)  Yard and leaf waste materials placed at curbside for collection shall be free from contamination by materials that are not included in the definition of yard and leaf waste provided in section 15-27. Leaves and grass should not be placed in plastic or paper bags. Where yard and leaf waste materials are found to be contaminated, town staff or its agents will not collect the yard and leaf waste until such time as the contaminants are removed by the homeowner. Grass clippings and leaves are collected by a vacuum and therefore must be free from twigs, sticks, rocks and any inorganic material. Leaf, limb hedge cuttings pick up is designed for residential customers. 
(e)  During leaf collection season, residents desiring yard and leaf waste collection by the town or its agents shall rake their leaves to behind the existing curbline of the street or, where no such curbline exists, the leaves shall be placed off the street pavement and between the roadside ditch and front property line. 
(f)  The town manager retains the discretion to collect items out of compliance where it is determined to be necessary for the public good, including storm clean-ups. 
(g)  During Christmas tree collection by the town or its agents, residents shall place their Christmas tree behind the existing curbline of the street or, where no curbline exists, the Christmas tree shall be placed off the street pavement and between the roadside ditch and the front property line. All tinsel, nails, screws, wires, ribbon and other nonvegetative material shall be removed from the Christmas tree by the residents for collection provided that the wreaths are free from wire, screws, metal frames and other nonvegetative material. 
(h)  Yard or leaf waste left for pick up that is not in compliance with this section shall be considered a public nuisance under section 14-11. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note- An ord. adopted Nov. 5, 2018, amended § 15-29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15-29 pertained to precollection practices and derived from Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 5, adopted Aug. 3, 2010. 
Sec. 15-30. - Limitations on service. 
(a)  Curbside yard and leaf waste collection service shall be provided only to residential solid waste customers of the town. This service will not be provided to institutional, business, commercial, or industrial solid waste collection customers, except for the fall and winter leaf collection using leaf vacuum machines. Furthermore, this service does not include the collection of land clearing debris. 
(b)  Only yard and leaf waste materials prepared and handled in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be collected by the town or their agents. 
(c)  The town will not collect any debris cut by a landscaping or tree service contractor. 
Sec. 15-31. - Prohibition against improper disposal and storage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other town ordinance or state statute, no resident of the town shall cause any yard waste, white good, or other bulky trash item to be placed at the curb for a period of time greater than 48 hours without arranging for a pickup by the town in the manner provided for in section 15-30, or with a private contractor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person residing outside the corporate limits of the town to bring quantities of garbage, refuse, or rubbish accumulated outside of the town and deposit them in any refuse receptacle maintained by the town along the streets or elsewhere within the corporate limits of the town. 
(c)  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other place upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the town, except in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the director of public utilities or his agent. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
Sec. 15-32. - Removal of light household items and white goods. 
(a)  The Town of Angier will endeavor to pick up light household items and white goods, as defined by section 15-27, left in front of the resident's personal property along the right-of-way of town streets. Pickup of light household items and white goods are limited to three items per week. If more than three items per property are left for pickup, the town may not be able to pick up any of the items left. 
(b)  The town will not pick up items from storage units, construction debris (such as shingles, sheetrock, lumber, building materials, doors, or windows), carpet, tires, or glass. 
(c)  If the items left do not fall under the category of light household items and white goods, the town may notify the resident to remove the items. If items are not moved within ten days after notice, such items will be considered a nuisance pursuant to section 14-11. If the items are deemed to be a hazard to the safety of the public as stated in section 14-11, the resident or property owner shall remove the items within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note- An ord. adopted Nov. 5, 2018, amended § 15-32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15-32 pertained to disposal of yard and leaf material. 
Sec. 15-33. - Right of entry. 
    The chief of police, the county health officer, code enforcement officer, public works director or any of their assistants shall have the right to enter any premises at any reasonable time for purposes of making inspections or investigations to ensure the health, welfare, and safety of the public. 
Sec. 15-34. - Frequency of collection; quantity limitation. 
    The public utilities director shall have authority to determine the frequency of collection and any limitation on quantity, both residential and commercial. 
Sec. 15-35. - Placement, removal of containers; duties of occupants. 
    Residential accounts will be provided up to two refuse containers and billed for each container requiring pickup on monthly utility bill. Commercial accounts will be provided up to two refuse containers and two recycle containers. Any number of refuse and recycle containers above two will require dumpster service at the owner's expense. 
(1)  Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at a location in such a manner as to be convenient for removal and collection. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any building or any residential unit to: 
a.  Place the refuse container at a location in such a manner as to be convenient for removal and collection. The supervisor may require such placement at any location for reasons of topography, efficiency or emergency. 
b.  Remove the empty container from the place of deposit at curbside or otherwise to the storage location. Such removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
c.  Empty garbage containers must be placed in a storage location behind or at the side rear of the dwelling or business. 
(Ord. of 6-6-17(2)) 
Sec. 15-36. - Disposal of refuse exposed to infectious disease, inflammable or explosive materials. 
(a)  The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collections. 
(b)  Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the supervisor at the expense of the owners or possessors thereof. 
Sec. 15-37. - Disposal of industrial wastes. 
    All industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing operations shall be disposed of by the owner or occupant of the building or premises where such industrial wastes originate. 
Sec. 15-38. - Refuse collectors from outside town. 
    This article shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside the town from hauling such refuse over town streets; provided that such collectors comply with the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the town. 
Sec. 15-39. - Collection and disposal by actual producer. 
    This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse; provided that such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this chapter and with other provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the town. 
Sec. 15-40. - Hauling of waste. 
(a)  The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, persons who desire to dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse, and collectors of refuse from outside the town who desire to haul over the streets of the town shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. 
(b)  The supervisor shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over town streets by outside collectors as he shall find necessary. 
Sec. 15-41. - Civil penalty provided. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this chapter, as set forth in section 1-6, pertaining to enforcement of ordinances. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00. 
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public works, G.S. 133; roads and highways, G.S. 136; special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.; municipal streets, G.S. 160A-296 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Acceptance of streets by town. 
(a)  No street shall be accepted by dedication or map by the town until approval is reviewed by the town manager or approved by the public utilities director. Any streets accepted shall have proper width, proper elevation and proper drainage, and must satisfy all other standards imposed by the town. 
(b)  Once standards are satisfactory, the public utilities director shall supply builders with specifications for the proper size of pipe for drainage. 
(Code 1975, § 13-1; Code 1991, § 16-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Assessment for street paving or surfacing. 
    In all cases where the board of commissioners concludes that any street shall be paved or surfaced, the abutting property owners shall pay one-half of the cost of such paving and the town shall not pay more than one-half of the cost thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13-2; Code 1991, § 16-2) 
State Law reference- Amount of cost assessed, G.S. 160A-217. 
Sec. 16-3. - Approval of plans for new streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open any new street in the town until and unless a plan and map of survey of the proposed street have been made by a licensed surveyor and such plan and map of survey have been submitted to the board of commissioners and approved by the board. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3; Code 1991, § 16-3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Paving of streets by developers. 
    Developers shall pave streets at their own risk. The town will not take over responsibility until 12 months after paving and the streets have been accepted, subject to approval by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1991, § 16-4; Ord. of 7-21-1987(2)) 
Sec. 16-5. - Display of building numbers. 
    Each residence or dwelling shall display its proper and correct numerical designation in such a fashion that such numerical designation is readily visible from the main public street or thoroughfare providing access to such residence or dwelling. The county mandates building numbers for emergency services purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4; Code 1991, § 16-5) 
Sec. 16-6. - Public drains. 
    No person shall obstruct in any manner any street drainage ditch, gutter, drain or culvert so as to prevent the free flow of water therein. 
(Code 1991, § 16-6; Ord. of 11-20-1990) 
Sec. 16-7. - Drainage ditches. 
(a)  The town's public works employees will not go onto private property to maintain ditches. Maintenance on drainage ditches established, built, or existing on private property is the responsibility of the property owner. The town will maintain ditches along street rights-of-way. 
(b)  The town will install drainage pipe only for driveway connections. The property owner requesting the driveway connection will supply the proper pipe. The public works director will approve all piping. Piping not meeting the director's specifications will not be installed. 
(c)  All drainage ditches within the town limits, both on private property and along streets rights-of-way, are to be maintained in such a manner as not to impede the natural flow of water. The property owner is responsible for keeping the ditches free of garbage, refuse, rubbish. 
(d)  The public works department of the town shall have the authority to clean ditches when they are obstructing the flow of water. The necessary expense incurred by the town in cleaning ditches shall constitute a lien against the parcel of property and the collection of the amount secured by such lien shall be enforceable in the same manner as unpaid municipal ad valorem taxes; provided that the public works director shall give to the owner of such property, as shown on the tax records, notice by regular mail of the town's intention to clean the ditch on such owner's property. Such owner shall have a period of ten days from date of the mailing of such notice in which to clean the ditch on his property. 
(Code 1991, § 16-7; Ord. of 5-7-1991; Ord. No. 1102-1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 16-8. - Civil penalty provided. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this section, as set forth in section 1-6, pertaining to enforcement of ordinances. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00. 
(Code 1991, § 16-8) 
Chapter 17 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities authorized to operate public enterprises including water and sewer services, G.S. 160A-312; public enterprises defined, G.S. 160A-311; water and air resources, G.S. 143-211 et seq.; revenue bonds, G.S. 159-80 et seq.; franchises, G.S. 160A-76, 160A-319; ordinances effective on municipal property outside limits, G.S. 160A-176; municipal regulation of the emission of pollutants or contaminants, G.S. 160A-185; health and safety nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.; excavations, placing pipes, etc., G.S. 160A-296. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Statutory authority; responsibilities of town manager. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by G.S. 160A. The town manager shall be the town's authorized representative to enforce this chapter and shall be responsible for the wastewater treatment plant. 
(Code 1991, § 17-1; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Adoption of rates and regulations. 
    The board of commissioners shall from time to time, as it shall deem wise, adopt rates, rules and regulations governing the water and sewer systems of the town, and it shall at all times keep available for inspection by the public a copy of the rates, rules and regulations in force on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 14-2; Code 1991, § 17-2) 
Sec. 17-3. - Pertinent provisions of chapter made part of contracts. 
    All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions of any contract whereby the town furnishes sewer service or water service to any person or performs any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of sewer service or water service. 
(Code 1975, § 14-8; Code 1991, § 17-3) 
Sec. 17-4. - Applicability of chapter to mobile homes and mobile buildings. 
    This chapter shall apply to mobile home or mobile building owners and occupiers and to the lots on which such mobile homes or mobile buildings may be located, in the same manner as the chapter applies to permanent construction buildings. 
(Code 1975, § 14-9; Code 1991, § 17-4) 
Sec. 17-5. - Correction of violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the town with written notice, sent by certified mail, stating the nature of the violation and that the violation must be corrected within 72 hours of the receipt of the written notice. For serious problems of design, coordination, and the like, the time for correction may be extended by the town manager. The offender, within the period of time stated in such notice, shall permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond such time limit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 (as set out in section 1-6) for each violation. Each day on which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the town for any expenses, loss or damage occasioned by the town by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1975, § 14-7; Code 1991, § 17-5; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-7) 
Sec. 17-6. - Water service deposit. 
    Any person desiring town water service shall, before obtaining such service, be required to make a deposit in an amount as determined from time to time by ordinance of the town as prescribed by the town board of commissioners. This deposit is to be charged to renters only; homeowners will be excluded from the deposit requirement. 
(Code 1991, § 17-6; Ord. of 4-18-1989, § 14-3) 
Sec. 17-7. - Rates. 
    The fees, charges, and rates for water and sewer service from the town water and sewer systems shall be as established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1975, § 14-4; Code 1991, § 17-7) 
Sec. 17-8. - Sewer service charge to commence on completion sewer tap. 
    When a sewer tap is made by the town, the sewer service charge will start immediately upon completion. 
(Code 1975, § 14-5; Code 1991, § 17-8) 
Sec. 17-9. - Billing; disconnection of service for nonpayment; disconnection of meter. 
(a)  All residential accounts shall be billed by individual meters and require individual sewer connections, where possible. Where two residences share one meter, each shall be billed the flat rate plus one-half of the usage above the flat rate amount. Effective upon adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, individual meters will be required for all residential, business, commercial and industrial accounts. 
(b)  All businesses, commercial and industrial accounts will be billed by meter. If a meter becomes inoperable, such accounts will be billed on the basis of the average of the last three billings' usage until the meter can be placed back into operation. 
(c)  Criteria and requirements concerning the reading of water meters, payment of water bills, and disconnection of service shall be as established from time to time. 
(d)  The fee to reconnect water due to nonpayment of a water bill shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(e)  If a water meter which had been cut off due to nonpayment of a water bill is turned on by the resident or a person acting in the resident's behalf, or a device is inserted to bypass the installed water meter or there is any effort to tamper or meddle with a meter for the measurement of water supplied by the town, the water meter will be removed by the town and a fee as determined from time to time by ordinance will be charged, as well as a fee to reconnect the water. 
(Code 1975, § 14-21; Code 1991, § 17-9; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-21) 
Sec. 17-10. - Returned checks. 
    If a check is returned for payment of the water and sewer account, the town will immediately, after notification by the bank, contact the person who wrote the check and request that they satisfy the check amount within three working days. A returned check penalty, in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance, will be added to the amount due. If the check has not been cleared after three working days, in addition, water service will be discontinued to the customer at the start of the next workday. 
(Code 1991, § 17-10; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-6) 
Sec. 17-11. - Discontinuance of water service for emergencies, repairs. 
    The town reserves the right to cut off the water supply for emergencies, breaks or repairs being made. When possible, all affected water users will be notified in advance by the town. 
(Code 1975, § 14-16; Code 1991, § 17-11) 
Sec. 17-12. - Discharge of wastewater generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with regulations of the state division of environmental management and the state department of environment, health, and natural resources. 
(b)  Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, cesspool, septic tank, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1991, § 17-12; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-12) 
Sec. 17-13. - Private wastewater disposal systems. 
(a)  Where a public sewer main is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written approval of the town. A private wastewater disposal system shall not be put into use until the installation is approved by the town. A representative of the town shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health and state division of environmental management. 
(b)  No approval shall be given for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface disposal where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. 
(c)  No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. The owner shall maintain all private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 14-13; Code 1991, § 17-13) 
Secs. 17-14-17-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER QUALITY PROTECTION/BACKFLOW PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power to require connections to water or sewer service. G.S. 160A-317. 

Sec. 17-38. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means an unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. An approved air gap vertical separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap be less than two inches. 
    Approved means certified in writing by the building inspector as an acceptable device or methodology for the purpose of backflow prevention. 
    Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than public water supply. 
    Backflow means any flow of water into the public water supply from any other source due to a cross connection, auxiliary intake, interconnection, backpressure, backsiphonage, any combination thereof or other cause. 
    Backflow prevention device means an approved effective device method use to prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply. The type of device required shall be based on degree of hazard, existing or potential. 
    Backpressure means any circumstance in which the pressure on the public water supply may be reduced to the point that the elevation and atmospheric pressure on a source of water other than the public water supply may result in a pressure to be greater than the pressure on the public water supply and may result in a backflow. 
    Backsiphonage means any circumstance in which the pressure on the public water supply may be reduced to the point that the elevation and atmospheric pressure on a source of water other than the public water supply may result in a pressure to be greater than the pressure on the public water supply and may result in a backflow. 
    Certified tester means a person who has proven his/her competency to test, repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention devices as evidenced by certification of successful completion of a training program approved by the public works director. 
    Confinement device means a backflow prevention device, as approved and required, installed within a private plumbing or distribution system to isolate a localized hazard from the remainder of said system. 
    Consumer means any person, firm, or corporation responsible for any property at which water from the town public water supply is received. In the absence of other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of record shall be ultimately responsible. 
    Containment device means a backflow prevention device, as approved and required, installed at the point of separation between the public water supply and a private service or private distribution system or at the point of metering. 
    Contamination means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective checkvalve or backpressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
    Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective checkvalve or backpressure valve, or because of any other arrangement. 
    Cross connection control coordinator refers to the official position established and authorized by the town designated by the public works director to administer, interpret this section and who shall be a certified tester. 
    Double checkvalve backflow prevention device means an approved assembly composed of two single, spring-loaded independently operating checkvalves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly, and having suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each checkvalve. 
    Dual checkvalve means an approved device containing two independently acting checkvalves in series. 
    Fire line means a system of pipes and equipment used to supply water in an emergency for the purpose of extinguishing fires. 
    Interconnection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, heat exchanger, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or substance which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means an approved assembly containing an independently operating spring-loaded checkvalve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the checkvalve. The assembly must be equipped with suitable connections for testing the proper operation of the device and tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly. 
    Public water supply means the water distribution system of the town as used by its in-town customers and its out-of-town customers, and which supply is recognized as the county water supply system, as permitted by the state department of environmental and natural resources. 
    Reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device (RPZ) means an approved device containing within its structure, two spring-loaded independently operating checkvalves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two checkvalves. The first checkvalve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either checkvalve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checkvalves less than the supply pressure. This device shall have suitable connections for testing the proper operation of the device, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device. 
(Ord. of 8-2005; Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 7), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 17-39. - Compliance with federal and state law. 
    The town will comply with the federal safe drinking water act, the state drinking water act, and state building code, which pertain to cross connections, auxiliary intakes and interconnections, and establish an effective ongoing program to control potential sources of contamination of the public water supply. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-40. - Unlawful connections. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake or interconnection to be made; or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-41. - Inspection of property. 
    It is the duty, upon request of the public works director, of the cross connection coordinator to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections shall be set by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-42. - Right of access. 
    The building inspector, or authorized representative, shall have the right to enter, at reasonable time, any nonresidential property served by a connection to the town public water supply for the purpose of performing the duties of this article. In those cases in which the property owner chooses not to provide such access, the building inspector or authorized representative, may designate the location as a high hazard in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-43. - Existing conditions. 
    Any consumer shall be allowed 90 days to correct any cross connections, auxiliary intakes, interconnections or other hazard as specified in this article without penalty. The 90 days will be from the date of receipt of the notification given by the cross connection coordinator, or building inspector. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-44. - Hazardous uses. 
(a)  The following uses shall be classified as hazardous: 
(1)  Hazardous uses include, but are not limited to: pumps and tanks handling sewage, radioactive, lethal, or toxic substances, boiler and steam connections, sewer waste lines, low inlets to receptacles containing toxic substances, coils or jackets used as heat exchangers, flushvalve toilets without vacuum breaks, bacterial and viral materials, private wells or other private water supply, irrigation systems, water systems or hose connections with booster pumps, carbonation equipment, or similar hazard potential as determined by the cross connection coordinator. 
(2)  Any location at which the nature of mode of operations within a premises is such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing or at which there is a likelihood in the determination of the cross connection coordinator that protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected. 
(3)  Any facility which contains, but is not limited to, a bottling plant, cannery, building having five or more stories, battery manufacturer, exterminator, greenhouse, chemical processing plant, dairy, dye works, film laboratory, car wash, hospital, commercial laboratory, laundry, metal fabricating operations, mortuary, swimming pool, morgue, x-ray equipment, medical office with laboratory, aspirator, medical washing equipment, packing house, plating plant, poultry house, power plant, nuclear reactor, those fire sprinkler systems equipped with facilities for introduction of freeze preventive chemicals or other substances other than water, dental office, any radioactive material, restaurant, or shopping mall with a tenant conducting any activity listed in this section and sewage pump or treatment facilities. 
(b)  All installations described in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed hazardous uses, and must have a containment device in the form of a reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device provided that, if the consumer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the cross connection coordinator that sufficient internal confinement devices have been installed and tested. The cross connection coordinator may require that the consumer provide engineering drawings sealed by a professional engineer of installations within the premises, which provide complete internal protection against cross connection. Any such connection shall be considered a cross connection for the purpose of determining the type of containment device required. Each internal confinement device shall be one of the following, as approved by the building inspector or his authorized representative: reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device, double checkvalve backflow prevention device, air-gap; vacuum break-pressure type, or dual checkvalve. Each reduced pressure zone principal backflow prevention device serving as an internal confinement device shall have a mesh strainer immediately upstream of the inlet gate valve. 
(c)  No person shall fill any tanks or tankers which include the following: those containing pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or residues, flush trucks, street sweepers, and nonpotable water tankers from a public water system except with an approved air gap fill or an approved reduced pressure backflow prevent or properly installed on the tank or tanker or on the public water supply fill pipeline or hose. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-45. - Other connections. 
(a)  Services to single-family residential units, not otherwise required by the Code to have other containment devices, may have a containment device in the form of an approved dual checkvalve on all such services for which meters are applied for more than 90 days following the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, said dual checkvalves or other containment devices as required shall be installed by the owner's representative prior to the installation of the meter by the town public works department. On all such services for which meters have been applied prior to that date, said dual checkvalve shall be installed by the town public works department, provided that the town reserves the right to charge the owner or occupant of any residence for the cost of said device and its installation. Maintenance of dual checkvalve containment devices installed in accordance with this section shall be conducted by the town public works department. Testable containment devices that are required on lawn irrigation water systems must be tested every three years by a contractor who has been approved by the town. 
(b)  All other connections to the public water supply of the town shall have containment devices in the form of a double checkvalve backflow prevention device as set forth in this section. This shall include water mains installed to the town's standards, and with town supervision, but which are not maintained by the town including but not limited to manufactured home parks, apartments, group housing projects, and other private distribution systems of similar hazard potential as determined by the public works director or building inspector or his authorized representative. Private distribution systems shall be configured so as to provide looped mains, with two or more containment devices on each building water service connection and at dead-end branch mains. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-46. - Installation of containment devices. 
(a)  The containment devices shall be located out of the street right-of-way on the water main side of any plumbing connections, where feasible. When installed in a building, the device shall be located on the service line immediately after its entrance into the building. Each containment and confinement device shall be installed in a location that is physically accessible for inspection and testing as determined by the cross connection coordinator. Containment devices which have been buried in the ground do not satisfy the provisions of this article. Each reduced pressure principle zone device shall be installed such that flooding of the device is unlikely as determined by the building inspector. 
(b)  The public works director shall maintain a list of approved manufacturers and models of hazard containment devices and drawings of standard installation, copies to be made available through the office of the public works director. All reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention devices and double checkvalve backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. All vacuum breaks and dual checkvalve devices shall be approved by the American Society for Sanitary Engineers. All installations and materials shall conform to town standards as set by the public works director. 
(c)  In those cases in which containment and/or confinement devices have been previously installed by prior owners, the town, or other parties, the responsibility for maintenance, testing and replacement as applicable shall be with the consumer. 
(d)  The cost of said means of containment, and any other plumbing modifications necessary and convenient thereto, and the testing and maintenance thereof is to be paid for by the consumer. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-47. - New construction. 
    All buildings proposed for connection to the public water system of the town for which building permits have been issued, shall be equipped with an approved and tested as properly functioning backflow prevention device, as prescribed herein, prior to the issuance of a certificate of code compliance for that building. If a building permit was issued for the building prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or a building permit was not required, the building shall be considered to be an existing building prior to the effective date in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-48. - Notification of consumer. 
    Upon identification of a hazard, or hazard potential, as specified in sections 17-44 and 17-45, the cross connection coordinator shall notify the consumer of record of the property on which the hazard exists of the following: 
(1)  Location of hazard. 
(2)  Nature of hazard observed. 
(3)  Date hazard observed. 
(4)  Section of Code applicable. 
(5)  Requirements of Code. 
Such notification is to be made by certified mail, with return receipt requested. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-49. - Change in nature of use. 
    The building inspector shall be notified by the consumer of the nature of use of the property changes so as to change the hazard classification of that property, as set forth in sections 17-44 and 17-45. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-50. - Consumer responsibilities. 
(a)  The consumer shall, upon notification, as specified in section 17-48, install the hazard containment device as required within 90 days from the date of notification. 
(b)  If, after expiration of 90 days, the containment device has not been installed in conformance with standards set by the town, and/or said containment devices are not in a proper working condition, the building inspector may notify the public works director for the purpose of discontinuing the public water service at that premises, and service shall not be restored until such devices have been installed. The building inspector may permit an extension of up to 90 additional days if compliance efforts are underway and the existence of hardship can be demonstrated. 
(c)  The town shall bear no liability for direct or consequential damages caused by the discontinuance of service pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-51. - Testing and maintenance of devices. 
    The consumer at each property at which containment and/or confinement devices have been installed, except those with devices installed in accordance with section 17-45(a), shall have each containment and/or confinement devices tested on an annual basis, and perform any routine maintenance to such device as recommended by the manufacturer, and provide the cross connection coordinator with a report documenting the inspection and work. The consumer shall cause such maintenance, or repairs to be made, rendering the device fully operational. Failure of the consumer to perform that testing and maintenance shall be cause for the premises to be made, rendering the device fully operational. Failure of the consumer to perform that testing and maintenance shall be cause for the premises to be deemed an immediate public health hazard. The public works director and/or building inspector may immediately thereafter discontinue public water supply service to that premises and service shall not be restored until such devices have been rendered operational. Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicated containment or confinement devices shall be provided by the property owner to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the device or devices. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil penalty. Violation of any provision of this article may subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days after the assessment has become final by exhaustion of the appeal process established by this section, or by failure to appeal the assessment. The civil penalty for violation of any provision of this cross connection control article shall not exceed $400.00 per day for each day of continuous violation, or a cumulative or single civil penalty of $10,000.00. The civil penalty for willful violation of any provision of this article shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day of a continuous violation, or a cumulative or single civil penalty of $20,000.00. 
(b)  Assessment. Any civil penalty shall be assessed by the town manager, upon the recommendation of the building inspector or public works director, and shall be based upon the reasonable estimated cost of correcting the cited violation, the magnitude of the potential risk posed to the public health, safety and welfare by the violation, and the cost of the public safety or other emergency response caused by the violation. The town manager shall have served written notice of the civil penalty assessment to the offender and set out with reasonable care the basis of the amount so assessed. 
(c)  Equitable relief. An appropriate equitable remedy, including a mandatory or prohibitory injunction, issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction may endorse the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Enforcement option. The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or instead of the penalties established by other sections of the Code. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-53. - Limitation of liability. 
    The town shall not be held liable, for any cause, for failure to detect any unit failing to operate adequately, or failure to identify any specific hazard which may result in contamination of its public water supply, nor shall this article diminish the responsibility of any property owner from whose property a contamination of the public water supply may originate. 
(Ord. of 8-2005) 
ARTICLE III. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 17-54. - Time limit for making connections. 
    At such time as a public water or sewer main becomes available to a property, a direct connection shall be made to the public water or sewer main within 60 days. The town board of commissioners may alter this time limit under special circumstances at the request of the property owner. 
(Code 1975, § 14-11; Code 1991, § 17-32) 
Sec. 17-55. - Installation of lines by developers. 
    Developers shall install water and sewer lines, with town approval and supervision, and then turn them over to the town. 
(Code 1991, § 17-33; Mo. of 4-15-1986) 
Sec. 17-56. - Installation of taps by developers. 
(a)  Developers shall install water and sewer taps before the streets are paved. 
(b)  Taps shall be conducted only by the town staff or licensed utility contractors or licensed plumbers. 
(Code 1991, § 17-34; Ord. of 7-21-1987(1); Mo. of 8-3-1993) 
Sec. 17-57. - Acreage fees. 
(a)  Water and sewer service acreage fees are established in order to recover the cost of previous capital investments in the water and sewer systems, and to build capital reserve funds for future investment in water and sewer collection distribution and treatment facilities. Fees are as established from time to time by ordinance, set forth in the rate and fee schedule of the town. 
(b)  In addition to all other charges prescribed by ordinance or resolution, there shall be an acreage fee charge for connecting to the water system and the sewer system of the town. For residential development, these charges shall be calculated on a per lot basis pursuant to the rate and fee schedule. For nonresidential development, these charges shall be based upon the meter size for the project. These charges are to be paid as follows: 
(1)  In the case of a residential subdivision, these fees are payable prior to the approval of the final plat of the subdivision or an approved phase of the subdivision. Existing lots or parcels which were approved prior to August 4, 1987, shall be subject to the fee at the time a building permit is issued. 
(2)  In the case of a nonresidential application, or when there is no subdivision of land involved, these fees are payable prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  These fees are not applicable to land that is proposed for redevelopment, provided that the zoning classification and meter size do not change. If the meter size or zoning classification change to a higher rate of acreage fees, the resulting difference in fees must be paid. 
(Code 1991, § 17-35; Ord. of 8-4-1987, § 14-43; Mo. of 12-2-1987(1); Mo. of 9-18-1990; Ord. of 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 17-58. - Application for water connection. 
    Any person wishing to connect with the water system of the town shall go to the town hall office and pay the water deposit, if applicable, and other associated fees. By requesting connection to the water system of the town, the applicant agrees to obey the rules and regulations of the town, to give a ten-day notice in case he shall desire to stop using town water, to be responsible for water charges in case such notice shall not be given, and to waive all right of action against the town in case the town shall find it necessary to cut off such property owner's or user's water supply. 
(Code 1991, § 17-36; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-14) 
Sec. 17-59. - Water cutoff valve; sewer lines and cleanout; contractor's water deposit. 
    All applicants for water and sewer connections, in addition to other requirements of this chapter, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  There shall be installed on each water line a cutoff valve on the owner's side of the water meter box which will provide a means of stopping the flow of water without the necessity of using the town's valves in the meter box. 
(2)  All sewer lines from buildings to mains shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe, ABS schedule 40, or PVC lines shall not be smaller than four inches in diameter. 
(3)  There shall be installed on each sewer line a sewer cleanout. 
(4)  All items mentioned in subsections (1) and (2) of this section must be approved by the town prior to the town's connecting water to the premises. 
(5)  On new construction projects, the contractor or someone acting in his behalf must post a water deposit as would be required for a renter of the property prior to the town's connecting water to the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 14-15; Code 1991, § 17-37; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-15) 
Sec. 17-60. - Unauthorized taps; tampering. 
(a)  Prohibited without consent. No taps into water or sewer system lines of the town subject to jurisdiction of the town or serviced by the town, or into any lateral lines installed on and maintained by any individual property owner or user, shall be made without the consent and approval of the town or its duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Tampering with meters or lines. It shall be unlawful for any person personally or by and through agents, servants or employees, in any way or manner, to tamper or meddle with a meter for the measurement of water supplied by the town, or to attempt to repair such meter, or to tamper or meddle with any sewer or water lines of the town or under the town's jurisdiction or which are serviced by the town. 
(c)  Liability for damages resulting from violation of section. Any person violating any of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the town by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Continuing violations. Each day that a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section is allowed to be continued by any person shall constitute a separate offense, for which such person may be convicted and fined up to $500.00 or imprisoned for up to 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1975, §§ 14-17-14-20; Code 1991, § 17-38; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-17) 
Sec. 17-61. - Payment of tap fee. 
(a)  No water or sewer connection shall be made for any premises without first paying the tap fee as listed on the fee schedule, which can be changed from time to time by the board of commissioners, before any construction is begun by the town. No connection tap charge shall be accepted away from town hall finance offices. 
(b)  Tap-on fees are calculated for each tap. The tap-on fees are based on the number of dwelling or office units. For example, a 40-unit apartment complex would pay for 40 water and sewer tap fees. A duplex would pay for two water and sewer tap-on fees. 
(c)  Each dwelling or office unit will be separately metered. For example, a 40-unit apartment complex would be required to install 40 separate water meters. A duplex would be required to install two water meters. 
(Code 1975, § 14-23; Code 1991, § 17-39; Mo. of 9-18-1990) 
Sec. 17-62. - Meters and other equipment property of town. 
    All meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the town in installing any water connection shall be and remain the property of the town. 
(Code 1975, § 14-24; Code 1991, § 17-40) 
Sec. 17-63. - Connections from outside town. 
    No connection of any water line or sewer system outside of the town shall be made to any part of the town water or sewer system outside of the town shall be made to any part of the town water or sewer system without special permission from the board of commissioners and on such terms as the board of commissioners shall prescribe. 
(Code 1975, § 14-22; Code 1991, § 17-41) 
Sec. 17-64. - Connection fee. 
    All homeowners will be required to pay a nonrefundable connection fee as established by the rate and fee schedule, as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1991, § 17-42; Ord. of 2-19-1991) 
Sec. 17-65. - Interceptor taps. 
    No service connections shall be made to sanitary sewers 15 inches in diameter or larger without the approval of the public utilities director. Services on 15-inch and larger mains will require connection at an existing manhole or installation of a manhole. 
(Code 1991, § 17-43; Mo. of 8-3-1993) 
Sec. 17-66. - No tap policy. 
    No connection of any sewer system shall be made to any part of the town sewer system for any development occurring within the floodplain limits. The floodplain is defined as the area inundated during a 100-year frequency event. 
(Code 1991, § 17-44; Mo. of 8-3-1993) 
Secs. 17-67-17-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXTENSION OF MAINS 

Sec. 17-90. - Application. 
(a)  When any property owner or developer desires to have water or sanitary sewer service extended to and along any public street or other public way where no water or sanitary sewer main exists, the property owner or developer shall apply in writing, on forms provided by the town, to the town manage or his designee, for such water and sewer service. 
(b)  When application is made for water and sewer extensions to serve an area or development project that is planned as a part of a larger project, all of which is not to be developed at the time application is made, the owner or developer shall submit plans in sufficient detail to the town manager or his designee in order that adequate size of facilities can be determined and plans for the orderly extension of service can be made. 
(Code 1991, § 17-61; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-25) 
Sec. 17-91. - Extension of both water and sewer mains required; minimum distance for extensions; minimum size of mains. 
(a)  Extension of both water mains and sewer mains shall be required when service is requested. Extension of one utility without the simultaneous extension of the other shall be permitted only if water or sewer mains are available and considered adequate by the town. 
(b)  The minimum distance for the extension of water mains or sewer mains shall be determined by the town. In general, the minimum distance for extensions shall be one platted block, or in the case of water mains, from the main line valve to a valve and in the case of sanitary sewers from manhole to manhole. 
(c)  The minimum size water main shall be six inches, and the minimum size sewer main shall be eight inches. 
(Code 1975, § 14-26; Code 1991, § 17-62) 
Sec. 17-92. - Financing. 
(a)  When application for a water and sewer extension is received, the town manager or other designated person will estimate the cost of the project, to the cost of extending water and sanitary sewer service for the required distance. If the application is approved, subject to the availability of funds, the town will install, or have installed by contract under its supervision, the facilities and extensions which have been approved, if the property owner or developer has deposited with the town a sum of money sufficient to defray the total cost of extending the water and sewer facilities in accordance with approved plans and specifications. When the project is completed and the final cost is determined, if the final cost of extending facilities exceeds or is less than the estimated cost deposited with the town, the property owner or developer will be charged or refunded an amount equal to the difference. In lieu of depositing a sum of money equal to the estimated cost, the owner or developer may post a bond with the town in an amount sufficient to defray the estimated cost of extending services. 
(b)  Before future connections are made to that portion of a water main or sanitary sewer main constructed under the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, the town shall collect from the property owner desiring a connection an amount per front foot for water and per front foot for sewerage and refund the amount collected to the owner or developer who financed the original construction of such facilities; however, no refunds will be made after the expiration of five years from the date the water or sewer line was constructed. 
(c)  As an alternative method of financing water and sewer extensions, the board of commissioners may elect to extend water and sewer facilities upon request or upon its own motion to any area not serviced, and access the cost therefore against the abutting property owners at an equal rate per front foot. 
(d)  Where the town deems it advisable to install larger size facilities than the required minimum, the difference in the cost for the larger size facilities above the cost of required minimum size facilities shall be paid for by the town. 
(e)  Fire hydrants, pumping stations, outfall lines, manholes and other facilities installed for general public use shall be paid for by the town. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the board of commissioners from extending water and sewer facilities without requiring a deposit or property assessment when the general public interest demands such extension, and in such instances the cost shall be borne by the town. 
(Code 1975, § 14-27; Code 1991, § 17-63; Ord. of 1-3-1989(1), § 14-27) 
Sec. 17-93. - Extensions outside corporate limits. 
(a)  Applications for water and sewer extensions outside the corporate limits shall be made in the same manner as required for extensions inside the corporate limits. 
(b)  If an application for water and sewer extensions outside the corporate limits is approved by the board of commissioners, the town will not participate to any extent in the cost of such extensions, and the owner or developer shall be required to pay for the entire cost of all extensions; however, the town may participate to the extent agreed upon by the board of commissioners in the cost of larger facilities required which are in excess of the cost of facilities required to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation, and all water and sewer lines located outside the corporate limits shall become the property of the town at the time such facilities are connected to the town systems as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 14-28; Code 1991, § 17-64) 
Sec. 17-94. - Plans and specifications. 
    Any water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the provisions of this article shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and requirements of the town. 
(Code 1975, § 14-29; Code 1991, § 17-65) 
Sec. 17-95. - Ownership of facilities. 
    All facilities installed under the provisions of this article, whether within or outside the corporate limits, shall become the sole property of the town and shall be under its jurisdiction sand control for all purposes whatsoever, and a deed to the town for such facilities shall be executed prior to the time any extensions provided for in this article are connected to the town system. 
(Code 1975, § 14-30; Code 1991, § 17-66) 
Secs. 17-96-17-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Federal law reference- Local delegated pretreatment programs must effectively control and document wastewater discharge from certain industrial users to publicly owned treatment works, 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii); general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403.1 et seq.; categorical pretreatment regulations, 50 CFR 401.10-471.105. 
State Law reference- Local pretreatment programs, 15A N.C. Admin. Code 2H.0900 et seq. 

Sec. 17-119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the board of commissioners. 
    BOD or biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    COD or chemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of the constituents of the wastewater with potassium dichromate solution under standard laboratory procedure, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Color means the true color due to the substances in solution, expressed in parts per million. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes, other than domestic sewage, resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial establishments. 
    Normal strength sewage means that liquid waste having chemical concentrations not in excess of that to be expected from domestic sewage, which, for the purposes of this article, shall mean BOD equal to or less than 250 milligrams per liter, suspended solids equal to or less than 250 milligrams per liter, total solids equal to or less than 750 milligrams per liter, COD equal to or less than 600 milligrams per liter, ammonia nitrogen equal to or less than 30 milligrams per liter and other chemical and physical characteristics not in excess of those prohibited by this article. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. A stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. A pH valve indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Receiving stream means that body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the waters discharged from the sewage treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and industrial waste, except that the type expressly prohibited by this article, without the admixture of surface water and stormwater. 
    Standard laboratory procedure means the test for a particular constituent of the wastewater as outlined in Standard Methods, American Public Health Association, latest edition. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Total solids means the weight of residue per unit volume of sewage upon evaporation of the liquid portion at 103 to 105 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(Code 1975, § 14-31; Code 1991, § 17-86) 
Sec. 17-120. - Right of entry; authority to exclude waste. 
(a)  The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Authority is hereby granted to the approving authority to temporarily exclude any industrial waste, whether pretreated or not, from the sanitary sewers whenever, in its opinion, such action is necessary for the purpose of determining the effects of such wastes upon the sewers, sewage treatment works or sewage treatment plant. 
(Code 1975, § 14-37; Code 1991, § 17-87) 
Sec. 17-121. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following waste materials into any town sewer. 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 160 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, fish scales, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, ground paper products or other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 6 or higher than 9, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a BOD in excess of 500 parts per million by weight. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing more than 500 parts per million by weight of suspended solids. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes having an objectionable color which is not removable in the existing sewage treatment plant processes. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or any other material in sufficient quantity to insure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage treatment plant. 
(11)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(12)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any surface water or stormwater from roof or yard drains or unpolluted cooling water. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet. 
(b)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted into the sanitary sewers by the town after approved pretreatment. 
(Code 1975, § 14-32; Code 1991, § 17-88) 
Sec. 17-122. - Fats, oils and greases control. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the town's sanitary sewer collection system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cooking establishments means those establishments engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foods and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, extended care facilities, school cafeterias (public and private), and daycare facilities where meals for more than six children are prepared, served or otherwise made available for human consumption. 
    Fats, oils, and greases means the polar organic compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
    Grease trap or interceptor refers to an approved device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors." 
    Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Noncooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foods that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen food preparation and serving establishments. 
    User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the town, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the town's sanitary sewer collection system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(c)  Grease interceptor maintenance, recordkeeping, and grease removal. Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the public works director or his designee. grease interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in noncooking or cold dairy and frozen food establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments when they are deemed necessary by the public works director for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentrations from subject grease interceptor to exceed 325 milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA Method 1664 or 275 milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA method 413. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the public works director or his designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and town inspection. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capabilities or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less than every 30 days. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall: 
(1)  Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the uniform plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a sludge pocket. 
(2)  Remove any accumulated grease in the grease trap and sludge pocket as required but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user's expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
(3)  Accept the following conditions: If any skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from the grease interceptor are treated in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after said onsite treatment, the user shall be responsible for attainment of the established grease numerical limit consistent with and contained in this ordinance for all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor into the town sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
(4)  Ensure that all waste material removed from grease traps and interceptors are disposed of in a manner that complies with all federal, state and local statutes, rules regulations, policies and ordinances. 
(5)  Maintain a written record of trap maintenance for three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the town at all times. 
(6)  Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved. The term "consistent" shall mean any wastewater sample taken from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of the numerical limit attainment described in this ordinance. If an establishment desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of the nearest town sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside the building. 
b.  Existing plumbing at or within a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site. 
(7)  Understand and agree that: The use of biological additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the town's public works director. Any establishment using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the trap's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(8)  Understand and agree that: The use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the town's public works director, and the county department of health. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(9)  Understand and agree that: The town's public works director reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of such traps. 
(10)  If non-cooking establishments, be exempted, from the requirements of this section after an inspection of the subject premises and submission of adequate supporting documentation, as deemed necessary in the sole and absolute discretion of the public works director upon the prior written approval of the town's public works director. At a minimum, such supporting, documentation shall include: detailed plumbing plans for the subject premises, and a full and detailed list of all potential sources of grease. 
(11)  In other facilities, as deemed necessary by the town's public works director also be required to install grease traps and interceptors. If an impact and such overflow, spill, leak or other event is attributed in part or in whole to a particular user, then the town will seek enforcement action under the sewer use ordinance, and/or the pretreatment enforcement plan. For purposes of this section, an overflow, spill, leak or other event shall be deemed to have an environmental impact when (i) such overflow or other event includes an amount of wastewater equal to or in excess of 1,000 gallons or lesser volume if otherwise stated by state or federal guidelines), or (ii) any amount of wastewater reaches any body of surface water. 
(12)  Not connect nongrease-laden sources may be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(13)  Supply: 
a.  An adequate sampling point downstream of the grease trap or interceptor, prior to mixing with other sanitary flows; and 
b.  An accessible entry into each chamber of the grease trap or interceptor. The minimum requirement for the sampling point shall be a four-inch vertical cleanout. 
(14)  Provide access manholes with a minimum diameter of 24 inches over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. All manhole construction shall conform to the town specifications. 
(15)  Empty and service grease traps and interceptors to comply with the performance criteria in this ordinance as often as necessary, but in any event no longer than every 30 days. Under-the-counter grease traps and interceptors shall be cleaned at least daily, and shall comply with the performance criteria in this ordinance. There shall be no reintroduction of wastewater back into the grease trap or interceptor unless and until said wastewater has been proven to contain 325 mg/l or less of grease. Under no circumstances shall the sludge or scum layer be reintroduced or discharged into the town's wastewater collection and/or treatment system. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No later than one year after adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, all users shall install grease traps or interceptors designed to limit the introduction, contribution and discharge of greases into the town's wastewater collection and/or treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors with appropriate sampling or inspection points shall be installed at the user's expense whenever any user operates a commercial establishment, industrial establishment, or a cooking establishment, or when required by the public works director. Grease traps and interceptors must have a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons or more as required to effect a maximum grease concentration of 325 mg/l. 
(2)  Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, although installation of grease interceptors will be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this ordinance for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease interceptors. 
(3)  If an obstruction of a town sewer main occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the town's sewer collection system, the town will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the town's ordinance, against the generator or contributor of such grease. 
(4)  Unless otherwise approved by the town public works director, kitchen grease removal systems may be installed provided the owner can demonstrate that: 
a.  Existing condition restrict the ability to install a full size grease trap. 
b.  Proposed operations are such that a kitchen grease removal system will provide grease removal as effective as a full size grease trap. 
(5)  The town public works director reserves the right to require the removal of a kitchen grease removal system, and require subsequent installation of a full size grease trap if evidence indicates the kitchen removal system is not functioning at a level equal to a full size trap. 
(e)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day plus additional costs as set forth in this section. 
a.  A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the town manager. 
b.  Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within the specified number of days after issuance. 
c.  Each and every day that a violation of any provision of this section continues beyond receipt of a citation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(2)  In addition, any violator of this section shall be responsible for the reimbursement to the town of all expenses that the town incurs due to the violation. These expenses include but are not limited to equipment cost, material cost, and labor cost, for site remediation and cost recovery of a sanitary sewer overflow. 
(3)  The violator shall also be responsible for all costs associated with a public or private penalty against the town due to any violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 14-32; Code 1991, § 17-88; Ord. of 8-2005) 
Sec. 17-123. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
    Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in this article before discharging into any community sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the town shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facility and operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review and shall be approved by the town before construction of the facility. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facility or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the town. 
(Code 1975, § 14-33; Code 1991, § 17-89) 
Sec. 17-124. - Required facilities for measurement, sampling, and flow equalization. 
(a)  Flow measurement. Each person discharging a waste into the town's sanitary sewers having a volume in excess of 25,000 gallons in any one day shall construct, at his own expense, a flow measurement system. 
(b)  Control manhole. Any person discharging industrial wastes into the town sanitary sewer shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole, downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works, to facilitate observation, measurements and sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage, from the industry. The control manhole shall be constructed at a suitable and satisfactory location and built in a manner approved by the approving authority. The manhole shall be installed by the person discharging the wastes, at his expense. 
(c)  Storage tanks. Those persons discharging waste into the town's sanitary sewers in excess of 25,000 gallons per day, where this discharge is dumped from a batch process or released in a short time interval, shall, at the direction of the approving authority, install at their own expense a surge tank or other flow equalization facilities. Such facilities shall be sufficient to release the flow over a full 24-hour period. 
(d)  Sampling devices. Persons discharging a waste into the town's sanitary sewers in excess of 25,000 gallons per day, where the strength of the waste exceeds the strength of normal domestic waste, shall install, at their own expense, a suitable system for the automatic sampling of the waste. The system shall include a shelter for the sampling device and such controlled storage equipment as is necessary to preserve the sample for the appropriate analysis. 
(e)  Approval of plans. Plans for the construction of such measurement devices, control manhole, equalization devices and sampling devices shall be approved by the approving authority prior to the beginning of construction. 
(f)  Ownership and access. All equipment and structures for which approval under this section is required shall, upon approval, be deeded to the town, along with such easements and the like as are necessary to gain access to the equipment and structures. The equipment and structures shall be maintained by the town at the expense of the person being monitored. 
(Code 1975, § 14-34; Code 1991, § 17-90) 
Sec. 17-125. - Tampering with testing equipment. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials belonging to the town used for the purpose of making tests or examinations and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewers. 
(Code 1975, § 14-41; Code 1991, § 17-91) 
Sec. 17-126. - Permit for discharge of industrial wastes. 
    Any person desiring to deposit or discharge or who is depositing or discharging any industrial waste into the sanitary sewers shall make application for the disposal of industrial waste to the approving authority. The approving authority shall approve such application only when evidence is submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the sanitary sewer will comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 14-35; Code 1991, § 17-92) 
Sec. 17-127. - Discharge of industrial waste from premises outside town. 
    Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate limits and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of the town may do so upon approval of the approving authority, by complying with the requirements of this article and by paying an additional permit fee and a yearly sewer rental charge to be fixed by the approving authority. 
(Code 1975, § 14-36; Code 1991, § 17-93) 
Sec. 17-128. - Determination of character and concentration of industrial wastes. 
(a)  The industrial wastes of each person discharging such wastes into the town sanitary sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection, and determination of character, and concentration of such wastes shall be made quarterly, or more often as may be deemed necessary, by the approving authority or his authorized assistants. 
(b)  Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual quality of the wastes. The laboratory methods used in the examination of such wastes shall be those set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the American Public Health Association, latest edition, copies of which are on file with the town clerk for inspection by any interested party. 
(c)  The determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes by the approving authority or his authorized assistants shall be binding as a basis for charges. 
(d)  Total cost incident to the supervision, inspection, sampling and analyzing of wastes shall be included in the surcharge made to persons discharging wastes into the town sanitary sewers, where applicable. 
(Code 1975, § 14-39; Code 1991, § 17-94) 
Sec. 17-129. - Charges and fees generally. 
(a)  A schedule of sewer charges and fees shall be adopted by the town which will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of the state Clean Water Grant Program, Public Law 660 and Public Law 92-500, and such charges and fees shall be determined in a manner consistent with the regulations of the grant programs that have benefited the town and its industrial users. 
(b)  All users shall be subject to the latest user charge assessment and provisions as applicable, pursuant to federal regulation 40 CFR 35.925.11, 35.925.12, 35.928 and appendix B, and as approved by the federal Environmental Protection Agency. All industries using the town's treatment works are subject to industrial waste surcharges on discharges whose characteristics exceed the limits for certain pollutants. 
(Code 1975, § 14-42; Code 1991, § 17-95) 
Sec. 17-130. - Measurement of flow; determination of sewer service charge. 
(a)  For flows less than 25,000 gallons per day, the volume of flow used in computing the sewer service charge shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by the town water department. If a person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system produces evidence to the approving authority that more than ten percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the town sanitary sewer, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be agreed upon between the approving authority and the persons discharging wastes into such sewer. Where the person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers of the town procures any part or all of his water supply from sources other than the town water department, all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewer, the person discharging such waste shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the approving authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be charged. 
(b)  For flows greater than 25,000 gallons per day, the sewer service charge shall be the actual cost of providing collection and treatment service for the discharged waste. Such actual cost shall include a proportionate share of the retirement of bonds, administrative costs, power costs, planning costs and those other costs and salaries directly attributable to the operation and upkeep of the sewage collection and treatment system, including from time to time the costs of providing additional plant capacity. Such charge may also include an allowance for funds to be entered into a sewer capital reserve account to offset future capital costs for the sewer system. 
(Code 1975, § 14-38; Code 1991, § 17-96) 
Sec. 17-131. - Surcharge for treatment of high strength wastes. 
(a)  Costs included. All persons discharging high strength wastes into the town sanitary sewer system shall be rendered a bimonthly bill as a surcharge covering the entire costs to the town incurred by treating all wastes having strength in excess of that of normal strength sewage. Such surcharge shall be invoked as provided in this section, in addition to the existing sewer service charge. Such surcharge shall include: 
(1)  All fixed charges and amortization costs of additional plant capacity required for treating such wastes. 
(2)  A charge covering the cost incurred to the town in treating such waste in the municipal sewage treatment plants. 
(b)  Determination. The surcharge covering the costs of the treatment of industrial wastes shall be arrived at in the following manner: 
(1)  The approving authority shall fix the rate to be charged during the new fiscal year at the beginning of the fiscal year, which shall be based upon the percentage by which the strength of the sewage to be discharged into the town sanitary sewers exceeds that of normal strength sewage. In the event that the strength or more than one constituent exceeds that of normal strength sewage, the constituent having the greater percentage in excess shall govern. The sewer service surcharge per 1,000 gallons shall be the percentage described in this subsection multiplied by the base sewer service charge. 
(2)  The following constituent strengths shall be used as the maximum normal strength sewage. A surcharge will be charged for waste in excess of these strengths: 
a.  BOD, 250 mg/l. 
b.  Suspended solids, 250 mg/l. 
c.  Total solids, 750 mg/l. 
d.  COD, 600 mg/l. 
e.  Ammonia nitrogen, 30 mg/l. 
(c)  Billing and payment. The surcharge as set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be billed and payable bimonthly on a separate bill rendered to the proper person by the town water department. The bill shall be sent through the United States mail notifying all persons of the amount and date due. Failure to receive notice is not an excuse for nonpayment of bills. Persons not having paid their bills within ten days of the date of billing will be delinquent; notice shall be sent them through the United States mail, and if after five days' notice the bills remain unpaid, the water connection serving the premises will be severed and will not be turned on again until the bill is paid. In case a person discharging wastes into the town sanitary sewer system does not procure his water supply from the town and becomes delinquent in his payment of the surcharge, his connection with the town sewer system will be severed and will only be reconnected at his expense. 
(Code 1975, § 14-40; Code 1991, § 17-97) 
Secs. 17-132-17-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE MEASURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local governments providing public water service must prepare local water supply plan, G.S. 143-355. 

Sec. 17-159. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of official phases of water supply shortage situations and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the municipality in the event a shortage is declared. 
(Code 1991, § 17-111; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 17-160. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Allotment means the maximum quantity of water allowed for each customer over any applicable period as established in the water-rationing provisions of this article. 
    Any water means any type of water, including fresh water, brackish water, wastewater, or reclaimed water. 
    Brackish water means water containing more than 1,000 parts per million of dissolved salts. 
    Customer means any person using water for any purpose from the municipality's water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in this case of bulk sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery. 
    Emergency means that water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and that serious shortages exist in the area. 
    Excess use means the usage of water by a water customer in excess of the water allotment provided under the water rationing provisions of this ordinance for that customer, over any applicable period. 
    Fresh water means water withdrawn from surface or groundwater which has not been previously used, other than brackish water. 
    Mandatory conservation means that raw water supplies (i.e., steamflow, reservoir levels or groundwater levels) are consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue to decline, may not be adequate to meet normal needs. 
    Nonresidential customer means commercial, industrial, institutional, public and all other such users, with the exception of hospitals and health care facilities. 
    Rationing means procedures established to provide for equitable distribution of critically limited water supplies, in order to balance demand and limited available supplies, and to assure that sufficient water is available to preserve public health and safety. 
    Reclaimed water means wastewater which has been treated to allow reuse. 
    Residential customer means any customer who receives water service for a single or multifamily dwelling unit. The term residential customer does not include educational or other institutions, hotels, motels, or similar commercial establishments. 
    Service interruption means the temporary suspension of water supply, or reduction of pressure below that required for adequate supply, to any customer, portion of a water supply, or entire system. 
    Voluntary conservation means that conditions exist which indicate the potential for serious water supply shortages. 
    Waste of water includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain; or 
(2)  Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing. 
    Wastewater means water which has been previously used for industrial, municipal, domestic, or other purpose, and has not been returned to the surface or groundwater source. 
    Water means water available to the town for treatment by virtue of its water rights or withdrawal permit or any treated water introduced by the municipality into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale. 
    Water use classes shall be established as follows: 
(1)  Class 1. Essential water uses. 
a.  Domestic use: Water necessary to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation. 
b.  Health care facilities: Patient care and rehabilitation, including swimming pools used for patient care and rehabilitation. 
c.  Public use: Fire hydrants. 
1.  Firefighting. 
2.  Certain testing and drills by the fire department if performed in the interest of public safety and if approved by the municipal board of commissioners. 
(2)  Class 2. Socially or economically important uses of water. 
a.  All domestic uses other than those included in classes 1 and 3: 
1.  Home water use including kitchen, bathroom, and laundry use. 
2.  Minimal watering of vegetable gardens. 
3.  Watering of trees where necessary to preserve them. 
b.  Commercial, agricultural, industrial, and institutional uses: 
1.  Outdoor commercial watering (public or private) using conservation measures to the extent that sources of water other than fresh water are not available for use. 
2.  Irrigation for commercial vegetable gardens and fruit orchards or the maintenance of livestock. 
3.  Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum level necessary to maintain stock. 
4.  Water use by arboretums and public gardens of national, state, or regional significance where necessary to preserve specimens. 
5.  Use of fresh water at a minimum rate necessary to implement vegetation following earth-moving, where such revegetation is required by law or regulation. 
6.  Water for golf course greens. 
7.  Filling and operation of swimming pools: 
(i)  Residential pools which serve more than 25 dwelling units. 
(ii)  Pools used by health care facilities for patient care and rehabilitation. 
(iii)  Municipal pools. 
8.  Commercial car and truck washes. 
9.  Commercial laundromats. 
10.  Restaurants, clubs, and eating places. 
11.  Air conditioning: 
(i)  Refilling for start-up at the beginning of the cooling season. 
(ii)  Make up of water during the cooling season. 
(iii)  Refilling specifically approved by health officials and the municipal board of commissioners, where the system has been drained for health protection or repair purposes. 
12.  Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar commercial establishments. 
(3)  Class 3. Nonessential uses of water. 
a.  Ornamental purposes: Fountains, reflecting pools, and artificial waterfalls. 
b.  Outdoor noncommercial watering (public or private): 
1.  Gardens, lawns, parks, golf courses (except greens), playing fields and other recreational areas. 
2.  Filling and operation of recreational swimming pools which serve fewer than 25 dwellings. 
3.  Noncommercial washing of motor vehicles. 
4.  Serving water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places except by specific request. 
5.  Air conditioning: refilling cooling towers after draining except as specified in class 1. 
c.  Public use. Fire hydrants: Any purpose, including use of sprinkler caps and testing fire apparatus and for fire department drills, except as listed in class 1. 
(Code 1991, § 17-112; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 17-161. - Declaration of voluntary conservation. 
    Whenever the board of commissioners of the municipality finds that a potential shortage of water supply is indicated, it shall be empowered to declare by adoption of an ordinance that voluntary conservation conditions exist, and that the water manager or superintendent shall, on a daily basis, monitor the supply and demand upon that supply. In addition, the mayor (or his/her agent) is authorized to call upon all water customers to employ voluntary water conservation measures (see section 17-172 pertaining to conservation measures) to limit water use (especially class 3 uses) and eliminate the waste of water. This resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area which qualifies under G.S. 1-597, and may be publicized through the general news media or any other appropriate method for making such resolutions public. 
(Code 1991, § 17-113; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 17-162. - Declaration of mandatory conservation. 
    Whenever the board of commissioners of the municipality finds raw water supplies (i.e., streamflow, reservoir levels or groundwater levels) to be consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue to decline and may not be adequate to meet normal needs, it shall be empowered to declare by adoption of an ordinance that mandatory conservation conditions exist. The municipality shall continue to encourage voluntary water conservation measures defined under the voluntary conservation declaration, and further shall impose a ban on all class 3 water uses for the duration of the shortage until it is declared ended by ordinance of the governing board. Publication of these ordinances shall follow the provisions in section 17-161. 
(Code 1991, § 17-114; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 17-163. - Declaration of water shortage emergency. 
    Whenever the board of commissioners of the municipality finds that raw water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and that serious shortages exist, it shall be empowered to declare by adoption of an ordinance that a water shortage emergency exists. Class 1, essential uses shall be identified, in specific, as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives. Also, all class 2, socially or economically important uses shall be banned in addition to the class 3, nonessential uses. These restrictions shall continue until the emergency is declared ended by ordinance of the board of commissioners. Publication of these ordinances shall follow the provisions in section 17-161. 
(Code 1991, § 17-115; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 17-164. - Declaration of rationing. 
    Whenever the board of commissioners of the municipality has declared a water shortage emergency and finds a need to provide for the equitable distribution of critically-limited water supplies, in order to balance demand and limited available supplies, and to assure that sufficient water is available to preserve public health and safety, it shall be empowered to provide for mandatory rationing by adoption of an ordinance. 
(Code 1991, § 17-116; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 17-165. - Objectives of rationing. 
    An ordinance that provides for mandatory rationing shall state findings that: 
(1)  It is imperative that water customers achieve an immediate further reduction in water use in order to extend existing water supplies and, at the same time, assure that sufficient water is available to preserve public health and sanitation and to provide fire protection service. 
(2)  The immediate further reduction in water usage is another step along a continuum of responses to the present water supply shortage. Should shortage continue, further reductions in usage may be required. It must be emphasized that the additional usage reduction in the rationed area is a valid and attainable goal reflective of the conditions which currently exist. 
(3)  The plan provides for equitable reductions in water usage and for equal sacrifice on the part of each water customer. The success of this article depends on the cooperation of all water customers in the emergency area. 
(4)  Metered residential water customers and allotments. 
a.  The number of permanent residents in each dwelling unit (household) will determine the amount of water that each household will be allowed. 
b.  Each dwelling unit (household) shall be allotted 40 gallons per day for each resident of the household. Households with only one permanent resident will have a daily allotment of 55 gallons. 
c.  Residential water customers are required to provide municipality and utility personnel with reasonable access to read meters as necessary to this rationing declaration. Where access is not readily available, all reasonable efforts to contact customers in order to arrange for access to read meters shall be made. In the event a water customer does not allow entry to read the meter after reasonable efforts to arrange for such access, the dwelling unit (household) allotment will be reduced to 55 gallons per day. 
d.  Revised allotment requirement. 
1.  If it is found that the residential water allotment provided under this section would create an extraordinary hardship for individual customers, as in the case of special health-related requirements, a revised allotment for the particular customer may be established. 
2.  Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such an exemption or variance may file a complaint with the town manager or clerk in accordance with the municipality's normal administrative procedures. 
(5)  Nonmetered residential water customers and allotments. 
a.  In order to effectively implement and monitor the residential water conservation effort, a water allotment shall be established for the entire water system based on 40 gallons per day per capita served or 50 percent of the water use by the entire system during an average month, as notified individually by the municipality. 
b.  The municipality and the utility will establish a communication system with the customers through public media to inform them of the requirements of the water rationing provisions of this ordinance, possible conservation measures that customers may employ, the system allotment, and a regularly scheduled report of whether the usage was within the allotment. 
(6)  Metered and nonmetered residential customers of the same water supply system. Where a water supply system serves both metered and nonmetered residential customers, the allotments and procedures provided under both subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be applied, as appropriate. 
(7)  Suggested conservation measures. See section 17-172 pertaining to conservation measures. 
(Code 1991, § 17-117; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 6a) 
Sec. 17-166. - Water use rationing for nonresidential water users. 
(a)  Nonresidential customers include commercial, industrial, public, and all other such users, with the exception of hospitals and health care facilities. 
(b)  Nonresidential water customers shall further reduce their water usage to 40 gallons per person per day or to 50 percent of use levels during typical month. 
(c)  It is the primary responsibility of each nonresidential water customer to meet its mandated water use reduction goal in whatever manner possible, including limitation of operating hours or days if necessary. 
(d)  The municipality will establish a water allotment for each nonresidential water customer, based upon a required further reduction of water usage from the rate of water used by the customer in effect on a specified date, or the last recorded use level if no meter readings record the rate of the customer's use on a specified date. 
(e)  Each nonresidential water user shall provide access to municipal personnel for purpose of meter reading and monitoring of compliance with this ordinance. All reasonable efforts will be made to contact customers to arrange for access. 
(f)  Variances for extraordinary hardships. 
(1)  If the mandated further reduction in water usage cannot be obtained without imposing extraordinary hardship which threatens health and safety, the nonresidential customer may apply to the municipality for a variance. For these purposes, the term "extraordinary hardship" means a permanent damage to property or an economic loss which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by other water users subject to this water rationing ordinance. If the further reduction would cause an extraordinary hardship or threaten health or safety, a variance may be granted by the town manager (or clerk) and a revised water use reduction requirement for the particular customer may be established. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such a variance may file a complaint with the town manager, or clerk, in accordance with established procedures. 
(g)  The municipality will provide each nonresidential customer with suggested means to reduce usage levels. See section 17-172, pertaining to conservation measures. 
(Code 1991, § 17-118; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 6b) 
Sec. 17-167. - Water use rationing for hospitals and health care facilities. 
(a)  Hospitals and health care facilities shall comply with all restrictions imposed on residential and nonresidential water customers as may be applicable to each individual institution, to the extent compliance will not endanger the health of the patients or residents of the institution. 
(b)  Each hospital or health care facility shall survey its water usage patterns and requirements and implement such additional conservation measures as may be possible without endangering the health of its patients or residents to achieve a further reduction in the institution's water usage. 
(c)  The municipality will provide each hospital and health care facility with suggested means to reduce usage levels. See section 17-172 pertaining to conservation measures. 
(Code 1991, § 17-119; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 6c) 
Sec. 17-168. - Enforcement of water rationing. 
(a)  The municipality or its water utility will have primary responsibility for monitoring of compliance with the water rationing ordinance. 
(b)  The following provisions shall govern the implementations of temporary service interruptions: 
(1)  In order to effectuate compliance with this article, the municipality is hereby authorized and required to plan and implement temporary service interruptions to all or part of its water supply system, as may be deemed appropriate, when any and/or all of the following conditions are determined to exist: 
a.  The mandated reduction in systemwide usage has not been achieved; 
b.  The mandated reduction in system-wide water usage has been achieved, but has failed to have a significant impact in extending limited water supplies; and/or 
c.  Temporary service interruptions are necessary in order to further extend limited and/or dwindling water supplies. 
(2)  In the event it is determined that temporary service interruptions are necessary, the municipality shall notify its customers through the public media (newspapers, radio, and television), at least one day prior to the temporary service interruptions, that a planned, temporary service interruption is to be imposed. Such notice shall: 
a.  State the days when the planned, temporary service interruption will occur; 
b.  State the time when such planned, temporary service interruptions will commence, and the time such interruption will cease; 
c.  State whether the planned, temporary service interruptions are to be imposed on the entire system, or part thereof, and, if only part of the system will experience planned, temporary service interruptions, identify geographic boundaries within which such interruptions will occur; and 
d.  Advise all customers within the areas affected by planned, temporary service interruptions how to treat any water received from the system, for human consumption, during the period of such interruptions and for such additional time as may be necessary until full pressure is restored to the system. 
(3)  If a planned, temporary service interruption is imposed as authorized and required by this ordinance, the municipality must provide for the continued delivery of water to health care facilities within the area affected by such interruptions, by means of any adequate, alternative delivery measures that may be necessary. 
(4)  If a planned, temporary service interruption is implemented, the municipality must make provision, by any means possible, for the continued delivery of such water as may be necessary for the proper operation of sewage collection, treatment, and disposal systems and facilities. 
(c)  Any residential or nonresidential water customer who exceeds the water allotments established pursuant to this water rationing will be subject to the following excess-use civil penalties. 
(1)  Excess-use civil penalties will be collected based on the amount by which a customer's use exceeds the water allotments established pursuant to the local water rationing declaration, computed in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  Option 1. 
Excess Usage per Month Civil Penalty for Excess First 2,000 gallons or portion thereof $7.00 per 1,000 gallons or portion thereof Each 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, 
thereafter $15.00  
b.  Option 2. 
Size of Service Connection Penalty 3/4 inch $30.00 1 inch  40.00 11/2 inch  50.00 2 inch  60.00  
(2)  Any monies collected through excess-use civil penalties shall not be accounted for as income, but shall be placed in a reserve account that is dedicated to addressing water shortage problems and water conservation initiatives. 
(d)  In addition to the excess-use civil penalty, noncompliance with the water rationing provisions of this article will result in the following: 
(1)  For the first excess-use, a warning of possible discontinuation shall be issued to the customer. 
(2)  For the second or subsequent excess-use, service to the customer may be interrupted or shut off for a period not to exceed 48 hours, or, if the customer provides access, a flow restrictor may be installed in the customer's service line for the duration of the 
emergency. The cost incurred to interrupt or shut off and reinstate service, or to install and remove a flow restrictor, shall be assessed to the water customer. Before service to an individual may be terminated under this provision, actual notice of the intent to discontinue shall be given, which shall include notice that the customer may appear at a designated time and place (within 24 hours) for an informal hearing to show why service should not be discontinued. 
(e)  Meter reading schedules are authorized to be altered to assure adequate monitoring of compliance with this article. 
(f)  Any customer or other person aggrieved by a decision or action imposing an excess-use civil penalty or other remedy for noncompliance with the requirements of this article may proceed in accordance with the following provisions: The municipality shall adopt procedures which provide an opportunity for the customer or aggrieved party to rebut the finding of a violation, or provide evidence of circumstances beyond the customer's control which resulted in the violation. A record of evidence regarding disputed violations shall be kept, and written notice of the municipality's final decision and action in such cases shall be provided to the customer or aggrieved party. 
(Code 1991, § 17-120; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 6d; Ord. of 11-5-2007, pt. 1) 
Sec. 17-169. - Shortage water rates. 
    Upon the declaration of a water supply shortage as provided in sections 17-161-17-164, the board of commissioners of the municipality shall have the power to adopt shortage water rates by ordinance designed to conserve water supplies. Such rates may provide for, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Higher charges per unit for increasing usage (increasing block rates); 
(2)  Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit rate); 
(3)  Extra charges for use in excess of a specified level (excess demand surcharge); or 
(4)  Discounts for conserving water beyond specified levels. 
(Code 1991, § 17-121; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 7) 
Sec. 17-170. - Regulations. 
    During the effective period of any water supply shortage as provided for in sections 17-161-17-164, the board of commissioners is empowered to promulgate by ordinance such provisions and requirements as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, any water supply shortage declaration ordinance, or water shortage rate ordinance. Such ordinances may be adopted at a special or emergency meeting of the board of commissioners, if statutory requirements are met. 
(Code 1991, § 17-122; Ord. of 9-29-1992, § 8) 
Sec. 17-171. - Penalties. 
(a)  Notice of violation and penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this article, who fails to carry out the duties and responsibilities imposed by this article, or who impedes or interferes with any action undertaken or ordered pursuant to this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  If the mayor, manager, water superintendent, or other municipal official or officials charged with implementation and enforcements of this article or a water supply shortage resolution learns of any violation of any water use restriction imposed pursuant to this article, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where the violation occurred and mailed to the customer of record and to any other person known to the municipality who is responsible for the violation or its correction. Said notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured, or abated immediately or within such specified time as the municipality determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the municipality may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedures: 
a.  The municipality shall give the customer notice by mail that, due to the violation, water services will be discontinued within a specified time and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the municipality board of commissioners or a municipal official designated as a hearing officer by the board of commissioners; 
b.  If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before termination is ordered; and 
c.  The board of commissioners or hearing officer shall make findings of fact and order whether service should continue or be terminated. 
(2)  A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service terminated pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. In the event of subsequent violation, the reconnection fee shall be $250.00 for the second violation and $300.00 for each additional violation. 
(3)  Any customer may also be charged with violation of this ordinance and prosecuted in district court. Any person so charged and found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for violation shall be a maximum fine of $50.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(b)  Civil penalties. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, violation of this article may subject the offender to civil penalties in the amounts provided, or otherwise in an amount of $25.00 per day, collectible in a civil action in the nature of debt. 
(Code 1991, § 17-123; Ord. of 9-29-1992, §§ 9, 9.1; Ord. No. O-2010-04, § 8), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 17-172. - Conservation measures. 
    Direct users are to adopt the following conservation measures: 
(1)  Indoor residential use. 
a.  Conservation for voluntary and mandatory conservation phases. 
1.  Use dishwashers only when they are full. Washing dishes by hand (don't let the tap run) saves about 25 gallons. 
2.  Adjust water level on clothes washing machines, if possible. Use full loads only, if not adjustable. 
3.  Turn off faucets while brushing teeth, etc. Saves about five gallons per day. 
4.  Reduce water used per flush by installing toilet tank displacement inserts. A plastic jug may often be used as an alternative. Do not use bricks. They disintegrate when soaked and the resulting grit hinders closing of flap valve. 
5.  Do not use the toilet as a trash can. 
6.  Use sink and tub stoppers to avoid wasting water. 
7.  Keep a bottle of chilled water in the refrigerator for drinking. 
8.  Find and fix leaks in toilets, which can leak silently. The following method can be used to see if this is occurring: Place a drop of food coloring in the upper tank and don't flush for 30 minutes. If color appears in the bowl, there's leakage. 
9.  Find and fix leaks in faucets and water-using appliances. Faucets can usually be fixed cheaply and quickly by replacing washers. 
10.  Adapt plumbing with flow-restricting or other water-saving devices. These are usually inexpensive and easy to install. 
11.  Learn to read your water meter so you can judge how much water you use and what difference conservation makes. 
12.  Take shorter showers and shallower baths. Saves about 25 gallons. 
13.  Reduce the number of toilet flushes per day. Each flush uses about five gallons, two or three if you have water-saving toilets. 
14.  Don't use a garbage disposal. 
15.  Use nonphosphate detergent and save laundry water for lawns and plants. 
b.  Conservation for emergency conservation or rationing phase (In addition to measures listed above). 
1.  Turn off shower while soaping up. 
2.  Use disposable eating utensils. 
(2)  Outdoor residential use. 
a.  Conservation for normal conditions and voluntary conservation phase-Lawns. 
1.  Water before 10:00 a.m. to prevent evaporation which occurs during the hottest part of the day. Morning is better than evening, when the dampness encourages growth of fungus. 
2.  Water only when lawn shows sign of wilt. Grass that springs back when stepped on does not need water. 
3.  Water thoroughly, not frequently: long enough to soak roots. A light sprinkling evaporates quickly and encourages shallow root systems. Water slowly to avoid runoff. 
4.  Don't let the sprinkler run any longer than necessary. In an hour, 600 gallons can be wasted. 
5.  Allow maximum of one inch of water per week on your lawn. To measure, place cake tins outside to collect rain and water from sprinklers. 
6.  Use pistol-grip nozzles on hoses to avoid waste when watering flowers and shrubs. 
7.  Aerate lawns by punching holes six inches apart. This allows water to reach roots rather than run off surfaces. 
8.  Position sprinklers to water the lawn, not the pavement. 
9.  Avoid watering on windy days when the wind not only blows water off target, but also causes excess evaporation. 
10.  Keep sprinkler heads clean to prevent uneven watering. 
11.  Adjust hose to simulate a gentle rain. Sprinklers that produce a fine mist waste water through evaporation. 
12.  Know how to turn off an automatic sprinkler system in case of rain. 
13.  Use an alarm clock or stove timer to remind you to shut off sprinklers that don't have timers. 
b.  Same-Vegetables and flower gardens. 
1.  Water deeply, slowly and weekly. Most vegetables require moisture to a depth of six to eight inches. 
2.  Keep soil loose so water can penetrate easily. 
3.  Use mulch around plants and between rows to hold in moisture. 
4.  Keep weeds out to reduce competition for water. 
5.  Put the water where you want it and avoid evaporation by using soil-soakers or slow-running hoses, not sprinklers. 
c.  Same-Trees and shrubs. 
1.  Water deeply using a soil-soaker. 
2.  Water only when needed. Check the depth of soil dryness by digging with a trowel. 
3.  Mulch to reduce evaporation. A two-inch to three-inch layer of wood chips, pine needles, grass clippings, or straw keeps the soil cool in summer. 
4.  Dig troughs around plants to catch and retain water. 
5.  Water trees growing in full sun more often than those in shade. 
6.  Do not use sprinklers. Apply water directly at base. 
7.  Do not fertilize during the summer. Fertilizing increases a plant's need for water. 
8.  Postpone planting until fall or spring when there is generally less need for water. 
9.  Install trickle-drip irrigation systems close to the roots of your plants. By dripping water slowly, the system doesn't spray water into the air. Use soil probes for large trees. 
10.  Water when cloudy, at night, or even when a light rain is falling. 
d.  Conservation for voluntary conservation phase, in addition to measures listed in this section. 
1.  Do not allow children to play with hose or sprinklers. 
2.  Limit car washing. 
3.  Be ready to catch rainfall that occurs. Place containers under drain spouts. 
4.  Use leftover household water if available. 
5.  Consider delaying the seeding or sodding of new lawns. 
6.  Determine the amount of water being used outdoors by comparing water bills for summer and winter. 
e.  Conservation for mandatory conservation phase, in addition to the measures listed in this section. 
1.  Vegetable gardens and food trees should be given minimal amounts of water on an individual basis only. 
2.  Do not water lawns and inedible plants. 
3.  Do not use sprinklers. 
Most outdoor watering is prohibited under emergency conservation conditions. 
(3)  Hospital and health care facility use. 
a.  Reduce laundry usage or services by changing bed linens, etc., only when necessary to preserve the health of patients or residents. 
b.  Use disposable food service items. 
c.  Eliminate, postpone, or reduce, as they may be appropriate, elective surgical procedures during the period of emergency. 
(4)  Industrial use. 
a.  Identify and repair all leaky fixtures and water-using equipment. Give special attention to equipment connected directly to water lines, such as processing machines, steam-using machines, washing machines, water-cooled air conditioners, and furnaces. 
b.  Assure that valves and solenoids that control water flows are shut off completely when the water-using cycle is not engaged. 
c.  Adjust water-using equipment to use the minimum amount of water required to achieve its stated purpose. 
d.  Shorten rinse cycles for laundry machines as much as possible; implement lower water levels wherever possible. 
e.  For processing, cooling, and other uses, either reuse water or use water from sources that would not adversely affect public water supplies. 
f.  Advise employees, students, patients, customers, and other users not to flush toilets after every use. Install toilet tank displacement inserts; place flow restrictors in shower heads and faucets; close down automatic flushes overnight. 
g.  Install automatic flushing valves to use as little water as possible or to cycle at longer intervals. 
h.  Place water-saving posters and literature where employees, students, patients, customers, etc. will have access to them. 
i.  Check meters on a frequent basis to determine consumptive patterns. 
j.  Review usage patterns to see where other savings can be made. 
(Code 1991, § 17-124; Ord. of 9-29-1992) 
Secs. 17-173-17-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Local government units may adopt ordinances necessary to establish and enforce stormwater control programs, G.S. 143-214.7(c). 

Sec. 17-200. - Stormwater management plan criteria. 
    All developments excluding individual residential lots shall provide a stormwater management plan to be approved by the town's engineer. The stormwater management plan shall meet the criteria stated in this section. 
(1)  The stormwater shall be conveyed through the site and discharged to an adequate outfall. An adequate outfall shall be considered one or a combination of the following: 
a.  Natural watercourse means an incised channel with a defined channel bed and banks that are not constructed. A natural watercourse will be considered adequate if the peak discharge from the ten-year rainfall event can be conveyed without overbank flooding and erosive velocities as defined in the latest edition of the North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual. 
b.  Manmade channel means an incised channel with a defined channel bed and banks that was constructed for the purpose of conveying stormwater. A manmade channel will be considered adequate if the design event (ten-year minimum) can be conveyed without overbank flooding and erosive velocities. The capacity and erosive velocities shall be determined per the latest edition of the North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual. 
c.  Storm drainage facility means a structure designed to convey stormwater such as storm sewers, curb inlets, yard inlets, etc. A storm drainage facility will be considered adequate if the design event can be conveyed with the following conditions: 
1.  The hydraulic gradient shall be a minimum nine inches below the ground elevation. 
2.  The hydraulic gradient shall be less than 1.5 times the diameter of the pipe size above the crown of the pipe. 
3.  The ponding at inlets shall be contained without flooding adjacent sites or overtopping channels, curb, berm, etc. 
Hydraulic gradients shall be determined using the latest edition of the North Carolina Department of Transportation Guidelines for Drainage Studies and Hydraulic Design. Curb inlets within public rights-of-way shall be designed per the latest state department of transportation guidelines. 
(2)  The design event shall be the ten-year, 24-hour duration rainfall event. 
(3)  If off-site improvements are required to discharge stormwater to an adequate outfall, an easement from the affected property owner allowing such improvements shall be recorded prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. The applicant is to obtain easements. 
(4)  If an existing outfall is being used and the existing outfall is not considered adequate for the post-developed peak discharge, then the owner shall either: 
a.  Improve the existing outfall such that it can be considered adequate with the post-developed peak discharge; or 
b.  Provide on-site stormwater detention such that the peak discharge from the design event is not greater than the predeveloped peak discharge at the point of discharge. 
(5)  All developments that exceed 30,000 square feet of impervious surface shall provide on-site stormwater detention such that post-development peak discharge for a ten-year storm from the design event is not greater than the predeveloped peak for a ten-year storm discharge at the point of discharge unless: 
a.  The town determines it is in the best interest of the town not to have stormwater detention on a particular site. 
b.  The town has identified an offsite stormwater facility which will improve stormwater runoff and the owner shall pay a fee in lieu of providing on-site detention. Refer to provisions as set forth in this section. 
c.  The owner can demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic calculations performed by a professional engineer registered in the state that the development will not have an adverse impact on the downstream properties and storm drainage facilities during the design event. The analysis shall be performed to a point downstream where the post-development design event peak discharge from the development is equal to or less than ten percent of the total drainage area peak discharge from the same design event. 
(6)  Quality control. All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to safely pass the peak discharge from the 100-year, 24-hour duration rainfall event. 
(7)  All culverts on public roads shall be designed to convey the peak discharge from the 25-year rainfall event without inundating the roadway surface. Headwater depths shall be determined using the latest edition of the NCDOT Guideline for Drainage Studies and Hydraulic Design Manual. 
(8)  All storm drainage facility outlets and culverts shall be protected from erosion. Outlet protection shall be designed according to the latest North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual. 
(9)  All storm drainage facilities and manmade channels shall be within recorded easements. The easements shall note that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the stormwater facilities and manmade channel such that the function is not reduced and the area remains acceptable to the town. The property owner and/or developer will be responsible for maintenance. A maintenance plan must be submitted for approval by the town. 
(Code 1991, § 17-141; Ord. of 3-1-1994) 
Secs. 17-201-17-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - USER CHARGE AND SEWER USE ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 17-300. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Town of Angier, hereafter referred to as the town, and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this part are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass-through the system, inadequately treated into any water of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges from the municipal system; 
(4)  To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and 
(6)  To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject. 
    This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system as authorized by (G.S. 160A-312 and/or 153A-275). The town shall designate an administrator of the publicly owned treatment works or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW director may be delegated by the POTW director to other town personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located outside the town limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-301. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this part shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
(2)  Approval authority. The director of the Division of Environmental Management of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or his designee. 
(3)  Authorized representative of the industrial user. 
a.  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
1.  The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
d.  The individuals described in subsections a.-c. above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the town. 
e.  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the POTW director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(4)  Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/l). 
(5)  Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POWT. 
(6)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(7)  Categorical standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard. 
(8)  Control authority. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW organization's Pretreatment Program approval has not been withdrawn. 
(9)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(10)  Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(11)  Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(12)  Indirect discharge or discharge. The discharge or the introduction from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
(13)  Industrial user or user. Any person which is a source of indirect discharge. 
(14)  Interference. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the controlled authority NPDES, collection system permit or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
(15)  Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminates laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(16)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(17)  National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in [section 17-311] of this article and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
(18)  New source. As defined in 40 CFR 403.3 (m), including any subsequent amendments or additions. 
a.  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
1.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other is located; or 
2.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
3.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection a.2. or a.3. above, but otherwise alter, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
c.  For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source had commenced if the owner or operator has: 
1.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
(19)  Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
(20)  National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or pursuant to the G.S. 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA. 
(21)  Non-discharge permit. A disposal system permit issued by the state pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1. 
(22)  Pass-through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the control authority's NPDES or non-discharge permit, or a downstream water quality standard. 
(23)  Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
(24)  pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
(25)  Pollutant. Any "waste" as defined in G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive material, heat wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
(26)  POTW director. The town manager designated with the responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this sewer use ordinance. 
(27)  POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
(28)  Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
(29)  Pretreatment program. The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the town of compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as authorized by G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11. 
(30)  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard. 
(31)  Pretreatment standards. Any prohibited discharge standards, categorical standards, and local limits which applies to an industrial user. 
(32)  Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or municipal wastewater system. A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this ordinance, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or in any other way, users of the town's POTW. 
(33)  Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the user's treatment facilities, which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(34)  Significant industrial user. Any industrial user that discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that: 
a.  Has an average daily process wastewater flow of 25,000 gallons or more; or 
b.  Contributes process wastewater which makes up five percent or more of the NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. In this context, organic capacity refers to BOD, TSS, and Ammonia; or 
c.  Is required to meet the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard; or 
d.  Is found by the town, the division of water quality or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements. 
e.  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsections a. and b. above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and thus is not a significant industrial user. 
f.  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection c. above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
g.  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection c. above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3) and thus is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR Parts 403.8 (f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12 (e)(3). 
(35)  Significant noncompliance or reportable noncompliance. Significant noncompliance or SNC. The status of noncompliance of a significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria are met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in subsection c., d. or h. below shall also be SNC. 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3 (l); 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements for the same pollutant parameter during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC; [for the conventional pollutants: BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease: TRC = 1.4 for all other pollutants (except flow and Ph): TRC = 1.2]; 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3 (l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the control authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the control authority's or POTW's (if different from the control authority) exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8 (f)(l)(vi)(B) and subsection 17-396(e) of this SUO to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
e.  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date. 
f.  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and compliance reports within 45 days from the due date. 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(36)  Slug load or discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include, but is not limited to: spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section [17-311] of this article. 
(37)  Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
(38)  Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
(39)  Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
(40)  Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(41)  Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institution together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(42)  Wastewater permit. As set forth in section [17-347] of this article. 
(43)  Waters of the state. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
a.  This article is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa. 
b.  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
c.  The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
d.  The following abbreviation when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
1. BOD       =  Biochemical oxygen demand 2. CFR       =  Code of federal regulations 3. COD       =  Chemical oxygen demand 4. EPA       =  Environmental Protection Agency 5. gpd       =  Gallons per day 6. l       =  Liter 7. mg       =  Milligrams 8. mg/l       =  Milligrams per liter 9. G.S.       =  North Carolina General Statutes 10. NPDES       =  National pollution discharge elimination system 11. O & M       =  Operation and maintenance 12. POTW       =  Publicly-owned treatment works 13. RCRA       =  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 14. SIC       =  Standard industrial classification 15. SWDA       =  Solid Waste Disposal Act 16. TSS       =  Total suspended solids 17. TKN       =  Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 18. U.S.C       =  United States Code  
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-302-17-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-311. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference or pass-through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or subject to any National, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(3)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(4)  Any wastewater having a pH less that 5.0 or more that 10.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference with the POTW. 
(6)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater that 150° F (66° C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C). 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauls pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW director in accordance with section [17-319] of this article. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Any substance which may cause POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludge's, or scum's, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(11)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public heath or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for any designated uses. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW director. 
(14)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations as to cause an interference in the collection system. (Discussed further in the fat, oil and grease ordinance.) 
(15)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(16)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(17)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
(18)  Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of a sewer except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW director. 
(19)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate State Water Quality Standards for Toxic Substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200. 
(20)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(21)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
(22)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
(23)  At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or material storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
When the POTW director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass-through, the POTW director shall: 
1.  Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance with section [17-396]; and 
2.  Take appropriate actions in accordance with section [17-346] for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass-through. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-312. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
    Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(5)  A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-313. - Local limits. 
    An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits: 
BOD 250 mg/l TSS 250 mg/l NH3 25 mg/l Arsenic 0.003 mg/l Cadmium 0.003 mg/l Copper 0.061 mg/l Cyanide 0.015 mg/l Lead 0.049 mg/l Mercury 0.0003 mg/l Nickel 0.021 mg/l Silver 0.005 mg/l Chromium 0.05 mg/l (total chromium) Zinc 0.175 mg/l  
    Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's maximum allowable headwork loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW director may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place of, concentration-based limits. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-314. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-315. - Right of revision. 
    The town reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 17-310 or the general and specific prohibitions in section 17-312, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-316. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute and discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-317. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
    Pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this part and wastewater permits issued under section 17-347, and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 17-311 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state or POTW director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be approved by the POTW director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(2)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirement of this article. 
b.  The POTW director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
c.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the POTW director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
d.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-318. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  The POTW director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in subsection 17-301(36). All SIU's must evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The POTW director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW director may develop such a plan for any user. 
(b)  All SIU's are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see sections 17-360 and 17-361. 
(c)  An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 17-361 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-319. - Hauled wastewater. 
    The Town of Angier does not accept any hauled wastewater, septic tank wastes, holding tank wastes or hauled industrial waste into its POTW or any portion of its collection system. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-320-17-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 17-331. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system of the town for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the POTW director and approved by the Town of Angier Board of Commissioners. A copy of these charges and fees will be made available from the POTW director. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-332. - User charges. 
    A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW. 
(1)  The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW. 
(2)  Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow. 
(3)  The town manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the town board for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary. 
(4)  Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow of the users. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-333. - Surcharges. 
    The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the volume of flow and the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater: 
(1)  The volume of flow used determining the total discharge of wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the following: 
a.  Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by the town; or 
b.  If required by the town or at the individual discharges option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the town. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense according to arrangements that may be made with the town. 
c.  Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain at his own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the town. 
(2)  The character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. 
(3)  The determination of the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW director of his duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-334. - Pretreatment program administration charges. 
    The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the town may include charges and fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications; 
(4)  Permitting; 
(5)  Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-335-17-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE 

Sec. 17-346. - Wastewater discharges. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the Town of Angier. When requested by the POTW director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-347. - Wastewater permits. 
    All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencements of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW director be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial users. 
(1)  Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall request from the POTW director a significant industrial user determination. If the POTW director determines or suspicions that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed. 
(2)  Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the town an application in the form prescribed by the POTW director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW director's determination in subsection (1) above. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.  Name of the industrial user; 
b.  Address of industrial user; 
c.  Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected classification and industrial user category; 
d.  Wastewater flow; 
e.  Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the discharge; 
f.  Major products manufactured or services supplied; 
g.  Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices; 
h.  Locations of discharge points; 
i.  Raw materials used or stored at the site; 
j.  Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user; 
k.  Number of employees; 
l.  Operation and production schedules; 
m.  Description of current and projected waste reduction activities in accordance with G.S.143-215.1(g); and 
n.  Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(3)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the control authority and/or town as defined in subsection 17-301(3) and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachment were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(4)  Application review and evaluation. The POTW director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
a.  The POTW director is authorized to accept applications for the town and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation. 
b.  Within 30 days of receipt the POTW director shall acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is required. 
(5)  Tentative determination and draft permit. 
a.  The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit. 
b.  If the staff's tentative determination in subsection (1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in writing: 
1.  Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited; 
2.  A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and 
3.  A brief description of any other proposed special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application. 
c.  The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) above and the town's general permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit. 
(6)  Permit synopsis. Permit supporting documentation. The control authority staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits: 
a.  An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all significant industrial users, including, but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised. 
b.  The basis, or rationale for the pretreatment limitations, including the following: 
1.  Documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and 
2.  Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12 (e)(2). 
(7)  Final action on significant industrial user permit applications. 
a.  The POTW director shall take final action on all applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application. 
b.  The POTW director is authorized to: 
1.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this part and G.S. 143-215.1; 
2.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
3.  Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and pursuant to [subsection (9)]; 
4.  Revoke any permit pursuant to section [17-396] of this article; 
5.  Suspend a permit pursuant to section [17-396] of this article; 
6.  Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW director such discharge may cause or contribute to the pass-through or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S. 143-215.1. 
(8)  Permit modification. 
a.  Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows: Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
1.  Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is indicated; 
2.  A single modification of compliance schedule not in excess of four months; 
3.  Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational. 
b.  Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection (2) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. 
c.  A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications. 
(9)  Permit conditions. 
a.  The POTW director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this part and G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  A statement of duration (in no case more than five years); 
2.  A statement of non-transferability; 
3.  Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both; 
4.  Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State and local law; 
5.  Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in subsection 17-301(36); 
6.  Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in subsection 17-301(36), if determined by the POTW director to be necessary for the user; 
7.  Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in subsection 17-301(36). Also see sections 17-360 and 17-361; 
8.  A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. 
b.  In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
2.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
3.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system. 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
7.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
8.  Requirement for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic re-sampling and reporting within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s). 
9.  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
10.  Requirement for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports. 
11.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in section 17-368 and affording the POTW director, or his representatives, access thereto. 
12.  Requirement for prior notification and approval by the POTW director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system. 
13.  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
14.  Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges, or any discharge which would cause any problems to the system. 
15.  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the terms of the permit. 
16.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(10)  Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(11)  Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(12)  Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with this section a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-348-17-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REPORTING REQUIREMENT 

Sec. 17-356. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operation. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW director/manager, or regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 17-365. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 17-366 of this article and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as defined in subsection 17-301(3) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 17-357. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 17-347(3) of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-357. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 17-356(b)(7) of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW director. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-358. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatments standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW director a report containing the information described in subsections 17-356(b)(4) and (b)(6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 17-347(3). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-359. - Periodic compliance reports. 
    Town of Angier may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the POTW director but in no case less than once every six months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in sections 17-365 and 17-366 of this article. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 17-347(3) of this article. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW director, using the procedures prescribed in sections 17-365 and 17-366 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-360. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the POTW director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the control authority and/or municipality. See subsection 17-361(d) for other reporting requirements. 
(1)  The POTW director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 17-347 of this article. 
(2)  The POTW director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 17-347 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 17-347 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. [Increases or decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the control authority and/or municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.] 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-361. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in subsection 17-301(36), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW director/superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the POTW director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on a user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  All SIU's are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in subsection 17-301(36). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-362. - Report from unpermitted users. 
(a)  All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW director as the POTW director may require. 
(b)  All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users under subsection 17-301(34)f. shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW director as the POTW director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria as required under 40 CFR Part 403.12(q). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-363. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
(a)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW director, the user is not required to resample: 
(1)  If the POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or 
(2)  If the POTW director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(b)  If the POTW director has performed sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the POTW director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless one of the following occurs: 
(1)  The POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or 
(2)  The POTW director samples the user between their initial sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or 
(3)  The POTW director requires the user to perform sampling and submit the results to the POTW director within the 30 day deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-364. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
    The town prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification and approval of the POTW director. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days before the discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the control authority. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 17-360 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 17-356, 17-358 and 17-359 of this article. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-365. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedure approved by EPA or the town. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the town. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-366. - Grab and composite sample collection. 
(a)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW director may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136. 
(c)  Composite samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW director. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-367. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-368. - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirement of this part shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW director. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-369. - Electronic reporting. 
    The POTW director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this article. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under division 8 of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-370. - Special reporting requirements for IU's in satellite POTW's. 
    In the case of an industrial user located in a satellite POTW organization's jurisdiction, all information required to be reported to the industrial user's pretreatment control authority by the section shall also be reported to the POTW treatment plant organization. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-371-17-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 17-381. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The town requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the town's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the town. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-382. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The town will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town, approval authority and EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The town, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the POTW director's approval authority's or EPA's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-383. - Search warrants. 
    If the POTW director, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of the routine inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community then the POTW director, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the District Court of Harnett or Wake County. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-384-17-389. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Sec. 17-390. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW director/superintendent that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
    When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this ordinance, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, non-discharge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to official of the approval authority and EPA upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-391-17-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 17-396. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW director finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW director may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Town by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharge of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The POTW director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to subsection (d) below. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The POTW director may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this article or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should be taken. In the event the POTW director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
    The POTW director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate. 
    A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under section 17-397 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW director/manager under this section subject to an administrative appeal under division 10 of this article. 
(d)  Administrative orders. When the POTW director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this part, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the order; 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; 
(4)  Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified time period. 
(e)  Emergency suspension. The POTW director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. 
    Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW director prior to the date of the above-described hearing. 
(f)  Termination of permit. The POTW director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection of monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge, conditions of this article, or any applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Noncompliance industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 17-396 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-397. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be fined up to $25,000.00 per day per violation. 
(1)  Penalties between $10,000.00 and $25,000.00 per day per violation may be assessed against a violator only if: 
a.  For any class violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within five years preceding the violation, or 
b.  In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this article, or the orders, rules regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the violation. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW director shall consider the following: 
(1)  The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation; 
(2)  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
(3)  The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; 
(4)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
(5)  The amount of money saved by noncompliance; 
(6)  Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally; 
(7)  The prior record of the violator in complying for failing to comply with the pretreatment program; 
(8)  The costs of enforcement to the town. 
(c)  Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be as provided in subsection 17-347(6). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-398. - Other available remedies. 
    Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this ordinance, are available to the POTW director, who may use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Criminal violations. The district Attorney for Harnett/Wake County Judicial District may, at the request of the town, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. 
(2)  The district attorney for Harnett County may, at the request of the County, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. [Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).] 
(3)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW director, through the city attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question. 
(4)  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of the provision of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactory demonstrated ability to comply. 
(5)  Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the POTW director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the town governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-399. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The POTW director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the town's enforcement response plan. However, the POTW director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-400-17-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 

Sec. 17-406. - Annual publication of significant noncompliance. 
    At least annually, the POTW director shall publish in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users which were found to be in significant noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-407-17-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS 

Sec. 17-411. - Hearings. 
    The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with its regular hearing procedure. 
(1)  Adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under section 17-397, or one issued an administrative order under section 17-396 shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW director or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW director upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW director within 30 days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall make a final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or certified mail as described in subsection b. below. The decision is a final decision for the purposes of seeking judicial review. The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as follows: 
a.  New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
b.  Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
c.  Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(3)  Official record. When a final decision is issued under subsection a. above, the hearing officer shall prepare an official record of the case that includes: 
a.  All notices, motions, and other like pleadings; 
b.  A copy of all documentary evidence introduced; 
c.  A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken; 
d.  A copy of the final decision of the hearing officer. 
(4)  Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of the hearing officer is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under paragraph a. above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written request for review by the Superior Count of Harnett County within 30 days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the Town of Angier Department of Public Utilities. Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the written request for review by the court, the hearing officer shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Secs. 17-412-17-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 17-421. - Upset. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) below are met. 
(b)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-422. - Prohibited discharge standards defense. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section subsection 17-311(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in subsections 17-311(b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(5)-(b)(7) and (b)(9)-(b)(13), of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limits exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
    Pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative defense outlined in this section cannot apply to the specific prohibitions in subsections 17-311(b)(1), (b)(4) and (b)(8). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 17-423. - Bypass. 
(a)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections [(b)] and [(c)] of this section. 
(b)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW director/manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW director/manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of this time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(c)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or sever property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices required under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2013) 
ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2010-05 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF ANGIER, NORTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
    Section 1. The Ordinance entitled "Zoning Ordinance" of the Town of Angier, North Carolina and published by Municipal Code Corporation in 1989, subsequently revised and adopted in April 2005, the Town of Angier Subdivision Ordinance, last revised and adopted in 2002, and the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, last revised and adopted in 2006, and the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Angier are hereby repealed, revised and adopted as the Town of Angier Unified Development Ordinance. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before 1988, and not included in the Unified Development Ordinance or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. the repeal provided for in section 1 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuant thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 15.6 (Enforcement), unless provided otherwise. Each act of violation and each day upon which nay such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. This ordinance shall be effective September 7, 2010 . 
Passed and adopted by the Angier Town Board this 7th day of September, 2010 . 
/s/ ___________ R.H. Ellington Mayor 



  ATTEST: 
/s/ ___________ Joyce H. Valley, MMC Town Clerk 



  Board Action 
Ayes: 4 
Noes: 0 
Vote: Unanimous 
Chapter 1 - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 

Section 1.1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Unified Development Ordinance of Angier, North Carolina and shall be known as the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO). The official map designating the various zoning districts shall be titled, Town of Angier Zoning Map, and shall be known as the zoning map. 
Section 1.2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Unified Development Ordinance is: 
A.  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
B.  To secure safety from fire, panic, and other danger; 
C.  To promote the health and general welfare of the public; 
D.  To prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; 
E.  To facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
F.  To conserve the value of buildings; 
G.  To establish procedures and standards for the orderly growth and development of the town; 
H.  For the dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of rights-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; 
I.  For the coordination of streets and distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion; 
J.  To promote and facilitate economic development of the town. 
Section 1.3. - Authority. 
    The board of commissioners of the Town of Angier, in pursuance of the authority granted by N.C.G.S. §§ 160A-381 and 160A-371 and the authority vested in the Town of Angier by its charter, does hereby ordain and enact into law this ordinance. 
Section 1.4. - Applicability. 
    1.4.1 Jurisdiction. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the Town of Angier and the Town's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Angier. 
    1.4.2 Approved plans. These regulations shall not apply to any land or structure for which, prior to the effective date hereof, there is a properly approved site specific plan as required by the requirements previously adopted. Any preliminary or final subdivision plat approvals required for such approved and exempted site specific plans shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the previous Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance. 
Section 1.5. - Abrogation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul easements, covenants, water supply watershed regulations, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
Section 1.6. - Conformance with adopted plans and right-of-way dedication. 
A.  In accordance with the requirement of N.C.G.S. § 160A-383, the regulations adopted pursuant to this ordinance shall be consistent with any adopted land use plan and any specific plans adopted by the board of commissioners. All new developments shall be designed in conformance with adopted plans including but not limited to adopted comprehensive transportation plans, small area plans, land use plans, parks and recreation plans, and any other adopted plans. 
B.  When a proposed development includes any part of a thoroughfare which has been designated as such upon the officially adopted comprehensive transportation plan, such thoroughfare right(s)-of-way shall be dedicated and constructed by the developer(s) as shown on the plan. Where such right-of way does not currently exist, the developer shall be required to dedicate the necessary right(s)-of-way on the development side of the thoroughfare. 
Section 1.7. - Vested rights. 
    1.7.1 Establishment of vested right. 
A.  Pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 and not withstanding any other provision of this ordinance or amendment thereto, a vested right shall be deemed established with respect to any property upon the valid approval of a site specific development plan or a phased development plan. 
B.  Such vested right shall confer upon the landowner(s) the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the approved plan, including any town approved amendments thereto. 
C.  The approving authority may approve a site specific development plan or a phased development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
D.  The approving authority shall not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of developmental approval. 
    1.7.2 Duration of vested right. 
A.  A site specific development plan or a phase development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the approving authority's action. A right which has been vested shall remain vested for a period of two years, unless otherwise specified by this ordinance. 
B.  Upon request of the applicant, the town board of commissioners may approve an extended vesting period of between two years and five years from the date of approval in accordance with the vested rights requirements of chapter 11, and provided that reasonable explanation is given as to why such extension is necessary. 
    1.7.3 Revocation, expiration, or termination. 
A.  A vested right, once established and compliant with approved plans, precludes any zoning action which would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in the approved site specific development plan or phased development plan except as provided below. In such cases, vested right shall be terminated: 
1.  Failure to abide by such terms and conditions established as part of the approved plan. 
2.  Upon findings that natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan or the phased development plan. 
3.  Upon findings that the landowner(s) or his/her representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval of the site specific development plan or phased development plan. 
4.  Upon the enactment of a state of federal law or regulation which precludes development as contemplated in the site specific development plan or phased development plan. In such a case, the town board may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, or by ordinance after notice and public hearing. 
5.  With written consent of the affected landowner. 
6.  To the extent that the affected landowner receives compensation for all costs, expenses, and losses incurred. 
B.  A building permit issued by the building inspector pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-417 may not be revoked because of the running of time on a piece of property for which a site specific development plan has been approved and the vested right period has not otherwise expired. 
C.  The establishment of a vested right on a piece of property for a site specific development plan or phased development plan shall not preclude the town from establishing and enforcing on the property any additional regulations (adopted during the time the vested right was in effect) which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to the regulations of this ordinance. 
D.  A building permit shall be valid for the specific period of time outlined by the N.C. State Building Code, regardless of the vesting period outlined elsewhere throughout this ordinance. 
Section 1.8. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid by the courts, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The board of commissioners hereby declares that it has passed this ordinance and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. 
Section 1.9. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall become effective on September 7, 2010. Upon such date, these regulations shall supersede, repeal, and replace the Town of Angier Zoning Ordinance and the Town of Angier Subdivision Ordinance. 
Chapter 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2.1. - Applicability of general provisions. 
    The following provisions shall apply throughout the jurisdiction of this ordinance, regardless of the underlying regulating district. 
Section 2.2. - General lot standards. 
    2.2.1 Use. 
A.  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure (or part thereof) shall be erected, moved, structurally altered, or altered on the exterior-except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance or amendments thereto, for the district in which it is located. 
B.  Every building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one principal building and its customary accessory buildings on the lot except in the case of bona fide farms, as provided by this ordinance, or when a designed complex of institutional, residential, commercial, or industrial buildings in an appropriate zoning district. 
    2.2.2 Dimensional standards. 
A.  The minimum yards or other open spaces required by this ordinance for each and every building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or considered as meeting the yard or open space requirements of any other building. 
B.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall be at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
C.  The location of required front, side and rear yards on irregularly shaped lots shall be determined by the administrator. The determination will be based on the spirit and intent of this ordinance to achieve an appropriate spacing and location of buildings and structures on individual lots. 
D.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to street lines. 
E.  Where there is an official lot of record in any district at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, that does not to conform to the minimum lot size requirements, and the owner of such lot does not own sufficient adjacent property to meet the minimum lot size requirements, then such lot may be used as a building site provided that the other dimensional specifications (i.e. setbacks) of the district are complied with, or a variance is granted by the board of adjustment concerning minimum dimensional requirements. 
F.  Lots shall meet any applicable health department requirements. 
    2.2.3 Lot access. 
A.  No building shall be erected on any lot, which does not abut at least 25 feet along a street. Such a street shall meet one of the following criteria: 
1.  It shall have been accepted by the Town of Angier as a local public street and be identified by a specified name; or 
2.  It shall have been accepted by the North Carolina Department of Transportation as a primary or secondary road, with corresponding primary or secondary road number and/or state-identified name; or 
3.  If neither subsection (1) or (2) above is applicable, the street shall have all the following characteristics: 
a.  Be accessible and useable by the Town of Angier, its agents, and assigns; 
b.  Have a dedicated right-of-way of at least 25 feet or a deeded right-of-way of at least 20 feet provided that the deed was approved prior to 1975; 
c.  Have a pavement width of at least 15 feet. 
B.  Flag lots, which are only accessed by a narrow strip of land and do not meet the minimum lot width of the zoning district at the front setback, are not permitted. 

C.  Double frontage lots shall be avoided, wherever possible. 
Section 2.3. - General development standards. 
    2.3.1 Suitability of land. 
A.  Land which, on the basis of engineering or other expert surveys, has been determined to pose an ascertainable danger to life or property by reason of its unsuitability for the use proposed shall not be developed for that purpose, unless and until the developer has taken the necessary measures to correct said conditions and to eliminate said dangers. 
B.  Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be developed unless tests by the Harnett County Health Department, a structural engineer and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for the purpose proposed. 
C.  All development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage in accordance with regulations of the flood damage prevention overlay in chapter 3. 
    2.3.2 Name duplication. The name of the development shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing development within the Town of Angier and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) area. All development and street names shall be reviewed and approved by the Harnett County E-911 Addressing or the Wake County E-911 Addressing Department, whichever is applicable. 
Chapter 3 - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 3.1. - Interpretation. 
    3.1.1 Definition of zoning. 
A.  Zoning is the process by which an area is divided into various districts, each of which is specifically intended for different uses and intensity of uses and within which the use of land and buildings, the height and dimension of buildings, the size of required yards, and the population density are regulated. 
B.  Further, the regulations are to be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its unique suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town's jurisdiction. 
    3.1.2 Zoning district authority. 
A.  In accordance with the requirement of N.C.G.S. § 160A-382, the town, is hereby divided into zoning districts which shall be governed by all of the uniform use and dimensional requirements of this ordinance. Said zoning regulation shall be by districts, as shown on the zoning map accompanying this ordinance. 
B.  Zoning divides a town's territorial jurisdiction into districts, or zones, of any number, shape, and area that may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of N.C.G.S. § 160A-382. Within those districts, the municipality may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings, structures, or land. All regulations must be uniform for each class or kind of building throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
    3.1.3 Zoning map. 
A.  For the purposes of this ordinance, the Town of Angier is hereby divided into zoning districts whose locations and boundaries are shown on the official zoning map for the Town of Angier which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
B.  This zoning map and all the notations, references, and all amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described and set out herein. The zoning map properly attested is on file in the town hall and is available for inspection by the public. 
C.  The town clerk or his representative shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the official zoning map. Upon notification by the town board that a zoning change has been made, the town clerk shall make the necessary changes on the official zoning map. 
D.  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning map, the board of commissioners shall have the authority to interpret zoning district boundaries. 
    3.1.4 District and permitted use interpretation. Each zoning district has uses permitted by right, uses permitted with special requirements, and special uses. The permitted uses table includes each district and places uses under one of the three categories. The following describes the processes of each of the three categories that the uses are subject to: 
A.  Permitted by right. Administrative review and approval subject to district provisions and other applicable requirements only. 
B.  Permitted with special requirements. Administrative review and approval subject to district provisions, other applicable requirements, and special requirements outlined in chapter 4. 
C.  Special uses. Board of adjustment review and approval of special use permit subject to district provisions, other applicable requirements, and conditions of approval. Some special uses may also be subject to special requirements outlined in chapter 4. 
D.  Uses not listed herein as "Permitted", "Permitted with Special Requirements", or as a "Special Use Permit" are not allowed and will require application for an ordinance amendment. 
    3.1.5 Other requirements. Refer to all other local, state, and federal requirements. 
Section 3.2. - Base zoning districts. 
    Base zoning districts are created to provide comprehensive land use regulations throughout Angier. There are nine base zoning districts that provide for a variety of uses that are appropriate to the character of the areas in which they are located. For the purpose of this ordinance, Angier is hereby divided into the following base zoning districts. These districts shall comply with all of the general and specific requirements of this ordinance. 
OSR Open space and recreation RA-30 Low density residential-Agricultural R-15 Low to medium density residential R-10 Medium density residential R-6 High density residential O&I Office and institutional CB Central business GC General commercial CP Commerce park  
    3.2.1 OSR, Open Space and Recreation District (OSR). The open space and recreation district is established to encourage the conservation of land for flood control, public recreation, community facility sites, natural or manmade bodies of water, forests, and other similar open space uses. 
    3.2.2 RA-30, Low Density Residential-Agricultural District (RA-30). The residential-agricultural district is established to accommodate low density residential development and agricultural uses. 
    3.2.3 Low to Medium Density Residential District (R-15). The R-15 district is intended for low to medium density single-family residential uses along with their customary accessory uses. 
    3.2.4 Medium Density Residential District (R-10). The R-10 District is coded to promote the health of the town's medium density neighborhoods and to provide for their expansion along the same traditional lines along which they were established. 
    3.2.5 High Density Residential District (R-6). The R-6 residential district is provided to encourage the development of compact higher density neighborhoods and the redevelopment of existing, under-utilized lots. 
    3.2.6 Office and Institutional District (O&I). The O&I district is intended to accommodate a variety of office and institutional uses. This district can serve as a transitional buffer between residential districts and commercial districts. 
    3.2.7 Central Business District (CB). The CB district is established to provide redevelopment or investment opportunities for existing or planned commercial centers within the Town of Angier. Developments in the CB district are to emulate the characteristics of downtown Angier and encourage pedestrian use through connection with adjacent neighborhoods and the construction of mixed use buildings. 
    3.2.8 General Commercial District (GC). The GC district is established to provide a wide array of primarily retail and service uses to a large trading area for persons residing in and/or traveling through the Angier area. Such uses shall be located and designed in such a manner so as to promote aesthetics, the safe and efficient movement of traffic, and to not unduly burden adjoining thoroughfares. 
    3.2.9 Commerce Park District (CP). The CP district is established for a high quality mixture of employment, light industrial, and institutional uses, as well as limited retail and service uses to encourage development which will create a self-supporting advantageous business environment in an attractive corporate park setting. 
Section 3.3. - Permitted uses table. 
    3.3.1 Intent. The permitted uses table contains a listing of uses which may be permitted in one or more of the various zoning districts. Uses are listed in alphabetical order within ten categories as follows: 
A.  Residential 
B.  Civic and Government 
C.  Institutional 
D.  Animal Services 
E.  Office and Service 
F.  Retail 
G.  Recreation and Entertainment 
H.  Industrial, Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale, Distribution, and Transportation 
I.  Agriculture 
J.  Other 
    3.3.2 Table key. The following is a list of the meanings of table entries: 
A.  The "Use Group" indicates the use group level to determine landscaping requirements in chapter 7. 
B.  "P" indicates that the use is permitted by right in the zoning district. 
C.  "S" indicates that the use is permitted with a Special Use Permit in the zoning district. 
D.  A blank space under a zoning district column indicates that a use is not permitted in that district. 
E.  A section number listed in the "SR" column indicates that the use has special requirements for the zoning district in which it is permitted. The section number refers to the regulations in chapter 4. 
F.  The "Parking" column indicates the number of parking spaces required for each use in addition to the parking requirements of chapter 8. 
Legend: 
P = Permitted by right 
S = Permitted with Special Use Permit 
Blank = Use not Permitted 
SR = Refer to chapter 4 section number for requirements 
PERMITTED USES TABLE Residential Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Accessory dwellings 1 S S S S 4.2.1 1 per dwelling Accessory structures (residential) 1 P P P P 4.2.2 Boarding and/or rooming houses 2 S 4.2.3 1 per bedroom Family care homes P P P P P 4.2.4 2 per dwelling Home occupations (including in-home daycares) 1 P P P P P P P 4.2.5 3 per dwelling Infill residential 1 4.2.6 As required by proposed uses Live/work development 3 P P 4.2.7 As required by proposed uses Manufactured home, individual lot 1 P 4.2.8 2 per dwelling Manufactured home park 2 Multifamily residential, apartments 2 P P 4.2.10 1.5 per bedroom plus 1 per bedroom over 2 Multifamily residential, condominiums 2 P P P P 4.2.10 1.5 per bedroom plus 1 per bedroom over 2 Multifamily residential, townhomes 2 P P P P 4.2.10 1.5 per bedroom plus 1 per bedroom over 2 Single-family residential, detached 1 P P P P 3 per dwelling Temporary emergency residences 1 P P P P P P P 4.2.10 2 per dwelling Two-family residential (duplexes) 1 P P P P 4.2.11 1.5 per bedroom plus 1 per bedroom over 2  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Civic and Government Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Cemeteries, mausoleums, and/or columbariums 2 S S S S 4.3.1 Churches, religious institutions and related accessory uses (including day cares, schools, and cemeteries) 2 S S S S P P 4.3.2 1 per 4 sanctuary seats Civic, clubs, lodges, fraternities, sororities, social, and/or other similar nonprofit organizations 2 S S S S P P 4.3.2 1 per 200 square feet Correctional facilities 4 S S 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) Emergency services (fire, police, EMT) 2 P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 1 per 350 square feet Government buildings (other, excluding correctional facilities) 2 P P P P P P P P P 4.3.2 1 per 200 square feet Schools (public and private elementary and middle) 2 P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 2 per classroom Schools (public and private high school) 2 P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 5 per classroom  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Institutional Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Assembly halls and/or community centers 2 P P P P P 1 per 200 square feet Colleges and/or universities 2 P P P P P P P 5 per classroom plus 1 per office Crematoriums 3 P P 1 per employee Day care centers 2 S S S S P P P 4.4.1 1 per employee plus 1 per 8 clients Hospitals 3 P P P P P P P 2 per bed Instructional and/or vocational schools 2 S S S S P P P 5 per classroom plus 1 per office Libraries 2 P P P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Museums and/or art galleries 2 S P P P 1 per 200 square feet Residential care facilities 3 S S S S P S 4.4.2 1 per employee plus 0.5 per resident Residential care homes 2 S S S S 4.4.3 1 per 5 beds  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Animal Services Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Equestrian facilities and/or riding/boarding stables 3 S S S S 4.5.2 1 per employee plus 0.5 per stall Government-owned animal shelter 3 S S P S 4.5.1 1 per employee plus 1 per 3 kennels Kennels and/or training facilities 3 S S S S S 4.5.1 1 per employee plus 1 per 3 kennels Pet grooming 2 S S P P 4.5.1 1 per 300 square feet Pet cemeteries 2 S S S Veterinarian (no outdoor kennels) 2 P P 4.5.1 1 per 300 square feet Veterinarian (with outdoor kennels) 3 S S 4.5.1 1 per 300 square feet  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Office and Service Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Automobile services 3 P P P 4.6.1 3 per bay plus 1 per employee Banks, financial offices, and/or similar uses 3 S S S P P P P 1 per 200 square feet Banquet hall 3 S S S S P P 1 per 300 square feet Bed and breakfast inns 3 S S S S P 4.6.2 1 per room plus 1 per employee Body piercing and/or tattoo studios 3 S S 1 per 300 square feet Communications offices (no visible towers or transmission equipment) 3 P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Drycleaning, laundry establishments, and/or tailoring services 3 P P P 1 per 300 square feet Funeral homes and/or mortuaries 3 S S S P P 1 per 200 square feet Hotels, motels, and/or inns 3 P P 4.6.3 1 per room plus 1 per 2 employees Medical, dental, and/or optical clinics 3 S S S P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Offices, professional 3 S S S P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Personal services 3 S S S S S P P 3 per licensed employee Repair services 3 S S S P P P 1 per 300 square feet Studios for artists, designers, and/or photographers 2 S S S S P P P 1 per 300 square feet  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Retail Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Auction house 3 P S S P 4.7.1 To be determined by administrator Convenience stores 3 S P P S 1 per 150 square feet Farmers' Market (town-sponsored) 1 P P P 4.7.2 Produce/Arts and Craft Market (non-town sponsored) 1 S S 1 space per 500 square feet Restaurants 3 S P P P 4.7.3 1 per 4 seats Retail uses, community 3 P P P 4.7.4 1 per 200 square feet Retail uses, neighborhood 3 S P 4.7.5 1 per 200 square feet Retail uses, regional 4 S 4.7.6 1 per 200 square feet Vehicle and/or manufactured home sales 3 P P 4.7.7 1 per 2 employees or 1 per 500 square feet  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Recreation and Entertainment Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Adult establishments 4 S 4.8.1 1 per 300 square feet Amusement arcade 3 S P 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Amusement and/or theme parks 4 S 4.8.5 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Billiards, pool halls, and/or bowling alleys 3 P 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Bottle shops 1 P P 4.8.5 1 per 300 square feet Brewery/winery/distillery 1 P P P 4.8.5 1 per 300 square feet Country clubs and/or golf courses 2 P P P P 4.8.2 2 per hole plus 1 per 300 square feet of primary building area Family campgrounds 3 S S S 4.8.3 1 per campsite Fishing and/or hunting camps 2 S S 1 per campsite Fitness and/or recreational sports centers 2 P S P P 4.8.5 1 per 200 square feet Go-cart raceways/racetracks 4 S S 4.8.5 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Nature preserves 1 P P P P P P P P P Nightclubs and/or bars 4 P P 4.8.5 1 per 300 square feet Parks 1 P P P P P P P P P Recreational facilities (private) 2 P S S S S P P P P 4.8.5 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Recreational facilities (public) 2 P P P P P P P P P 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Shooting ranges 3 S S 4.8.6 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Swimming pools (principal use) 3 P S S S S S P 4.8.8 1 per 4 persons (maximum capacity) Theater (indoor) 3 P P 1 per 6 seats Theater (outdoor) 3 S S 1 per 6 seats or 300 square feet of seating area  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Industrial, Warehousing, Wholesale, Distribution and Transportation Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Airport 4 S S See office, if applicable Assembly and/or packaging 4 P 4.9.1 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Automobile parking lots (principal use) 3 P S P S Automobile parking structures 3 P S S S Bus terminals for passengers 3 P 10 per terminal Distribution uses (accessory) 4 P P Distribution uses (principal) 4 S P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Equipment and/or machinery repair and service 4 P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Foundries producing iron and steel products 4 S 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Hazardous material storage (indoor and outdoor) 4 S 4.9.2 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Junkyards, junked motor vehicles, salvage operations, and/or similar uses 4 S 4.9.3 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Lumber yards and/or building materials storage and sale 3 S P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Manufacturing, heavy 4 S 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Manufacturing, light 3 S S P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Printing and/or publishing establishments 3 P P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Research facilities 3 P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Skilled trade shops 3 S P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet Taxicab stand and/or office 3 P 4.9.4 1 per employee (largest shift) + 1 per company vehicle Trucking terminals 4 S S 1 per employee (largest shift) + 1 per company vehicle Warehouse uses (accessory) 3 P Warehouse uses (principal) 3 S P 1 per employee (largest shift) Warehouse, mini 3 S P 4.9.5 See office, if applicable Wholesale uses 3 P P 1 per 2 employees (largest shift) or 1 per 500 square feet  
PERMITTED USES TABLE Agricultural Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Bona fide farm 1 P P P P P P 4.10.1 Farm and livestock 1 P P P P P 4.10.2 Greenhouse or horticultural nursery (no on-site sales) 2 P P P P P P 1 per employee (largest shift) Greenhouse or horticultural nursery (with on-site sales) 2 S S P 1 per 500 square feet Produce stands (permanent) 2 P P P S S 4.10.3 1 per 200 square feet  
Other Uses Use Group OSR RA-30 R-15 R-10 R-6 O&I CB GC CP SR Parking Accessory structures (nonresidential) 2 P P S P P 4.11.1 Drive-through Uses 3 S Infill nonresidential 2 S S S 4.11.2 As required by proposed uses Town center planned development (TCPD) P P P P 4.11.7 As required by proposed uses Outdoor storage (nonresidential) 3 S S S S 4.11.3 Planned development 1 S S S S S S S S 4.11.4 As required by proposed uses Recycling centers 2 P S S S S P P P P 2 spaces Temporary uses 1 P P P P P P P P P 4.11.5 Utility facilities (except service or storage yards) 3 P S S S S S P P 2 per facility Wireless telecommunications towers 4 S S S S S S S S 4.11.6 2 per tower  
(Ord. No. 2012.03, 10-2-2012; Ord. of 2-2-2016; Ord. of 3-5-2019) 
Section 3.4. - Dimensional requirements. 
    3.4.1 General provisions. 
A.  All setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the nearest point of the structure. 
B.  Where a property abuts a street right-of-way, the setback shall be measured from the right-of-way line. 
C.  A foundation survey shall be required on all lots less than or equal to 15,000 square feet or when said structure is located within three feet of a building envelope. 
D.  No planting, structure, fence, wall, or other obstruction to vision that is more than two feet tall as measured at street level shall be placed in the minimum 10&prime × 70&prime sight triangle, as defined by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The sight triangle is the area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting property lines (or a property line and the curb or a driveway). 
3.4.2 Dimensional table. 
District Minimum Area (square feet) Minimum Lot Width (feet) Front Setback (feet) Corner Side Setback (feet) Side Setback (feet) Rear Setback (feet) Maximum Height (feet) OSR 30,000 100 35 20 10 25 35 4 RA-30 30,000 100 35 20 10 25 35 4 R-15 15,000 80 25 20 10 20 35 4 R-10 10,000 60 20 20 10 15 35 4 R-6 6,000 50 15 (alley 
loaded) 
20 (front 
loaded) 15 5 15 35 4 O&I 20,000 (site) 3 acres (campus) No min. lot size NA 25 2 20 0 1 25 35 4 CB 6,000 15 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 35 4 GC 6,000 50 30 2 30 2 10 20 35 4 CP 20,000 NA 25 3 30 2&3 20 3 20 3 NA 4  
NA=Not applicable 
1.  Unless adjacent to different zoning district, then apply 10 foot setback. Maintenance agreement required for zero lot line development. 
2.  Reduce to 15 feet where parking is in side or rear and increase landscaping by 25 percent. 
3.  Double setbacks on major and minor thoroughfares and adjacent to residential uses and zoning districts. 
4.  All buildings that exceed 35 feet in height shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code. 
    3.4.3 Exceptions. 
A.  The dimensional provisions of this section do not apply to residential accessory structures, which are regulated in chapter 4. 
B.  Utility uses as defined by this ordinance are not subject to the minimum lot sizes set forth for each zoning district. 
C.  Canopies, awnings, open stairways, uncovered porches, uncovered decks, uncovered patios, bay windows, chimneys, and heating units may encroach into the setback up to three feet, such that none of the structures mentioned herein shall be closer than five feet to a property line. 
D.  The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy, and shall neither apply to monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials, and similar structure, except in the vicinity of airports and as regulated in this section and by chapter 4. 
Section 3.5. - Conditional zoning districts. 
    3.5.1 Purpose. 
A.  Conditional zoning districts are created to correspond to each of the base zoning districts. Conditional Zoning (CZ) Districts allow specific uses to be established in accordance with prescribed conditions pertaining to an individual project. 
B.  The purpose is to provide a voluntary alternative procedure for the rezoning of a property for a specific use. A broad range of uses are permitted in the base district. However, there are instances where a base zoning district designation is clearly inappropriate for a property, but a specific use or uses permitted under this district and subject to development requirements would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this ordinance. Conditional zoning districts, herein established, are intended to accommodate such situations. This voluntary procedure is intended for firm development proposals, and is neither intended nor suited for securing early zoning for tentative uses which may not be undertaken for a long period of time. 
C.  Just as there are nine base zoning districts, there are nine corresponding Conditional Zoning Districts. 
CZ OSR Conditional Zoning Open Space and Recreational CZ RA-30 Conditional Zoning Low Density Residential-Agricultural CZ R-15 Conditional Zoning Low to Medium Density Residential CZ R-10 Conditional Zoning Medium Density Residential CZ R-6 Conditional Zoning High Density Residential CZ O&I Conditional Zoning Office & Institutional CZ CB Conditional Zoning Central Business CZ GC Conditional Zoning General Commercial CZ CP Conditional Zoning Commerce Park  
    3.5.2 Applicability. 
A.  Property may be placed in a Conditional Zoning District only in response to a petition by the owners of all the property to be included. 
B.  Specific conditions applicable to these districts may be proposed by the petitioner or the town or its agencies, but only those conditions mutually approved by the town and the petitioner may be incorporated into the requirements of the district. Conditions and site-specific standards imposed in a Conditional Zoning District shall be limited to those that address the conformance of the development and use of the site to the town's ordinances and to any officially adopted plan, and those that address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or use of the site. 
C.  If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to these regulations is found to be illegal or invalid or if the applicant should fail to accept any condition, it is the intent of this ordinance that the authorization of such CZ district shall be null and void and of no effect, and that proceedings shall be initiated by the Town of Angier to rezone the property to its previous zoning classification. 
D.  Conditional Zoning Districts shall be approved through the town board approval process outlined in chapter 11. 
Section 3.6. - Overlay districts. 
    Overlay zoning districts are established to provide land use regulations in addition to those created by the base zoning districts herein. These overlay districts are implemented when necessary due to special circumstances. There are two overlay zoning districts in Angier that provide for the protection of special environmental features of the town, as follows: 
WP-O Watershed Protection Overlay FDP-O Flood Damage Prevention Overlay  
    3.6.1 Watershed Protection Overlay (WP-O). The following regulations were adopted April 2005 in accordance with the state model ordinance: 
    3.6.1.1 Intent. 
A.  The purpose of the Watershed Protection Overlay District is to prevent significant future water quality deterioration in existing or potential future drinking water reservoirs and rivers that receive stormwater runoff form land within the Town of Angier. Protection of all water supplies within the state, in accordance with minimum standards, was mandated by the Water Supply Watershed Protection Act passed by the General Assembly in 1989. The quality of water in drinking water reservoirs and rivers can be affected by human activities including farming, obstruction of highways and streets, subdivision development, industrial development, and other land disturbing activities. Types of water pollutants resulting from these activities include sediment, bacterial contamination, heavy metals, synthetic organic compounds, and low-level radioactivity. 
B.  The intent of the Watershed Protection Overlay District is to apply a set of regulations involving land use and, in some cases, structural Best Management Practices (BMP's) that protect the watersheds by reducing the pollution from future development that enters the drinking water supplies. Land use management practices involve minimum lot sizes, maximum allowed density, and built-upon area restrictions, since built-upon areas such as streets, rooftops, and driveways are a major source of pollution. Structural Best Management Practices allow for more intensive land uses by providing for temporary detention of stormwater runoff so that pollutants may settle. 
C.  The Watershed Protection Overlay District as hereby established overlay other zoning districts established in this ordinance. The new use of any land or new structure within the Watershed Protection Overlay District shall comply with the use regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district as well as the requirements of the Watershed Protection Overlay District. 
D.  A Watershed Protection Overlay District will be applied to the Town of Angier's portion of watersheds that have been classified as WS-IV watersheds by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission in its implementation of the Water Supply Watershed Protection Act of 1989. In accordance with the State Mandate, one (1) Watershed Protection Overlay District, as listed in the following table, is hereby established. 
DISTRICT GENERAL LOCATION U-CAPE FEAR-PA Upper Cape Fear 
River Protected 
Watershed Overlay District The portion of the drainage basin of the Cape Fear River located in the Town of Angier's planning jurisdiction and draining to the Town of Lillington's water intake.  
    3.6.1.2 General. Pursuant to the requirements of N.C.G.S. § 143-214.5, one Watershed Protection Overlay District, as described in this ordinance, has been established for lands within the watersheds of existing drinking water rivers. This district overlays other zoning districts established in this ordinance and delineated on the Town of Angier Official Zoning Map. Wherever standards of the underlying zoning district differ from the watershed protection overlay standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
    3.6.1.3 Applicability of watershed development standards. Only new development activities requiring an erosion/sedimentation control plan under State Code (NCAC, Chapter 4) or local government program and/or resulting in the disturbance of one acre or more of land area are required to comply with the watershed protection requirements as specified in this section. 
    3.6.1.4 Land use regulations. All uses and activities allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted with the following exceptions: 
DISTRICT LAND USE REGULATIONS U-CAPE FEAR-PA New sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils are permitted. New nondischarging landfills are permitted. New discharging landfills are permitted. Agricultural activities are permitted and are subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990. Silviculture activities are permitted and subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 11.0101-.0209.  
    3.6.1.5 Density and built-upon area requirements under the low and high density options. Minimum and maximum residential and nonresidential density and built-upon area limits shall be as indicated in the table below, or as required by the underlying zoning district, whichever is less. 
DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT TYPE MAXIMUM DENSITY/BUILT-UPON AREA U-CAPE 
FEAR-CA Single-Family Development Low Density Option 20,000 square foot (0.45 acre) minimum lot size with curb and gutter, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams, 
OR 
24 percent built-upon area with curb and gutters, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams, 
OR 
14,000 square foot (0.32 acre) minimum lot size without curb and gutter, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams, 
OR 
36 percent built-upon area without curb and gutter, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams. High Density Option On-site infiltration of the first inch of stormwater runoff required where density exceeds 2 dwelling units per 40,000 square feet (.92 acre), or 24 percent built-upon area (with curb and gutter), or 3 dwelling units per 40,000 square feet (.92 acre) or 36 percent built-upon area (without curb and gutter), 
AND 
70 percent built-upon area, 
AND 
100' stream buffers along perennial streams. U-CAPE 
FEAR-CA 
(continued) Other Residential and Nonresidential Development Low Density Option 24 percent built-upon area with curb and gutter, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams, 
OR 
36 percent built-upon area without curb and gutter, 
AND 
30' stream buffers along perennial streams. High Density Option On-site infiltration of the first inch of stormwater runoff required where development (residential or nonresidential) exceeds either 2 dwelling units per 40,000 square feet (.92 acre) or 24 percent built-upon area (with curb and gutter), or 3 dwelling units per acre or 36 percent built-upon area (without curb and gutter), 
AND 
70 percent built-upon area, 
AND 
100' stream buffers along perennial streams.  
  
    3.6.1.6 Stormwater control structures. 
A.  All stormwater control structures shall be designed by a North Carolina registered professional with qualifications appropriate for the type of system required. These registered professionals are defined as professional engineers, landscape architects (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A allow), and land surveyors, to the extent that the design represents incidental drainage within a subdivision, as provided in the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89 (c)-3(7). 
B.  All stormwater controls shall use wet detention as a primary treatment system unless alternate stormwater management measures, as outlined in subsection C., are used. Wet detention ponds shall be designed for specific pollutant removal according to modeling techniques approved by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management. Specific requirements for these systems shall be in accordance with the following design criteria: 
1.  Wet detention ponds shall be designed to remove 85 percent of total suspended solids in the permanent pool and storage runoff from a one-inch rainfall from the site above the permanent pool. 
2.  The designed runoff storage volume shall be above the permanent pool. 
3.  The discharge rate from these systems following the one-inch rainfall design storm shall be such that the runoff does not draw down to the permanent pool level in less than two days and that the pond is drawn down to the permanent pool level within at least five days. 
4.  The mean permanent pool depth shall be a minimum of three feet. 
5.  The inlet structure shall be designed to minimize turbulence using baffles or other appropriate design features. 
6.  Vegetative filters shall be constructed for the overflow and discharge of all stormwater wet detention ponds and shall be at least 30 feet in length. The slope and width of the vegetative filter shall be determined so as to provide a nonerosive velocity flow-through filter for a ten-year, 24-hour storm with a ten-year, one-hour intensity with a slope of five percent or less. Vegetation in the filter shall be natural vegetation, grasses, or artificially planted wetland vegetation appropriate for the site characteristics. 
C.  Alternative stormwater management systems, consisting of one treatment option or a combination of treatment options, may be used. The design criteria for approval shall be 85 percent average annual removal of total suspended solids. Also, the discharge rate shall meet one of the following criteria: 
1.  The discharge rate following the one-inch design storm shall be such that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design stage within five days, but not less than two days; or 
2.  The post development peak discharge rate shall equal the predevelopment rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm. 
D.  In addition to the required vegetative filters, all land areas outside of the pond shall be provided with a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within 30 days after any land disturbance. Upon completion of the stormwater control structure, a permanent ground cover, as described herein, shall be established and maintained as part of the maintenance agreement. 
E.  A description of the area containing the stormwater control structure shall be prepared and filed as a separate deed with the county register of deeds along with any easements necessary for general access to the stormwater control structure. The deeded area shall include the stormwater control structure, vegetative filters, all pipes and water control structures, berms, dikes, etc., and sufficient area to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs, and reconstruction. 
F.  Qualifying areas of the stormwater control structure may be considered pervious when computing total built-upon area. However, if the structure is used to compute the percentage built-upon area for one site, it shall not be used to compute built-upon area for any other site or area. 
    3.6.1.7 Operation and maintenance of stormwater control structures. 
A.  Posting of financial security. All new stormwater control structures shall be conditioned on the posting of adequate financial assurance for the purpose of maintenance, repairs, or reconstruction necessary for adequate performance of the stormwater control structures. Financial assurance shall be in the form of the following: 
1.  Security performance bond or other security. 
a.  The permit applicant shall obtain either a performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in North Carolina, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value payable to the Town of Angier or placed in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the Town of Angier. The bond or other instrument shall be in an amount equal to 1.25 times the total cost of the stormwater control structure, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the town engineer. The total cost of the stormwater control structure shall include all materials such as piping and other structures; seeding and soil stabilization; design and engineering; and grading, excavation, fill, etc. The cost shall not be prorated as part of a larger project, but rather under the assumption of an independent mobilization. 
b.  Upon default of the permit applicant to complete and/or maintain the stormwater control structure as spelled out in the performance bond or other security, the town may obtain and use all or any portion of the funds necessary to complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. The town shall return any funds not spent in completing the improvement to the owning entity. 
2.  Cash or equivalent security deposited after the release of the performance bond. 
a.  The permit applicant shall deposit with the Town of Angier either cash or other instrument approved by the town attorney that is readily convertible into cash at face value. The cash or security shall be in an amount equal to 15 percent of the total cost of the stormwater control structure or the estimated cost of maintaining the stormwater control structure over a ten-year period, whichever is greater. The estimated cost of maintaining the stormwater control structure shall be consistent with the approved operation and maintenance plan or manual provided by the developer. The amount shall be computed by estimating the maintenance cost for 25 years and multiplying this amount by two-fifths or 0.4. 
b.  Upon defualt of the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in accordance with the operation maintenance agreement, the town shall obtain and use all or any portion of the cash security to make necessary improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds shall only be made after exhausting all other reasonable remedies seeking the owning entity to comply with the terms and conditions of the operating and maintenance agreement. The town shall not return any deposited cash funds. 
B.  Maintenance and upkeep. 
1.  Operation and maintenance agreement required. The permit applicant shall enter into the binding operation and maintenance agreement between the Town of Angier and all interests in the development. Said agreement shall require the owning entity to maintain, repair, and if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in accordance with the operation management plan or manual provided by the developer. The developer shall file the operation and maintenance agreement with the county register of deeds. 
2.  Operation and maintenance plan or manual required. An operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be provided by the developer for each stormwater control structure, indicating what operation and maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative criteria will be used for determining when those actions are to be taken and, consistent with the operations maintenance agreement, who is responsible for those actions. The plan shall clearly indicate the steps that will be taken for restoring a stormwater control structure to design specifications if a failure occurs. 
3.  Landscaping and grounds maintenance. Landscaping and grounds management shall be the responsibility of the owning entity. However, vegetation shall not be established or allowed to mature to the extent that the integrity of the control structure is diminished or threatened, or to the extent of interfering with any easement or access to the stormwater control structure. 
4.  Repair or reconstruction. Except for general landscaping and grounds management, the owning entity shall notify the administrator prior to any repair or reconstruction of the stormwater control structure. All improvements shall be made consistent with the approved plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation and maintenance plan or manual. After notification by the owning entity, the town engineer shall inspect the completed improvements and shall inform the owning entity of any required additions, changes, or modifications and of the time period to complete said improvements. 
5.  Minor amendments to plans and specifications. Amendments to the plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be approved by the town engineer, provided that the changes do not involve a change in the size or location of the structure. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a North Carolina registered professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A, allow) and submitted to and reviewed by the town engineer. 
a.  If the town engineer approves the proposed changes, the owning entity of the stormwater control structure shall file sealed copies of the revisions with the administrator. 
b.  If the town engineer disapproves the changes, the proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the town engineer as a new proposal. If the proposal has not been revised and is essentially the same plan that was already reviewed, it shall be returned to the applicant. 
c.  The town engineer shall report any such revisions to the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
6.  Major amendments to plans and specifications. Amendments to the plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or manual that involve a change in the size or location may be approved by the board of commissioners after receiving a recommendation from the town engineer. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a North Carolina registered professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A, allow) and submitted to, and reviewed by the town engineer. 
7.  Revision of plan required if found to be inadequate. If the town finds that the operation and maintenance plan or manual is inadequate for any reason, the board of commissioners shall notify the owning entity of any required changes and shall prepare and file copies of the revised agreement with the county register of deeds, the town engineer, the administrator, and the owning entity. 
C.  Inspection and release of the performance bond. 
1.  Inspection by town engineer. The stormwater control structure shall be inspected by the town engineer after the owning entity notifies the administrator that all work has been completed. At this inspection, the owning entity shall provide: 
a.  The signed deed, related easements and survey plat for the stormwater control structure ready for filing with the county register of deeds. 
b.  A certification sealed by an engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A, allow) stating that the stormwater control structure is complete and consistent with the approved plans and specifications. 
2.  Submittal of inspection report to town engineer. The administrator shall present the materials submitted by the developer and the inspection report and recommendations to the town engineer. 
a.  If the town engineer approves the inspection report and accepts the certification, deed, and easements, the administrator shall file the deed and easements with the county register of deeds, release up to 75 percent of the value of the performance bond or other surety, and issue a zoning permit for the stormwater control structure. 
b.  If deficiencies are found, the town engineer shall direct that improvements and inspections be made and/or documents corrected and resubmitted to the town engineer. 
3.  Release of remaining security. No sooner than one year after the filing date of the deed, easements and maintenance agreement, the developer may petition the board of commissioners to release the remaining value of the performance bond or other security. Upon receipt of said petition, the town engineer shall inspect the stormwater control structure to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and intended. The administrator shall present the petition, inspection report, and recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
a.  If the board of commissioners approve the report and accept the petition, the developer shall deposit with the Town of Angier a cash amount equal to 1.25 times the cost of the stormwater structure, after which, the board shall release the performance bond or other security. 
b.  If the board of commissioners do not accept the report and rejects the petition, the board shall provide the developer with instructions to correct any deficiencies and all steps necessary for the release of the performance bond or other surety. 
4.  Annual inspection required. 
a.  All stormwater control structures shall be inspected at least once on an annual basis to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and intended. Records of inspections shall be maintained on forms approved or supplied by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management. Annual inspections shall begin within one year of the filing date of the deed for the stormwater control structure. 
b.  In the event the town engineer discovers the need for corrective action or improvements, he/she shall notify the administrator who shall notify the owning entity of the needed improvements and the date by which the corrective action is to be completed. All improvements shall be made consistent with the plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation plan or manual. After notification by the owning entity, the town engineer shall inspect and approve the completed improvements. 
    3.6.1.8 Cluster development. Cluster development in the Watershed Protection Overlay is allowed under the following conditions: 
A.  Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments for the underlying zoning district in which it is located. Density or built-upon area for the project shall not exceed that allowed for the protected area. 
B.  All built-upon area shall be designed and located to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated stormwater flow, maximize the use of sheet flow through vegetated areas, and maximize the flow length through vegetated areas. 
C.  Areas of concentrated density development shall be located in upland area and away, to the maximum extent practicable, from surface waters and drainageways. 
D.  The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an incorporated homeowners association for management; to a local government for preservation as a park or open space; or to a conservation organization for preservation in a permanent easement. Where a property association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property deeds. 
E.  Cluster developments that meet the applicable Low Density requirements shall transport stormwater runoff by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable. 
    3.6.1.9 Stream buffers required. 
A.  A minimum 100-foot vegetative stream buffer is required for all new development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a minimum 30-foot vegetative stream buffer for development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government studies. Desirable artificial stream bank or shoreline stabilization approved by the administrator is permitted. 
B.  No new development is allowed in stream buffers except for water dependent structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs and security lights that result in only diminutive increases in impervious area and public projects such as street crossings and greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from surface waters, and maximize the utilization of stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP's). 
    3.6.2 Flood Damage Prevention Overlay (FDP-O). The following regulations were adopted September 5, 2006 in accordance with the state model ordinance: 
    3.6.2.1 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and objectives. 
A.  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Angier, North Carolina, does ordain as follows: 
B.  Findings of fact. 
1.  The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of Town of Angier are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards. 
C.  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this overlay to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
D.  Objectives. The objectives of this overlay are to: 
1.  Protect human life, safety, and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in flood prone areas; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas; and 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special flood hazard area. 
    3.6.2.2 Definitions. 
    Definitions for the Flood Damage Prevention Overlay are contained in Appendix A Definitions under "Flood Damage Prevention Overlay Definitions". 
    3.6.2.3 General provisions. 
A.  Lands to which this overlay applies. This overlay shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction, including Extra-Territorial Jurisdictions (ETJs), of the Town of Angier and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability. 
B.  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), for Harnett County dated October 3, 2006, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this overlay. 
C.  Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this overlay prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection B. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this overlay and other applicable regulations. 
E.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This overlay is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this overlay and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this overlay, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
G.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this overlay is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This overlay does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This overlay shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Angier or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this overlay or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
H.  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this overlay or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this overlay or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Angier from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
    3.6.2.4 Administration. 
A.  Designation of floodplain administrator. The town manager or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain Administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this overlay. 
B.  Floodplain development application, permit, and certification requirements. 
1.  Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit: 
a.  A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development: 
i)  The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; 
ii)  Existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development; 
iii)  The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section 3.6.2.3 B., or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area; 
iv)  Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section 3.6.2.3 B.; 
v)  The boundary of the floodway(s) or nonencroachment area(s) as determined in Section 3.6.2.3 B.; 
vi)  The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in Section 3.6.2.3 B.; Section 3.6.2.4 C.; or Section 3.6.2.5 D.; 
vii)  The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
viii)  Certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
b.  Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including but not limited to: 
(i)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures; 
(ii)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and 
(iii)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed. 
c.  If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures. 
d.  A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this overlay are met. These details include but are not limited to: 
(i)  The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and 
(ii)  Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(4)(c) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30. 
e.  Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor. 
f.  Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
g.  Certification that all other local, state and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received. 
h.  Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (B) (6 and 7), are met. 
i.  A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
2.  Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit. 
b.  The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in Section 3.6.2.3 (B). 
c.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities. 
d.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities. 
e.  All certification submittal requirements with timelines. 
f.  A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or nonencroachment area of any watercourse, as applicable. 
g.  The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30. 
3.  Certification requirements. 
a.  Elevation certificates. 
(i)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. 
(ii)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(iii)  A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  If a manufactured home is placed within Zones A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(3)(b). 
d.  If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
e.  Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection: 
(i)  Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(6)(a); 
(ii)  Temporary Structures meeting requirements of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(7); and 
(iii)  Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(8). 
C.  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties: 
1.  Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the requirements of this overlay have been satisfied. 
2.  Advise applicant that additional federal or state permits may be required, and review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received. 
3.  Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
4.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained and is not diminished. 
5.  Prevent encroachments into floodways and nonencroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (F) are met. 
6.  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3). 
7.  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3). 
8.  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3). 
9.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3) and Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(2). 
10.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or nonencroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
11.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data have not been provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.3 (B), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to Section 3.6.2.5 (D)(2)(b), in order to administer the provisions of this overlay. 
12.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data are provided but no floodway or nonencroachment area data have been provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.3 (B), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this overlay. 
13.  When the lowest ground level elevation (floor) and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file. 
14.  Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this overlay and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended. 
15.  Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local overlay and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
16.  Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this overlay, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
17.  Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
18.  Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
19.  Follow through with corrective procedures of Section 3.6.2.4 (D). 
20.  Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests. 
21.  Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.3 (B) of this overlay, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs. 
22.  Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs). 
D.  Corrective procedures. 
1.  Violations to be corrected. When the floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification. 
2.  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service, stating: 
a.  That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations; 
b.  That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
c.  That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as applicable. 
3.  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention overlay, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
4.  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The board of commissioners shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
5.  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the board of commissioners following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court. 
E.  Variance procedures. 
1.  The board of adjustment as established by the Town of Angier, hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this overlay. 
2.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the court, as provided in N.C.G.A. Chapter 7A. 
3.  Variances may be issued for: 
a.  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; 
b.  Functionally dependent facilities, provided provisions of Section 3.6.2.4, (E)(9)(b, c and e), have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or 
c.  Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this section. 
4.  In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this overlay, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
5.  A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance. 
6.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this overlay, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this overlay. 
7.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
8.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request. 
9.  Conditions for variances: 
a.  Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or overlays. 
b.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or nonencroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
d.  Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval. 
e.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or overlays. 
10.  A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The use serves a critical need in the community. 
b.  No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area. 
c.  The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
d.  The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
e.  The Town of Angier has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance. 
    3.6.2.5 Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
4.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches. 
5.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
6.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
7.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
8.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this overlay, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this overlay. 
9.  Nothing in this overlay shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this overlay and located totally or partially within the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this overlay. 
10.  New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in Section 3.6.2.4 (E)(10). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3). 
11.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
12.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
13.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
14.  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
15.  When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements. 
16.  When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply. 
B.  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Section 3.6.2.3 (B) or Section 3.6.2.5 (D), the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (A), are required: 
1.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with Section 3.6.2.5 (G)(2). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan. 
3.  Manufactured homes. 
a.  New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 
c.  All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(4). 
d.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the local emergency management coordinator. 
4.  Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor: 
a.  Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas; 
b.  Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and 
c.  Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(iii)  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit; 
(iv)  The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade; 
(v)  Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and 
(vi)  Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above. 
5.  Additions/improvements. 
a.  Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
(i)  Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more nonconforming than the existing structure. 
(ii)  A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
b.  Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
c.  Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
(i)  Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(ii)  A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
d.  Where an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply with the standards for new construction. 
6.  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for new construction. 
7.  Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator for review and written approval: 
a.  A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one year; 
b.  The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
c.  The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification); 
d.  A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and 
e.  Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
8.  Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas); 
b.  Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled; 
c.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
d.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
e.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (A)(1); 
f.  All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (A)(4); and 
g.  Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(4)(c). 
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3). 
C.  (Reserved). 
D.  Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations. Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate Zone A and established in Section 3.6.2.3 (B), where no base flood elevation (BFE) data have been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (A), shall apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria: 
a.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data are available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this overlay and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in Section 3.6.2.5 (A and B). 
b.  When floodway or nonencroachment data are available from a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway and nonencroachment areas shall also comply with the requirements of Section 3.6.2.5 (B and F). 
c.  All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.6.2.3 (B) and utilized in implementing this overlay. 
d.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data are not available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All other applicable provisions of Section 3.6.2.5 (B) shall also apply. 
E.  Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but without established floodways or nonencroachment areas. Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor nonencroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas: 
1.  Standards of Section 3.6.2.5 (A and B); and 
2.  Until a regulatory floodway or nonencroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
F.  Floodways and nonencroachment areas. Areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment areas are located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 3.6.2.3 (B). The floodways and nonencroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to the standards outlined in Section 3.6.2.5 (A and B), shall apply to all development within such areas: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
a.  It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or 
b.  A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 
2.  If Section 3.6.2.5 (F)(1) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this overlay. 
3.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the following provisions are met: 
a.  The anchoring and the elevation standards of Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(3); and 
b.  The no encroachment standard of Section 3.6.2.5 (F)(1). 
G.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO). Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 3.6.2.3 (B), are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to Section 3.6.2.5 (A and B), all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
2.  Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in Section 3.6.2.5 (G)(1) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with Section 3.6.2.4 (B)(3) and Section 3.6.2.5 (B)(2). 
3.  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
    3.6.2.6 Legal status provisions. 
A.  Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. This overlay in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted November 4, 1997 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this overlay shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention overlay of the Town of Angier enacted on November 4, 1997 as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. 
B.  Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this overlay; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this overlay. 
Chapter 4 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 

Section 4.1. - Purpose. 
A.  The Town of Angier finds that there are certain uses that exist which may be constructed, continued, and/or expanded provided they meet certain mitigating conditions specific to their design and/or operation. Such conditions ensure compatibility so that different uses may be located in proximity to one another without adverse affects to either. This chapter specifies the additional requirements for specific uses as indicated in the Permitted Uses Table in chapter 3. 
B.  Each use shall be permitted in compliance with all conditions listed for the use in this chapter. Certain uses are also classified as special uses and require approval by the town board of adjustment as outlined in chapter 11. 
Section 4.2. - Residential uses. 
    4.2.1 Accessory dwellings. Accessory dwellings may be located in a building separate from the principal dwelling subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed one-half of the total area of the principal dwelling. 
B.  Accessory dwellings shall be built to North Carolina Building Standards. 
C.  Accessory dwellings shall be similar in appearance to and compatible with the primary structure. 
    4.2.2 Accessory structures (residential). 
A.  There shall be a principal residential structure on any lot for which there is an accessory structure. 
B.  Accessory structures shall be constructed in the side or rear yard and shall be similar in appearance to and compatible with the primary structure. An accessory structure may be constructed in the front yard in the RA-30 district where the accessory structure is setback a minimum of 150 feet from the street right-of-way. Accessory structures with a total area exceeding 500 square feet shall be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal structure. 
C.  Recreation vehicles shall not be considered an accessory dwelling or structure and the connection of such vehicle to utility services (other than for periodic maintenance and/or repair purposes) shall be prohibited unless the vehicle is located in a camping and recreational vehicle park so designed to accommodate recreation vehicles or proper connection is provided on private property for a period not to exceed 14 days in a calendar year. 
D.  Any structure not typically intended for residential purposes shall not be allowed. 
E.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to all accessory structures: 
Maximum Area and Number In the R-6, R-10, and R-15 districts, there shall be no more than two accessory structures per lot of record and the total area of accessory structures shall not exceed 40 percent of the area of the principal structure. Maximum Height Shall not exceed 125 percent of the height of the principal structure or as determined by the zoning administrator. Minimum Setback from Property Lines 1. For R-6, R-10 and R-15 districts: Five feet from side and rear property lines. 
2. For all other districts: Ten feet from side and rear property lines. 
3. For pools and portable carports: Ten feet from side and rear property lines. 
4. All side corner yards shall follow principal structure setbacks for side corner setback of the zoning district in which it is located. 
5. Accessory structures shall not encroach upon any platted or recorded easements. Minimum Setback from Principal Structure 10 feet  

F.  No accessory structure shall be permitted that involves or requires any external features which are not primarily residential in nature or character. 
G.  Under no circumstances may a vehicle, trailer, or manufactured home be used as an accessory structure. 
H.  The area of a pool shall include all structures and walks or patio areas of cement, stone, or wood, at or above grade, built for, and used in conjunction with the pool. 
I.  Fences for pools shall be in accordance with the N.C. Building Code requirements for fencing pools. All pools shall have security fencing. 
J.  Patio areas that are less than 200 square feet, uncovered, and at grade have no setback requirements from rear and side lot lines. 
K.  Satellite dishes less than 39.37 inches in diameter may be located anywhere. All other satellite dishes shall adhere to the following standards: 
6.  Satellite dishes shall be no larger than eight feet in diameter. 
7.  The maximum height shall be 15 feet unless the applicant can prove: 
a.  A less intrusive location is not possible; and 
b.  A higher location will improve reception. 
8.  Satellite dishes may not be located in front or side yards and shall meet all setbacks applicable to accessory structures. 
9.  Satellite dishes shall be screened from view with dense landscaping materials, fences, or other solid materials, to the extent that it does not impair reception. 
10.  Satellite dishes with a reflective surface shall be painted a subdued or natural color. 
11.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet above the peak of the roof of the maximum building height, whichever is less. 
    4.2.3 Boarding and rooming houses. 
A.  Single-family homes used as a rooming/boarding house may not subdivide existing rooms. 
B.  The rooming/boarding house shall be owner-occupied or shall be occupied by a resident manager which occupies the structure as a primary residence. 
C.  No more than one person or couple may inhabit a single room. 
D.  No more than five renters/boarders shall be permitted at any one time. 
E.  Guest rooms shall be accessed internally, except for emergency exits, and shall not have kitchen facilities. 
F.  All parking shall be to the rear of the home. Where on-street parking is permitted, the length of the street in front of the lot may be counted as parking. On-street parking shall be limited to two spaces. 
    4.2.4 Family care homes. In accordance with N.C.G.S. Chapters 122C, 131D, and 168, these uses are deemed residential uses and are permitted in all residential districts subject to the following conditions: 
A.  No more than six residents other than the homeowner and the homeowner's immediate family are permitted to live in a family care home as defined by N.C.G.S. 168-21. 
B.  A family care home must be licensed with the N.C. Department of Health and Human Services Division of Facility Services before operating. 
C.  No family care home may be located within a one-half mile radius of any other residential care home. 
D.  No exterior signage is permitted. 
E.  The owner or operator must provide documentation of the closet licensed family care home and its proximity to the proposed family care home. 
    4.2.5 Home occupations. 
    4.2.5.1 Customary home occupations. 
A.  Such business shall not change the character of the dwelling. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling. 
B.  No outdoor storage associated with the home occupation is permitted. 
C.  No more than 25 percent of the home square footage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. The home's square footage includes any attached garage or basement. 
D.  A maximum of one outside employee is permitted. 
E.  No display or advertising is permitted. 
F.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the home occupation. 
G.  Chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment that creates a hazard, odors, light emission, noises, or interference in radio or television reception detectable outside the subject property shall be prohibited. 
H.  Customary home occupations may be in operation at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
I.  If the residence is a rental unit, the tenant shall provide written consent from the property owner. 
    4.2.5.2 In-home daycare. In addition to the requirements for a customary home occupation (except hours), the following requirements shall apply to an in-home daycare: 
A.  The in-home daycares shall be limited to a maximum of four children in addition to any children of the owner(s). All outdoor play areas shall be fenced to a minimum height of four feet and screened with evergreen plantings, as defined herein. Front yards shall not be used as playground areas. 
B.  In-home daycares shall not be conducted within a manufactured home. 
C.  The structure shall be the primary residence of the business owner. 
D.  If the residence is a rental unit, then the tenant shall provide written consent from the property owner. 
E.  An in-home daycare shall not be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
F.  Parking areas shall not abut fenced play areas without provisions for ballasts or curbing. 
    4.2.6 Infill residential (reserved). 
    4.2.7 Live/work development. 
A.  Live/work developments shall be permitted only when located in the town center land use classification. 
B.  A declaration establishing a condominium development must be submitted with the special use application if more than one residential unit is proposed. This declaration shall be prepared which satisfies the requirements of the N.C. Unit Ownership Act (N.C.G.S. 47A-1 et seq.). 
C.  Each residential unit shall have a minimum of 600 square feet of usable floor space. 
D.  Residential and nonresidential uses shall not be located on the same story of a structure and nonresidential uses shall not be located above residential uses. 
E.  Permissible nonresidential uses shall include the following as listed in the "Permitted Uses Table" and must be conducted wholly within the structure: 
1.  Office and services uses. 
2.  Retail uses. 
F.  No outside storage or display of items associated with the use shall be permitted. 
    4.2.8 Manufactured homes on individual lots. 
A.  All manufactured homes shall: 
1.  Be constructed after July 1, 1976, and shall meet or exceed the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction. 
2.  Be set up in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and a continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the perimeter of the manufactured home; 
3.  Have stairs and a porch, the porch being at least four feet by six feet in size. Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code; and 
4.  Remove or landscape the hitch, wheels, axles, and transporting lights. 
B.  Multi-Section Manufactured Homes shall: 
1.  The manufactured home shall have a length not exceeding four times its width, with length measured along the longest axis and width measured at the narrowest part of the other axis; 
2.  The manufactured home shall have a minimum of 1,200 square feet of enclosed and heated living area; 
3.  The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home shall have minimum vertical rise of three and two tenths feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run (3.2 feet and 12 feet) and the roof is finished with a type of composition shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction; and 
4.  The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction; 
    4.2.9 Manufactured home parks. 
A.  All existing and new manufactured home parks must apply for a business license. A business license shall be valid for a period of one year subject to the provisions of this section and upon a yearly inspection performed under the direction of the administrator. All manufactured home parks shall maintain a valid business license. The business license issued to the owner shall constitute the authority to operate the manufactured home park in accordance with this section. All permits shall be withheld without a valid business license. The park owner(s) business license fee shall be a base inspection on the park and its lots. Whether occupied or vacant, each lot shall be charged if it is the intent of the park owner(s) to continue the use of the whole park. Therefore, failure to maintain a valid business license, or to obtain a business license within six months from the adoption date of this section, shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of chapter 15 of this ordinance. 
B.  Eligibility. 
1.  A complete application and site plan shall be submitted to the Town of Angier. 
2.  Application shall be for three or more manufactured homes on one parcel of land. 
3.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the Town shall conduct a manufactured home park inspection. All applicable requirements listed below shall be met. Failure to meet said requirements shall result in the forfeiture of their business license. 
4.  New manufactured home parks shall only be developed within the RA-30 zoning district via a special use permit. No manufactured home built prior to July 1, 1976, will be allowed to locate or move within a manufactured home park or within the jurisdiction of the Town of Angier. 
C.  General requirements for existing manufactured home parks 
1.  All manufactured homes shall have the entire perimeter underpinned at all times so as to enclose the space from the bottom of the manufactured home to ground grade. 
2.  All manufactured homes and accessory structures shall follow the setbacks of the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.  The towing hitch on all manufactured homes shall be removed or completely landscaped from view. 
4.  Each lot shall clearly display the approved number with a minimum of four inches in size and shall be composed of reflective materials of contrasting colors. 
5.  The owner(s) shall install and maintain mailboxes in good condition to allow for postal delivery service for each resident, in accordance with local, State, and Federal regulations. 
6.  The park operator(s) will operate or provide for the operation of a solid waste disposal system, including providing park tenants with appropriate containers. Individual containers shall be waterproof and rodent proof. The method of garbage disposal shall be noted on the plan and approved by the board of adjustment. Disposal of all large bulky items, such as furniture, shall be the responsibility of the tenant and/ or park owner(s). 
7.  Every manufactured home park owner shall maintain an accurate register containing a record of all occupants, owner(s) of manufactured homes, and a description of each home in the park. The register shall be available for inspection at all times by authorized county representatives. In accordance with N.C.G.S. § 105-316(a)(1), park owner(s) shall furnish to the county tax supervisor a copy of the register before January 1 st of each calendar year. 
8.  The owner(s) shall be required to provide a park sign, that shall 
a.  Meet the requirements of chapter 10; 
b.  Identify the name of the park and a telephone number at which the park owner(s) or operator(s) may be contacted; 
c.  Be constructed of weather-resistant material designed expressly for signs. 
9.  Fences or walls shall not be permitted unless approved as part of the park plan. 
a.  This excludes temporary pet containment areas that do not exceed 80 square feet. 
b.  The fence or wall shall be made of any suitable and durable material that is intended for such use. 
10.  No living compartment or structure other than that of a prefabricated structure specifically designed for manufactured home use or extension shall be added to any manufactured home parked. This excludes front and rear uncovered porches and decks not exceeding 100 square feet. 
11.  One accessory building is allowed per lot. 
a.  Such building shall not exceed 120 square feet in size. 
b.  Shall be located in the rear yard. 
c.  Shall be compatible to the principal dwelling in terms of exterior building material and color. 
d.  Existing structures authorized by permit and structurally sound, prior to the establishment of this section shall be allowed to remain. 
e.  Temporary carports that are a prefabricated structure without any footings or foundations, and compatible to the principal dwelling in terms of exterior building material and color 
12.  No manufactured home park shall permit a recreational vehicle or travel trailer to locate within its boundaries for periods greater than one (1) week. 
13.  Parks shall not be allowed to expand the number of lots or acreage unless the park receives approval from the Town of Angier. The transfer of a manufactured home space or spaces either by sale or by any other means within a manufactured home park is prohibited 
D.  New manufactured home park development standards. New manufactured home parks shall comply with the above requirements as well as the below development standards. 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be no less than 6,000 square feet with both public water and sewer. 
2.  Only one manufactured home shall be located on any manufactured home space at any one time. 
3.  Maintenance of all internal streets and corresponding drainage facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the park. All streets shall paved, and maintained in a manner to remain free of pot holes, breaks in pavement, rough surfaces, standing water, and associated problems which would impede or cause hazards to motor vehicles. 
4.  Setbacks. 
a.  The manufactured home and accessory structures shall be located not less than 25 feet from the park boundary and at least ten feet from planting or landscape areas. 
b.  Each manufactured home shall be located not less than 30 feet from any other manufactured home. 
c.  Accessory structures shall be located not less than ten feet from a manufactured home. 
5.  Each manufactured home lot shall have at least two paved parking spaces. 
6.  Buffers shall be maintained around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home park as per chapter 7. 
7.  No manufactured home park shall permit a recreational vehicle or travel trailer to locate within its boundaries for periods greater than one (1) week. 
8.  Adequate lighting shall be provided to illuminate streets, common driveways, walkways, and dead end streets for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. The minimum size street light shall be a 175 watt Mercury-vapor (approximately 7,000 lumen class) or its equivalent, spaced at intervals of not more than 300 feet. 
9.  The park owner(s) and occupants shall keep all park owned facilities, manufactured home spaces, improvements, equipment, open space, recreational and all common areas in good repair and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the accumulation or storage of material which would constitute a fire hazard or would cause insect or rodent breeding and harborage. The county shall have the authority to remove, abate, or remedy everything that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health. The expense of the action shall be paid by the park owner(s) in default, and, if not paid, shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the nuisance arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
10.  Parks shall not be allowed to expand the number of lots or acreage unless the park receives approval from the Town of Angier. The transfer of a manufactured home space or spaces either by sale or by any other means within a manufactured home park is prohibited. 
11.  Termination of a manufactured home park shall consist of a signed termination affidavit and removal of manufactured homes and other associated structures. 
    4.2.10 Multifamily residential. 
A.  All multifamily residential developments with 20 or more proposed units shall require a special use permit from the board of adjustment. 
B.  Dimensional requirements for multifamily residential developments shall be as follows: 
Maximum density 12 dwelling units per acre (with public water and sewer) Minimum public street frontage 150 feet if 20 or more units, 
100 feet if less than 20 units Front setback (project perimeter) Projects equal to or greater than 10 acres: 100 feet 
Projects between 5 and 10 acres: 50 feet 
Projects less than 5 acres: 25 feet Side setback (project perimeter) 30 feet Rear setback (project perimeter) 30 feet Minimum building separation 10 feet Maximum units per structure Single-story structure: 6 units 
Multistory structure: 18 units  
C.  All structures shall be a minimum of ten feet from all internal parking areas, and drive-isles. 
D.  Project perimeter setback areas shall be free of any structures, excluding access ways and signs. 
E.  Amenities and accessory structures shall be permitted as an accessory use to the primary use. 
F.  Developments of 50 units or more shall provide two means of ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 2010.1, 12-7-2010; Ord. of 3-5-2019) 
    4.2.11 Temporary emergency residences. Recreational vehicles (RV's) or travel trailers may be allowed on a temporary basis in a zoning district in which such use is not listed as a permitted use, if a disaster occurs which results in an occupied, single-family dwelling being destroyed (i.e., it receives damage greater than 60 percent of its tax value as indicated on the most current tax listings or if the home is deemed uninhabitable by the building inspector). In this instance, a travel trailer or RV may be placed on the lot containing the dwelling unit which was destroyed on a temporary basis. 
A.  Temporary emergency residences shall not be placed in the front yard and setbacks shall be determined by the zoning administrator. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall be given the authority to issue a zoning permit for such temporary residence on a one-time basis only for a period of up to nine months. Such permit may be renewed on a one-time only basis [for a period of no greater than nine months] by the board of adjustment if it is determined that construction of a new dwelling unit is proceeding in a diligent manner. 
    4.2.12 Two-family (duplex) residential. 
A.  The minimum lot size for a duplex shall be two times that of the zoning district requirement. 
B.  No building shall exceed a length of 150 feet. 
C.  All sanitary containers shall be completely screened from view of the street and adjacent properties with fencing and/or landscaping. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(1); Ord. of 1-3-2016(1)) 
Section 4.3. - Civic and government uses. 
    4.3.1 Cemeteries, mausoleums, and columbariums. 
A.  Cemeteries shall not include embalming or cremation facilities. 
B.  Setbacks to a wall or grave shall be a minimum of ten feet for secondary rights-of-way and 50 feet from designated thoroughfares. 
C.  Crypts and mausoleums shall be set back from all street rights-of-way a minimum of 20 feet or as required by the dimensional standards of the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
    4.3.2 Civic and religious uses. 
A.  Religious and civic uses shall be placed on a lot so as to front on the street. 
B.  Building(s) incidental to the principal structure shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the front façade of the primary structure, and if more than one, shall be arranged to create secondary gathering spaces within the subject property, unless it is not feasible as determined by the administrator. 
C.  Parking shall be located towards the interior of the lot. Parking may not occur within a front setback or corner side setback, unless it is not feasible as determined by the administrator. 
D.  Shared parking with adjacent nonresidential uses that typically do not operate during the same hours is encouraged when permissible. Signage denoting such is required and should be shown on the required site plan. 
E.  These uses when located within the CB zoning district shall have a minimum of three acres of land and shall provide 90 percent of their required parking on site. 
    4.3.3 Emergency services. 
A.  All public safety and emergency services buildings shall be similar in architectural design to adjoining residential structures when located in a residential zoning district. 
B.  Parking shall be to the side or rear of the building unless it is not feasible or practical as determined by the administrator. 
    4.3.4 Schools. 
A.  Ball fields and play areas should be located near the interior portions of the property to avoid nuisances attributed to noise lighting, and traffic. 
B.  All fenced areas shall be screened, at a minimum, with evergreen shrubs. 
Section 4.4. - Institutional uses. 
    4.4.1 Day care centers. The following shall apply to child day cares, not including those operated as a home occupation: 
A.  Day care centers shall conform in architecture to surrounding residential structures when located in a residential zoning district. 
B.  Outdoor play areas shall be fenced to a minimum height of four feet. All play equipment shall be located in the fenced area. Front yards shall not be used as playground areas. 
C.  Parking areas shall not abut fenced play areas without provisions for ballasts or curbing. 
D.  All day care centers shall provide a parking plan to illustrate provisions for loading and unloading of children in addition to the site plan requirements. 
    4.4.2 Residential care facilities. 
A.  A minimum of 300 square feet of total land area per enrollee/resident. 
B.  All structures shall be similar in architectural appearance to and compatible with the surrounding structures when located in residential zoning districts. 
    4.4.3 Residential care homes. 
A.  Residential care homes must be licensed with the State of North Carolina before operating. 
B.  No residential care home may be located within a one-half mile radius of any other residential care home. 
C.  Residential care homes shall not be permitted on nonconforming lots of record. 
D.  All fencing shall be six feet in height and shall screen the area from view. 
E.  No exterior signage is permitted. 
F.  The owner or operator must provide documentation of the closest licensed residential care home and its proximity to the proposed residential care home. 
Section 4.5. - Animal services. 
    4.5.1 Animal services. All uses included with the animal services category, as listed in the permitted uses table, that include outdoor kennels or other outdoor facilities for animals shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  In no case shall any animal service, other than equestrian facilities and riding/boarding stables and government-owned animal shelters, be permitted to board more than 50 animals at one time. 
B.  No outdoor containment of animals shall be located less than 100 feet from any residentially zoned property, dedicated open space, or Open Space and Recreation (OSR) zoning district, and less than 25 feet from any other adjacent property line. 
C.  Kennel areas must be surrounded by an opaque fence of not less than six feet in height and enclosed as to prevent escape. 
D.  Kennels shall be designed to effectively buffer noise audible to surrounding properties, including soundproofing of structures when necessary to minimize loud and disturbing noises that may have an adverse impact on adjoining structures. 
    4.5.2 Equestrian facilities and riding/boarding stables. 
A.  Common barns, stables, and manure storage areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residentially used or zoned property. 
B.  All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner to prevent dust from adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
C.  Outdoor lighting structures shall be located, angled, shielded, or limited in intensity so as to cast no direct light on adjacent property and to avoid the creation of a visual safety hazard to any adjacent right-of-way. 
Section 4.6. - Office and service uses. 
    4.6.1 Automobile services. 
A.  Gas station pumps or other appliances shall be set back at least 15 feet from the property line, and all service, storage, or similar activities connected with such use shall be conducted entirely within the premises. 
B.  Automobile services shall meet the requirements for "Junked Motor Vehicles" of the "Junkyards, Junked Motor Vehicles, Salvage Operations and Similar Uses" section of this chapter, as applicable. 
    4.6.2 Bed and breakfast inns. 
A.  Bed and breakfast inns shall have a minimum heated floor area of 1,500 square feet and shall be located in a single-family, detached home that was originally constructed as a residential structure. 
B.  Single-family homes used as bed and breakfast inns may not subdivide existing rooms into less than 100 square feet. 
C.  No changes shall be made to the exterior of the structure which would alter the residential appearance and character of the home. 
D.  The bed and breakfast inn shall be owner-occupied or shall be occupied by a resident manager which occupies the structure as a primary residence. 
E.  Meals served on the premise shall be for guests of the facility and no kitchen facilities shall be provided in guest rooms. 
F.  All parking shall be to the rear of the home. Where on-street parking is permitted, the length of the street in front of the lot may be counted as parking. On-street parking shall be limited to two spaces. 
    4.6.3 Hotels, motels, and inns. 
A.  In no case shall rental units be offered on an hourly basis. 
B.  All parking shall be to the side and rear of the principal structure, except for that which is provided on a short-term basis for access to the lobby of the structure. 
C.  Hotels, motels, and inns that include an accessory use that requires a special use permit in the zoning district in which the use is located shall be required to obtain such prior to approval of the primary use. 
Section 4.7. - Retail uses. 
    4.7.1 Auction house. 
A.  Any outdoor auction house or outdoor storage related to the same use shall be limited to 30 days prior to and seven days after the date of the auction. In a case where this requirement cannot be met, the outdoor storage shall be screened in accordance with chapter 7. 
B.  Shared parking with adjacent uses not typically in operation during the same hours is encouraged. 
    4.7.2 Farmers' market (town-sponsored). 
A.  All structures shall be constructed to meet building code. 
B.  A farmers' market shall be limited to the sale of locally grown produce (within 50 miles of the Town of Angier). 
C.  Adequate restroom facilities shall be provided. These facilities shall not be located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way. 
D.  Trailers for delivery or pick-up may be stored temporarily on-site for not more than three days at a time and shall be to the rear of the permanent structure. 
When the farmers' market is not open for business, all items shall be removed. 
    4.7.3 Restaurants. Any outdoor seating shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  The required site plan shall delineate any outdoor seating and circulation around such. 
B.  Outdoor seating shall not obstruct the sidewalk and shall only be covered by retractable awnings or umbrellas where permitted. Seating shall be considered part of the structure if this requirement cannot be met. 
C.  No outdoor sound system shall be permitted which can be heard beyond the boundaries of the property. 
D.  Restaurants with drive-through service must have a minimum cueing lane length to accommodate eight vehicles. Said cuing lane shall not interfere with any required drive isles. 
    4.7.4 Retail uses, community. 
A.  Dimensional requirements for community retail uses shall be as follows: 
Minimum public street frontage 150 feet Front setback (project perimeter) 35 feet (unless otherwise stated)  
B.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. 
C.  All requirements shall apply if this use is included as part of another type of use herein. 
    4.7.5 Retail uses, neighborhood. 
A.  Dimensional requirements for neighborhood retail uses shall be as follows: 
Minimum public street frontage 150 feet Front setback (project perimeter) Thoroughfare street: 100 feet 
Collector street: 50 feet 
Local/cul-de-sac street: 30 feet (unless otherwise stated) Side setback (project perimeter) 20 feet Rear setback (project perimeter) 30 feet  
B.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. 
C.  All requirements shall apply if this use is included as part of another type of use herein. 
    4.7.6 Retail uses, regional. 
A.  Dimensional requirements for regional retail uses shall be as follows: 
Minimum public street frontage 200 feet Front setback (project perimeter) 50 feet (unless otherwise stated) Side setback (project perimeter) 30 feet Rear setback (project perimeter) Nonresidential zoning adjacent: 30 feet 
Residential zoning adjacent: 50 feet  
B.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. 
C.  All outdoor storage and trash containers shall be located to the rear of the site. 
D.  Any regional retail use that has an average trip generation rate of 2,000 trips per day or greater, according to the most current version of the ITE trip generation informational report, a traffic impact analysis shall be provided to the TRC for review as part of the site plan approval process. The TRC shall use the analysis to determine what, if any traffic improvements need to be made subject to development approval to either maintain or provide adequate level of service for affected roadways. The analysis shall be prepared by a North Carolina licensed engineer qualified to perform such studies and shall include the following information: 
1.  Site description; 
2.  Study area; 
3.  Existing traffic conditions including traffic counts and level of service for roadways and intersections; 
4.  Horizon year(s) and background traffic growth for the year after the development is completed and ten years after the development is completed; 
5.  Trip generation, reduction, and distribution summarizing peak a.m. and p.m. projections; 
6.  Traffic assignment for horizon years; 
7.  Impact analysis; and 
8.  Mitigation and alternatives. 
D.  All requirements shall apply if this use is included as part of another type of use herein. 
    4.7.7 Vehicle and manufactured home sales. 
A.  A permanent structure built in accordance with North Carolina Building Code with permanent restroom facilities shall be located on the premises. 
B.  No outdoor sound system shall be permitted which can be heard beyond the boundaries of the property. 
C.  No vehicle, boat, equipment, or manufactured home shall be stored or displayed within the right-of-way of any public street. 
D.  No storage of trade-in manufactured homes shall be permitted. All manufactured homes stored on site shall adhere to the minimum building setback and separation requirements established by the zoning district in which the use is located. 
E.  All outdoor display areas shall be paved. 
F.  A North Carolina auto manufacturer dealership license shall be obtained prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO), as applicable. 
G.  All sales and display areas and structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned or used lot. 
H.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. 
    4.7.8 Produce/arts and crafts market (non-town-sponsored). 
A.  All permanent structures shall be constructed to meet Building Code. 
B.  Adequate restroom facilities shall be provided. These facilities shall not be located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way. 
C.  When the market is not open for business, all items, temporary shelters, tents, etc. shall be removed. 
D.  In addition to any conditions that may be placed on such use by the Board of Adjustment, the use shall comply with all U.D.O. requirements such as but not limited to setbacks, parking, signage, outdoor lighting, etc. 
E.  The location of the sales use and its required amount of parking spaces shall not interfere with any existing business that may occupy the same parcel. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2016) 
Section 4.8. - Recreational and entertainment uses. 
    4.8.1 Adult establishments. 
    4.8.1.1 Purpose and intent. Adult establishments, because of their nature, are recognized as having characteristics which may be objectionable to nearby residential districts and certain other uses considered to be sensitive, specifically religious institutions, schools, parks, libraries, day care centers, residential care facilities, and medical centers. The board of commissioners determines that regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects do not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of nearby residential districts and to protect the integrity of those sensitive uses listed above. 
    4.8.1.2 Requirements. 
A.  Adult establishments shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from a school, religious institution, day care center, or residential use; and 500 feet from any other adult establishment uses. 
B.  No printed material, slide, video, photograph, written text, live show, or other visual presentation format shall be visible from the exterior of the structure other than permitted signage. 
C.  No neon signage or lighting shall be permitted on the exterior of the structure, on the permitted sign, or on exterior windows and doors. 
D.  No outdoor sound system shall be permitted. 
E.  All parking shall be in the side or rear yards. 
F.  Except for an adult motel or hotel, no adult establishment use shall have sleeping quarters. 
    4.8.2 Country clubs and golf courses. 
A.  Loud outside noise, associated with club activities, shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
B.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. Lighting shall not be on between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
    4.8.3 Family campgrounds. 
A.  All spaces for camping and recreational vehicles shall be located at least 100 feet from any right(s)-of-way. 
B.  Each recreational vehicle parking area shall be connected to a public water supply system and public sewer system which provide an accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water. These and all other utilities provided shall be installed underground. 
C.  Each recreational vehicle parking area or campsite shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall be accessed internally. 
D.  A central service building containing all necessary toilets, bathhouses, and other plumbing fixtures specified in the most current edition of the North Carolina State Plumbing Code, as amended, shall be provided. The service building shall be conveniently located within a radius of 300 feet to spaces which it serves. 
E.  A trash disposal and containment area shall be provided. 
F.  No person, recreational vehicle, or tent may occupy the campground for a period in excess of 30 days unless otherwise stated herein. A register of all occupants, the space occupied, and the time of arrival and departure shall be maintained. 
G.  The owner-occupant or resident manager may occupy the site with his/her immediate family permanently within a residential structure built to the standards of the North Carolina Building Code. 
H.  Internal access and connection roads and driveways created as part of the site shall be constructed with either asphalt, screening, or crush and run gravel. 
1.  Width shall be a minimum of 18 feet. 
2.  Minimum depth shall be three inches. 
    4.8.4 Internet gaming, sweepstakes, or other gambling establishments. 
A.  The following standards shall apply to game centers, as defined in section A.4, which comply with N.C.G.S. 14306(b). 
B.  Game centers shall be permitted only in the General Commercial district and require a special use permit issued by the board of adjustment regardless of the number of machines proposed. 
C.  The use shall not be located within a one-half-mile radius of any other game centers, or within 1,000 feet of any school, religious institution or day care center. 
(Ord. No. 2012.01, 6-5-2012; Ord. of 3-5-2019) 
    4.8.5 Bars and alcohol related businesses. 
A.  No bar shall be allowed within a 500-foot radius of radius of any school, religious institution, or day care center except within the Central Business district. 
B.  Outdoor seating regulations for "restaurants," located in this chapter, shall be met if applicable. 
C.  Alcoholic beverage consumption areas may be allowed on the premises of a brewery/winery/distillery and a bottle shop as an accessory use. This accessory use shall occupy 30 percent or less of the square footage of the total area occupied by these establishments. Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed on the premises after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2019) 
Editor's note- Renumbered from section 4.8.4 per Ord. UDO 2012.01, adopted June 5, 2012. 
    4.8.6 Recreational facilities. 
A.  No intercom, loudspeaker, or other similar items that can be heard off of the property shall be permitted. 
B.  All outdoor lighting shall be cut-off fixtures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and shall not exceed ten footcandles at the property line. A photometric plan shall be submitted for review with the site plan. Lighting shall not be on between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
C.  Adequate parking must be provided so as not to interfere with the surrounding properties. 
1.  This shall hereby prohibit the use of on-street parking for overflow parking. 
2.  No parking signs shall be posted along property line(s) adjacent to the public right(s)-of-way in accordance with NCDOT standards and must be shown on the required site plan. 
3.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all residential structures. 
D.  All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner that prevents dust from adversely impacting adjoining properties and right(s)-of-way. 
E.  No outdoor recreational facilities, including fields, shall be permitted in required setback. 
F.  A permanent structure built in accordance with North Carolina Building Code with permanent restroom facilities shall be located on the premises. 
Editor's note- Renumbered from section 4.8.5 per Ord. UDO 2012.01, adopted June 5, 2012. 
    4.8.7 Shooting range. 
A.  Shooting ranges shall be permitted as an indoor use only. No outdoor use or accessory use shall be permitted as part of any shooting range. 
B.  The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities of the adjacent land uses. 
C.  Structures or facilities shall be constructed a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned or used lot. 
D.  Adequate, handicap accessible restroom facilities must be provided. 
Editor's note- Renumbered from section 4.8.6 per Ord. UDO 2012.01, adopted June 5, 2012. 
    4.8.8 Swimming pools (principal use). 
A.  All pools shall have security fencing and shall be in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code requirements for fencing pools. Fencing shall be screened, at a minimum, with evergreen shrubs. 
B.  A permanent structure built in accordance with North Carolina Building Code with permanent restroom facilities shall be located on the premises. 
Section 4.9. - Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale, distribution and transportation uses. 
    4.9.1 Assembly and packaging. 
A.  Any outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view from public right-of-way and adjacent property when not adjacent to commerce park zoning district. 
B.  The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities of adjacent land uses. 
Editor's note- Renumbered from section 4.8.7 per Ord. UDO 2012.01, adopted June 5, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2012.01, 6-5-2012) 
    4.9.2 Hazardous material storage. 
A.  Such material shall be listed and made known to the Angier and Black River Fire Department and the Harnett County Fire Marshal. A containment plan shall be provided to the Harnett County Fire Marshal and to the administrator at the time of site plan review. Said containment plan shall be in compliance with all local, state, and federal requirements. 
B.  Outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard only and shall be completed screened from view. 
C.  Indoor and outdoor storage areas shall meet all state and federal regulations. 
    4.9.3 Junkyards, junked motor vehicles, salvage operations and similar uses. Junkyards, salvage operations, and similar uses shall comply with the following requirements. Junkyards, salvage operations, and automobile repair services existing at the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the requirements included herein within two years of the effective date of this ordinance. 
Standard Junked Motor Vehicles (Existing and New 
Automobile 
Services) New and 
Expanding 
Junkyards Nonconforming Junkyards Buffer shall be adjusted in height to meet the required height requirement and to ensure maximum screening where the road grade is significantly higher than the required buffer and during all seasons of the year. X X X Junked motor vehicles shall not be stacked higher than the screening. X X X Vehicles shall be stored in such a manner that all fire apparatuses and equipment can ingress and egress all areas of the site at all times and be in accordance with all state and federal regulations. X X X Maximum of two junked vehicles outside of automobile salvage yard or enclosed building, unless otherwise specified. X Junked motor vehicles and parts storage areas shall be screened from view from adjacent property and right(s)-of-way by the following: (all requirements shall be met at time of installation and shall be a minimum six feet in height). Opaque fence or row of continuous evergreen shrubs "Buffers" article of this ordinance Opaque fence or row of continuous evergreen shrubs New automobile services that have junked motor vehicles and motor vehicles parts storage areas shall be screened from view from adjacent property and right(s)-of-way. X X X Junked motor vehicles or parts shall not be stored in the front yard or in the required front yard setback. X X X Setback from a school, residential structure, religious institution, or place of public assembly existing at application approval, excluding the residence of the owner (s) of such use. 1,000 feet Buffering plan shall be submitted in accordance with chapter 7 of this ordinance. X All operations, equipment, junk, and/or inoperable motor vehicles shall be kept within said buffer at all times unless in motion by transportation to and from the site. X X X Setback for equipment, junk, and/or inoperable motor vehicles from any adjoining property lot line. 20 feet 50 feet 20 feet Fences shall be designed to reasonably secure the area from unauthorized entry. X X X Setback from rights-of-way of any public or private road existing at application approval (property line shall be used if no right-of-way). 100 feet 10 feet The operational area existing at the effective date of the ordinance shall not be expanded, except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. X X Motor vehicles, parts, or other junked materials storage prohibited in setback. X X X  
    4.9.4 Taxicab stand and office. See Town Code of Ordinances for regulations related to taxicab stands and offices. 
    4.9.5 Warehouse, mini. 
A.  All outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view by an opaque fence and/or evergreen plantings. 
B.  All proposed storage, in units and in outdoor areas, shall be identified on the required site plan. 
C.  Any mini warehouse facility existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the screening requirements of this ordinance within six months of the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 4.10. - Agricultural uses. 
    4.10.1 Bona fide farm. 
A.  Bona fide farms shall be permitted to use manufactured homes used for farm labor or migrant housing as follows: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be set up in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and a continuous curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the perimeter of the manufactured home. 
2.  The manufactured home shall be set up in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and a continuous curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the perimeter of the manufactured home. 
3.  The moving hitch, wheels, axles, and towing lights shall be removed. 
    4.10.2 Farm and livestock. 
A.  Structures for the storage of farm equipment and supplies, maintenance equipment and supplies, livestock, and similar items associated with farms are permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit. No livestock or fowl shall be kept, maintained or stabled within 100 feet of any structure located on adjacent property. 
B.  Swine are not permitted. 
C.  No cattle, goats, horses, or other livestock shall be on a lot of less than one acre and shall be contained in a secured, fenced area. 
D.  The following shall apply to fowl, including but not limited to: chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and guineas: 
1.  No fowl shall be permitted to run at large outside of a secured, fenced area. 
    4.10.3 Produce stands (permanent). 
A.  A permanent produce stand shall be allowed as an accessory use to an agricultural use only. All produce sold shall be grown on a lot under the same ownership as the lot upon which the produce stand is located. All other produce stands shall be considered temporary uses and shall follow the special requirements for temporary uses. 
B.  A produce stand shall not be located closer than ten feet to any side lot line unless a greater setback is required for the zoning district in which it is located. 
C.  Signs for a produce stand shall not be illuminated, nor have flashing lights, nor shall they exceed four square feet in area. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
D.  During the times of the year in which the produce stand is not in operation, the stand shall be properly closed up and maintained. 
E.  Paved parking and drive-isles shall not be required. All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner that prevents dust from adversely impacting adjoining properties and right(s)-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(1)) 
Section 4.11. - Other uses. 
    4.11.1 Accessory structures (nonresidential). 
A.  Any nonresidential accessory structure shall be subject to the zoning district dimensional requirements, and the exterior materials of the accessory structure shall substantially match the materials of the principal structure. 
B.  All utilities must be screened. 
C.  Stand alone ATMs, ice machines, coffee shops, and drive-through uses may be permitted as accessory uses (i.e. in a shopping center parking lot). 
D.  Vehicle storage for drive-throughs shall be located outside of and physically separated from the right-of-way of any street or internal access drive-isle. This area shall not interfere with the efficient internal circulation of traffic on the site, adjacent property, or adjacent street right-of-way. There shall be adequate vehicular stacking area so that vehicles waiting for the drive-through do not back up into the street. 
E.  Portable carports and the like shall be permitted as an accessory structure in any nonresidential zoning district in the rear yard only. 
    4.11.2 Alternative energy production. For the purposes of this section, no construction, or any type of alternative energy production shall commence in the Town of Angier's zoning jurisdiction until a special use permit has been approved by the board of adjustment. All applicants for such a special use permit shall submit to the Town of Angier's Planning Department two copies of all documents required by the State of North Carolina, as well as any maps and charts accompanying these documents. These documents shall be reviewed by the Town of Angier Board of Adjustment and town staff. 
    If approved, a facility shall not be within a one-half mile radius of any other alternative energy facility, as measured from the edge of the property line. In addition to other site plan standards further described elsewhere within this ordinance, a six foot tall security fence and a visual screen of evergreen plantings shall be established and maintained around the site. All storage must be located indoors, and any equipment producing noise or sound shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property line. Also, decommissioning plans that describe the anticipated life of the facility, estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars, and the anticipated manner in which the facility will be decommissioned with the site being restored to predevelopment conditions shall be required. To ensure that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration, an agreement shall be signed with the town and a surety bond or cash equivalent submitted as per the standards with chapter 9, section 9.7. 
A.  Ethanol diesel and biofuel production. 
1.  Storage tanks shall be located inside an above-ground containment area made of concrete that can hold 100 percent of the tank size located within it. The containment area may be constructed of other materials upon approval by the Harnett County Fire Code Official. 
2.  Acceptable storage tank materials include aluminum, steel, fluorinated polyethylene, fluorinated polypropylene, Teflon, and other similar durable, noncorrosive materials. Copper, brass, lead, tin, and zinc are prohibited. 
3.  Fuel shall be dispensed from either a gravity flow or vacuum flow pump. 
4.  Facility and all accessory structures (storage tanks, buildings, etc.) shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet from the public right(s)-of-way and all property lines. 
B.  Solar energy facility. 
1.  Solar power electric generation structures shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
2.  Active solar structures shall meet the minimum setback for the zoning district in which it is located or be setback a minimum of 25 feet from all property lines or right(s)-of-way, whichever is greater. 
3.  Applications for all solar energy facilities shall include a site plan with those items required elsewhere by this ordinance, as well as the following: 
i.  Elevation drawings of all solar energy structures; 
ii.  Location of all solar energy structures on the property; and 
iii.  Distance of all solar energy structures to property lines. 
4.  Applications for grid-intertie photovoltaic systems or facilities shall include evidence that the owner(s) or operator(s) has been approved by the appropriate utility company to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Installation of systems or facilities shall not occur until this evidence has been supplied. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement. 
5.  Electric components of solar structures shall have an Underwriters Laboratories (UL) listing. 
6.  All photovoltaic systems shall comply with the most recent edition of the National Electrical Code. 
C.  Wind energy facility. 
1.  Wind energy facility structures shall be setback from all property lines and public right(s)-of-way a distance equal to one linear foot for every foot of height of the highest structure that is part of the facility or the minimum setback for the zoning district in which it is located, whichever is greater. 
2.  Shadow flicker onto any occupied building on a nonparticipating property caused by a wind energy facility located within 2,500 feet of the occupied building shall not exceed 30 hours per year. 
3.  The maximum height of wind turbines is 80 feet unless evidence is submitted otherwise showing approval for additional height from the Harnett County Fire Code Official. 
4.  Attachment of structures for the collection of wind energy to a building of any kind shall be prohibited. 
5.  Applications and/or site plans for wind energy facilities shall include the following items, in addition to those items required elsewhere by this ordinance. 
i.  The approximate generating capacity of the facility; 
ii.  The representative type and height of the wind turbines to be constructed, including dimensions, manufacturer, generator capacity per turbine, and a description of any ancillary facilities or structures; 
iii.  An environmental assessment for wind energy facilities shall be provided for review by the town and the state clearinghouse for distribution. Certification of distribution of the environmental assessment shall also be provided; and 
iv.  Evidence of compliance with applicable FAA regulations. 
v.  Location of all wind turbines and wind energy collection related structures; 
vi.  Access easement necessary for the use and maintenance of the facility and related structures; and 
vii.  The distance of wind turbines and wind energy collection related structures to the nearest property lines. 
viii.  Evidence that the owner(s) or operator(s) has been approved by the appropriate utility company to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Such evidence shall be in the form of written verification that the plans have been reviewed, and if built to plans, the facility will be accepted by the utility company. Installation of systems or facilities shall not occur until this evidence has been supplied. 
6.  The visual appearance of wind energy facilities shall, at a minimum: 
i.  Be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white, or gray; 
ii.  Not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by the FAA; and 
iii.  Not display advertising (including flags, streamers, or decorative items), except for identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility owner(s), and operator. 
7.  Installation and design of a wind energy facility shall conform to the applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute. 
8.  Any onsite collector system shall, to the maximum extent possible, be placed underground. 
9.  The noise emitted from such facility shall be not disturbing to adjacent properties. Evidence of such shall be furnished with the application for a wind energy system. 
    4.11.3 Infill nonresidential. 
A.  Infill nonresidential shall be located only within the town center land use classification. 
B.  Redevelopment shall be in the same building footprint, for retail and service uses, as the previous structure when applicable. 
C.  Front and side yard setbacks shall be equal to the average primary structure setback on the same side of the street right-of-way and within the same zoning district within 300 feet of either side of the site. In cases where the average setback is located within existing or required right-of-way, the structure shall not be located therein. 
D.  In addition to the site plan submitted for the special use permit process, the following information shall be included: 
1.  Proposed uses; 
2.  Traffic circulation; 
3.  Delineation of units or phases; 
4.  Impact on public services; 
5.  Stormwater plan; 
6.  Utilities plan. 
    4.11.4 Mining activities. 
A.  No mining shall commence in the Town of Angier's zoning jurisdiction until a special use permit has been approved by the board of adjustment. 
B.  Special use approval granted by the board of adjustment shall not become effective until a mining permit is issued by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Land Resources (DENR), Land Quality Section, or successor agency. 
C.  The operation will not constitute a substantial physical hazard to a neighboring dwelling house, school, religious structure, hospital, commercial, or industrial building, public street, or public property. 
D.  The operation will not have a significantly adverse effect on the purposes of a publicly-owned park, forest, or recreational open space area. 
E.  A special use permit shall automatically expire if at any time after its issuance the state mining permit is revoked or terminated. 
F.  Definitions. Definitions as listed in the NCGS and The Mining Act of 1971, both of North Carolina and as amended, shall apply to this Subsection. 
G.  Permit application. 
1.  Applicants for a special use permit shall submit to the Town of Angier's Planning Department two copies of all documents required by the State of North Carolina for a mining permit application, the reclamation plan, and any maps and charts accompanying these documents. These documents shall be reviewed by the Angier Board of Adjustment and town staff. 
H.  Buffer and screening standards. 
1.  A visual screen of evergreen plantings shall be established and maintained around that portion of the mining site that is being excavated or being used for the storage of minerals, as required elsewhere by this ordinance. When excavated areas have been reclaimed in accordance with the following: The Mining Act of 1971, of North Carolina and as amended, and Chapter 5 of the North Carolina Administrative Code, Title 15 "Environment & Natural Resources", any artificial screening may be removed. 
2.  The visual screening requirements may be exempted when: 
a.  The planning department determines that existing vegetative cover will fulfill these requirements. Such natural screening may consist of existing vegetative cover including, but not limited to, trees and shrubs, not less than 50 percent of which shall be evergreen. Screening may also consist of earthen berms or other artificial screens used individually or in combination with each other and existing vegetation to achieve a screening effect required by this section. Screening materials and vegetation may be located in required buffer areas. All berms and other artificial screens requiring extensive land disturbance shall comply with the North Carolina General Statutes. 
b.  It is determined that due to topographic, or other circumstances where, through no fault of the permittee, that the requirements of this section cannot be provided. In such case, an alternative plan shall be submitted to the planning department. 
I.  Vibration standards. All mining activities in the Town of Angier shall conform to the vibration policy adopted by the Land Quality Section of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). 
    4.11.5 Outdoor storage (nonresidential). 
A.  Outdoor storage, when permitted, shall be located in the rear yard and screened from view so that it is not visible from right(s)-of-way or adjacent property. 
B.  Screening shall be in the form of vegetation, fencing, or a combination thereof, and shall completely shield from view the goods that are stored outside. 
C.  This subsection shall not apply to the outdoor display of goods or services that are for sale. 
    4.11.6 Planned development. 
    4.11.6.1 Intent. Planned developments are intended to provide for creation of well-planned environments through the application of flexible and diversified land development standards. A planned development is intended to encourage the application of new techniques and technology to residential, commercial, office, and light industrial uses which will result in a more comprehensive development arrangement with lasting function and appeal. It is further intended to achieve broader goals such as economic land development, consideration of environmental conditions, efficient street systems and utility networks, usable attractive open spaces, and the general well-being of the town's inhabitants. 
    4.11.6.2 General provisions. Planned development districts existing prior to the adoption date of this ordinance shall be considered a use and no longer a separate zoning classification and shall follow the provision of this section, planned development. When applicable, the provisions for the RA-30 zoning district shall apply. In order to qualify for a planned development, the following criteria shall be met: 
A.  The areas proposed shall be in single ownership or if in several ownerships, the application for the special use permit shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties in the plan. 
B.  A suitable master plan which will include a site layout shall be submitted by the developer(s) for review by the board of adjustment as part of the special use permit application. 
    4.11.6.3 Uses. All planned developments shall contain a mix of uses, or densities, and/or residential housing types. Examples include but are not limited to a mix of: commercial and office, multifamily and single-family detached products, commercial and residential, or office and residential uses. In no case shall a planned development contain only one type of use, density, or housing product. 
    4.11.6.4 Density and dimensional requirements. 
A.  The site(s) for a planned development must contain a minimum of three acres. 
B.  Both residential and nonresidential uses may be proposed in a planned development. The maximum overall density for single-family detached units is five dwelling units per acre; and for multifamily is nine dwelling units per acre. 
C.  All dimensional standards will be stipulated by the master plan upon approval of the board of adjustment on a case by case basis. Dimensional standards proposed in the master plan shall include all of the following elements, in addition to the master plan requirements set forth in chapter 11: 
1.  Maximum building height. 
a.  Maximum building height may exceed 35 feet only in cases where sprinklers are installed in all structures. 
2.  Perimeter and internal buffers. 
3.  Minimum lot size. 
4.  Minimum lot width. 
5.  Minimum front yard setback. 
6.  Minimum rear yard setback. 
7.  Side yard setback. 
8.  Corner side yard setback. 
9.  Phase delineation. 
10.  Architectural standards. 
D.  Restrictive covenants and/or homeowners association by-laws shall be submitted as part of the special use permit application. All items listed in section C above shall be referenced within said restrictive covenants and/or homeowners association by-laws. 
    4.11.6.5 Open space requirements. 
A.  Open space shall meet the requirements of chapter 6. 
B.  Due to the size and scale of a planned development, payment in lieu of dedication, as regulated in chapter 6, shall not be permitted. 
    4.11.6.6 Approval procedures. 
A.  Any request pertaining to the establishment of a planned development shall be considered as a special use permit. 
B.  For planned developments the applicant may elect to develop the site in successive phases in a manner indicated in the required master plan. However, the infrastructure improvements of each stage shall be a minimum of 75 percent completed before the commencement of development of the next phase. 
C.  The administrator may require that development be done in phases if public facilities are not available to serve the entire facility initially. 
    4.11.6.7 Master plan required. 
A.  The initial master plan, shall be prepared and submitted, containing elements and according to the requirements set forth in chapter 11. 
B.  The technical review committee shall review the master plan for completeness and compliance with this section and applicable provisions of this ordinance prior to review of the special use permit. Approval of the special use permit herein is for the overall concept of the planned development, those items specifically listed in "Density and Dimensional Requirements" of this section, and those items specifically listed in "Changes and Modifications" of this section. 
    4.11.6.8 Changes and modifications. 
A.  Major changes in an approved planned development shall be treated as amendments to the master plan for that planned development. Any major changes require review and approval of the board of adjustment. Major changes include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Increase in overall density; 
2.  Changes in boundary lines; 
3.  Changes in land use, location, or amount of land devoted to specific land uses including recreation and open space; 
4.  Changes in the number, except in cases of a decrease, or mix of dwelling units; 
5.  Alterations to street design; 
6.  Changes in infrastructure; 
7.  Alternate materials or other changes that significantly alter the exterior appearance of structures. 
B.  Minor changes in the planned development may be approved by the TRC. Minor changes include, but are not limited to minor shifting of the: 
1.  Location of buildings; 
2.  Proposed streets; 
3.  Public or private rights-of-way; 
4.  Utility easements; 
5.  Parks; 
6.  Other public spaces; 
7.  Other features of the plan. 
    4.11.7 Temporary uses. Temporary structures and uses, when in compliance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance, and all other ordinances of the Town of Angier shall be allowed. The following temporary structures and uses shall be permitted: 
    4.11.7.1 Construction trailers. Construction trailers used in conjunction with construction projects provided that the following requirements are met: 
A.  Such construction trailers may be located at a building site where there is a valid building permit for the construction project, or, in the case of a residential subdivision, a valid building permit for at least one of the residential units being constructed. 
B.  All construction trailers shall be located at least ten feet off any street right-of-way and shall not be placed in any required rear or side yard setback. 
C.  All construction trailers shall be removed from the construction site not more than 30 days following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the project or, in the case of a residential subdivision, for the final residential unit. 
D.  In addition to construction trailers, at any construction site for a construction project, one security guard house may be installed. Use of such structures may include overnight stay provided adequate sanitary facilities are provided and the same conditions for construction trailers are met. 
    4.11.7.2 Residential sales offices. 
A.  Any temporary structure used as a sales office shall be located on a lot which is in compliance with the regulations of this ordinance and shall meet all yard requirements for the applicable zoning district. 
B.  A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the lot to accommodate persons using the sales office. 
C.  If a permanent residential structure is used as the sales office, future use of said structure shall be for residential purposes. Said 'future use' shall be initiated within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the final residential unit. 
D.  A trailer may be used as a temporary sales office, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The trailer shall be provided with underpinning, from the bottom of the walls to the ground, made of masonry, vinyl, pre-painted aluminum material, or other similar material. 
2.  Landscaping shall be provided around the base of the trailer. 
3.  At the completion of the sales in a tract, or two years from the date the temporary sales office began operation, whichever is sooner, said sales office shall cease operation unless the administrator determines that substantial progress is being made in the selling and/or marketing of the lots and/or homes in the subdivision. In such case, one extension (not to exceed one year in duration) may be so authorized by the administrator. Further extension shall be reviewed and approved by the board of adjustment and shall not exceed one year in duration. If a temporary structure is used as the sales office, it shall be removed after its use as a sales office is terminated. Within 30 days after the structure is removed, the lot shall be returned to a natural state. Any paved or graveled driveway and/or parking area associated with the sales office shall also be removed. All bare soil areas on the lot shall be returned to a natural vegetative state (reseeded or sodded) immediately after removal of the sales office and driveway/parking area. 
    4.11.7.3 Portable storage containers. 
A.  Up to two portable storage containers may be permitted on a site as a temporary use for a period of 30 days for storage of household items during renovations and moving. A one time extension of an additional 30 days may be granted by the administrator if the applicant demonstrates that progress is being made towards completing the project that makes the portable storage container necessary. 
B.  Portable storage containers shall not be located closer than 20 feet from the front property line or five feet from any other property line. 
C.  Portable storage containers shall not impede the ability to meet minimum parking requirements for a site. 
    4.11.7.4 Temporary sales and events. 
A.  Certain uses of a temporary nature which would not otherwise be permitted in a particular zoning district may be issued a temporary permit as herein provided. 
B.  The following salespersons or representatives are exempt from the privilege license tax, bond requirements and permit application fee required by this section; however, must comply with other permit requirements as set forth in this section: 
1.  Churches, civic organizations, and nonprofit organizations that are tax exempt under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code are exempt for activities involving craft fairs, flea markets, and yard sales; provided that such activities will not be held on more than four days in any 12-month period. 
2.  Vendors at special events such as Christmas Parade, Crepe Myrtle Festival, etc., selling goods only for that event. Food vendors will need to obtain necessary permits from the state and county health departments. 
3.  Seasonal sales of Christmas trees, pumpkins, or locally grown produce. 
C.  The following shall be prohibited for temporary sales conducted by itinerant merchants: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as an itinerant merchant without first receiving a temporary use permit issued by the administrator or his designee. 
2.  It is unlawful for any itinerant merchant to conduct any business any closer to a public street than 20 feet from the edge of the pavement. Such edge shall be maintained as a buffer and no tables, merchandise, items, parking, or any other obstructions, shall be allowed within said 20-foot buffer. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the buffer area clear of all vehicles and any other items at all times. 
3.  All itinerant merchants shall provide to the Town of Angier in the application for a permit, a plan for parking which shall provide areas outside of the above-mentioned buffered area. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for itinerant merchants to conduct business during the hours between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and at no time on Sunday. 
5.  Itinerant merchant activity shall be allowed only in the O&I, CB, GB, and CP districts or on the property of a permitted civic use as listed in the "Permitted Uses Table". The activity shall be allowed only on premises owned or controlled by the itinerant merchant or with the written permission of the property owner. 
6.  Itinerant merchant activities shall not be allowed on town property except for town-sponsored events and with invitation of the town. The town property includes, but is not limited to: sidewalks, parking lots, streets, parks, or any other town-owned or controlled property. 
D.  Additionally temporary sales conducted by itinerant merchants: 
1.  Shall comply with the sign regulations set forth in chapter 10; 
2.  Shall not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
3.  Shall not occupy designated parking spaces of the town. 
E.  All parking of vehicles shall be done in compliance with all applicable laws and town ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any itinerate merchant sale activities. 
F.  The duration for operating as an itinerant merchant shall not be excess of ten consecutive days and not more than three permits per year may be issued to any one itinerant merchant or business whether or not said permit is obtained by a different individual, it shall be limited to three per business. Upon termination of the permit, all temporary buildings erected for the purpose of such use and all trash and debris generated in connection with said use shall be removed by the applicant or owner of the premises by the close of the sale or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
G.  Upon expiration of the permit due to time, the applicant may apply for a renewal of the permit upon a form designated by the administrator, which shall indicate what changes, if any, have occurred since the date that the original application was completed and said renewal is within the calendar year and furthermore, there shall be no more than one original and two renewals allowed per calendar year as stated above. 
H.  The itinerant merchant selling or providing any unprepared food or consumable items shall comply and provide proof of compliance with regulations of the North Carolina Department of Agriculture. The itinerant merchant selling or providing prepared food shall obtain a permit from the Harnett County or Wake County Environmental Health Department. 
I.  Each person requesting a permit under this section shall file with the administrator a written application, which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the individual filing the application. 
2.  The name and address of the principal or employer if the applicant is an agent or employee. 
3.  A complete physical description of the applicant including height, weight, sex, race, date of birth, and any distinguishing characteristics. 
4.  A description of the goods or services to be sold or offered. 
5.  A statement as to whether the applicant intends to receive payment or deposit for goods or services to be delivered or rendered in the future. 
6.  The inclusive dates which the applicant wishes to have a permit to carry on business within the town. 
7.  A statement as to which days of the week the applicant wishes to conduct business within the town. 
8.  A complete description of the vehicle or method of transportation the applicant intends to use for business purposes while in the town including license number. 
9.  A statement as to whether the applicant, his principal or employer, or other person having management or supervisor function in the applicant's business, has been convicted of a criminal offense, and if so, the name of the person convicted, the nature of the offense, the punishment assessed and when and where the offense occurred. 
10.  A statement as to the exact location in the town the applicant intends to conduct business along with any necessary permission from the owner and a diagram showing designated parking to be provided for said business as it may apply to itinerant merchants. 
11.  A list of all persons, other than the applicant, who would be authorized by the applicant to engage in soliciting in the applicant's behalf. 
J.  Each person filing an application for issuance of a permit to solicit, peddle or be an itinerant merchant in the town shall present a valid driver's license or an approved state-issued identification card with a photograph, at the time of filing the application. 
K.  At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall present proof of a current town privilege license evidencing that the business or organization has paid the required privilege license tax for the current fiscal year if same applies. 
L.  A fee as set forth in the town's schedule of fees made payable to the town, will be collected at the time application is made. The fee is for processing of the application and is nonrefundable. 
M.  A permit issued under this section is not transferable. 
N.  Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall furnish a bond in the penal amount of $5,000.00 to the town signed by the applicant and as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in this state, conditioned upon the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material and workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal on such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to any agent or employee of the principal. The principal shall be in effect for 180 days from expiration of this permit. Only one bond shall be required of each applicant, even though such applicant shall have one or more agents or employees, provided such bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such agents or employees. Applicants soliciting for recognized charitable organizations, churches, schools, civic organizations, and similar neighborhood associations performing fundraising activities for their organization are exempt from such bond. 
O.  The administrator or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant within five working days of filing the application, if it is determined that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this article and proposes to engage in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise. 
P.  The applicant must carry the signed original of this permit along with an approved state identification card with a photograph at all times while engaged in business. Certified copies of the letter will be provided by the administrator for each agent or employee doing business with or for the applicant for a charge of $1.00 each. The employee or agent's name must appear on the initial application and will be included on the permit. Each agent or employee must carry the signed certified copy of this permit along with an approved state identification card with a photograph at all times while engaged in business. The permit and identification must be displayed upon demand of any police officer or code enforcement officer. Failure to produce the required permit and identification may result in the revocation of all copies and the original permit issued for the applicant and the listed agents or employees. 
Q.  Photograph identification used by a private company or organization will not be accepted as a substitute for an official state-issued identification card with photograph. The issuing state; however, is not mandated to be North Carolina. 
R.  Any applicant denied a permit will be mailed a letter within five working days after making application, stating the reason for denial. Denial will be made it is determined that provisions of this article have not been met or the applicant does not propose to engage in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise. Conviction of criminal offenses by the applicant or principals in the business, which indicate a propensity for violence, theft, fraud, or similar offenses, may be cause for denial of a permit. The administrator or his designee may revoke a permit issued under this section when there is a reasonable factual basis that doing so would in the best interest of the health, safety, welfare or morals of the public. The administrator shall mail a letter to the address listed for the applicant on the application notifying them of the reason for the revocation. The administrator or his designee upon observing violation of the safety provisions contained herein may revoke the permit of the operator to cease operations until such time as the violations are corrected and furthermore, may cite the permit holder for violation and penalties shall be applicable. 
    4.11.7.5 Yard sales. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
1.  Personal property shall mean property, which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
2.  Yard sale shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential zone, as defined by this ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "backyard", "patio", "flea Market", or "rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation where not more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
B.  No yard sale shall be conducted unless and until the individual or group desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefore from the administrator or his designee. Members of more than one residence may join in obtaining a permit for a yard sale to be conducted at the residence of one of them. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following: 
1.  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
2.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
D.  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or governmental institution organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
E.  Prior to the issuance of any yard sale permit, the individuals conducting such sale shall file a written statement with the administrator or his designee setting forth the following information: 
1.  Full name and address of applicant. 
2.  The location at which the proposed yard sale is to be held. 
3.  The date when the sale shall be held. 
4.  An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purpose of resale. 
F.  There may be an administrative processing fee for the issuance of such permit, established from time to time by the town board of commissioners. 
G.  The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such yard sales. No more than three such permits for no more than two consecutive days only for each permit may be issued to one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered having been issued for each and all such residences. 
H.  Such yard sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of the day for which the permit is granted. 
I.  If a yard sale is not held on the date for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, a representative of the code enforcement department may issue another permit to the applicant for a yard sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the sale was to be held. No additional permit fee will be required. 
J.  A fourth yard sale shall be permitted in a calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of the real property is first presented to the administrator or his designee. 
K.  Before issuing a permit, a representative of the code enforcement division may conduct an investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this section. 
L.  Any permit in possession of the holder or holders of a yard sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public and the town code enforcement officer or his/her designee. 
M.  Only the following signs may be displayed in relation to a pending yard sale: 
1.  A yard sale shall be allowed one sign on the lot of the yard sale, provided the sign does not exceed 42 inches in height, four square feet per side, and eight square feet total aggregate. 
2.  A yard sale shall be allowed two additional directional signs located off-premises provided written permission to erect said signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed and the signs to not exceed 42 inches in height, four square feet per side and eight square feet total aggregate. 
3.  No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than three days prior to the day such sale is to commence. Signs must be removed at the close of the yard sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
N.  The individual to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on which sale of activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire department of the city in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
O.  A police officer or any other official designated by the Code of Ordinances to make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance or to enforce the same, shall have the right of entry of any premises showing evidence of a yard sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a sale, or arrest any individual who violates the provisions of this section. 
P.  All parking of vehicles shall be done in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any yard sale. 
Q.  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the administrator or his designee if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
R.  If any individual is convicted of an offense under this section, the code enforcement department is not to issue such individual another yard sale permit for a period of two years from the time of conviction. 
S.  Every article sold and every day of a sale conducted in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
    4.11.8 Wireless telecommunications towers. The following development standards for the zoning jurisdiction (including the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction (ETJ) of the Town of Angier shall: 
A.  Apply to the installation, construction, attachment, removal, and alteration of facilities to accommodate wireless communication facilities; 
B.  Provide the criteria for evaluating such proposed activities; 
C.  Provide a procedure for the suitability certification and accomplishing related purposes. 
    4.11.8.1 Purpose. 
A.  The Town of Angier desires to encourage the orderly development of wireless communication technologies for the benefit of the town and its citizens. The town also recognizes the character of the different entities of the town. 
B.  As a matter of public policy the town aims to encourage the delivery of new wireless technologies throughout the town while controlling the proliferation of communication towers. Such development activities will promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of persons living in the Town of Angier. 
C.  Specifically, the wireless communication facility development standards are designed to achieve the following: 
1.  Provide a range of locations for wireless communication facilities throughout the town; and 
2.  Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities onto existing structures to reduce the number of new communication towers needed within the Town of Angier; and 
3.  Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing wireless communication facilities; and 
4.  Control the type of tower facility constructed when towers are permitted; and 
5.  Establish adequate development and design criteria to enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to provide service to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and 
6.  Protect residential, historic preservation areas, and scenic corridors from the uncontrolled development of wireless communications facilities by requiring reasonable siting conditions; and 
7.  Promote the use of suitable lands for the location of wireless antennae, towers, and/or wireless communications facilities; and 
8.  Insure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of wireless communications facilities within the town; and 
9.  Enhance the economy of the town through the continued use of the town's public resources; and 
10.  Provide development standards for the development of wireless communication facilities which are consistent with the requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in the best interest of the future of the Town of Angier; and 
11.  Provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of wireless communication facilities; and 
12.  Streamline and expedite the permitting procedures to effect compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    4.11.8.2 Certain uses not covered by this section. Nothing in this ordinance shall reduce any of the permitted uses within the Town of Angier. Nothing in this section shall affect the right of a property owner to use or develop their property as would be consistent with this ordinance and land use plan. Nothing in this ordinance shall affect the right of a property owner to continue any legal nonconforming use. 
    4.11.8.3 Interpretation and definitions. 
A.  To the extent these development standards conflict with other ordinances regarding wireless communications technology for the Town of Angier, these development standards shall control. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "used" includes "designed" and "intended" or arranged to be used or occupied; and the word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
C.  For the purpose of this section certain words, phrases and terms used herein shall be interpreted as shown in Appendix A, Definitions and below. The administrator or designee shall define any word, phrase or term not defined herein. The interpretation shall be based upon its common and ordinary usage in the region. 
1.  Federal Aviation Administration-FAA 
2.  Federal Communications Commission-FCC 
3.  Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996-FTA 
    4.11.8.4 Preferred locations for wireless communication facilities and applicability. The following wireless communication facilities may be allowed within the Town of Angier's Municipal and extraterritorial jurisdictions according to the following priority: 
A.  Antenna attachments. Antenna attachments onto existing support structure or onto an attached wireless communication facility shall be permitted by administrative approval subject to the development criteria of this section. 
B.  Lands owned by the Town of Angier. 
C.  All land identified in Table A. Antenna attachments or wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be permitted by special use permit approval subject to the development criteria of this section of this ordinance and Table A. 
Zoning District Support Structure Type Notes Commercial Districts Monopole Structure shall not be constructed less than 600 feet from an existing residential structure and; structure shall not be constructed less than 300 feet from a right-of-way and; structure shall not be constructed less than one 1,000 feet from any state maintained street or right-of-way. Commerce Park District Monopole Structure shall not be constructed less than 300 feet from an existing residential structure or right-of-way and; structure shall not be constructed less than 1,000 feet from any state street or right-of-way. Residential and Agriculture Districts Monopole Structure shall not be constructed less than 300 feet from an existing residential structure or right-of-way and; structure shall not be constructed less than 1,000 feet from any state street or right-of-way.  
D.  Other lands. Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall only be permitted on all other lands not identified in Table A by means of approval of a special use permit. Prior to applying for a special use permit, the applicant shall provide the town with adequate information to establish that lands included in Table A above, cannot be made suitable for wireless communication facility locations. 
    4.11.8.5 Development standards. 
A.  Height standards. The following height standards shall apply to installation of all wireless communications facilities: 
1.  Attached wireless communications facilities. Attached wireless communication facilities shall not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing building or structure to which it is attached (attachment structure). However, antenna attachments to existing communication towers shall not increase the height of tower above the maximum original permitted height of that tower. 
2.  Wireless communication facilities with support structures identified in Table A shall have a maximum height of 199 feet. 
3.  Height for wireless communication facilities with support structures on other lands not meeting the requirements in 1. or 2. above shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis as part of the special use permit process. The height of the proposed wireless communication facility should be consistent with the height standards indicated in this ordinance for similar properties in similar locations; and considering ground elevations, topographical conditions, and other site development criteria within this ordinance. 
B.  Setback standards. The following setback standards shall apply to all wireless communication facility installations: 
1.  Attached wireless communication facilities. Attached wireless communication facilities shall meet the setback provisions of the underlying zoning district in which they are located. However, an attached wireless communication facility antenna array may extend up to 30 inches horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon an adjoining parcel or right-of-way. 
2.  Wireless communications facilities with support structures wireless communications facilities with support structures shall meet the setback requirements noted in Table A. 
3.  Setback standards for wireless communication facilities with support structures on other lands not meeting the requirements in 1. or 2. above shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis as part of the special use permit process. The distance setbacks of the proposed wireless communication facility should be consistent with the setback standards indicated in this ordinance for similar properties in similar locations; and considering ground elevations, topographical conditions, and other site development criteria within this ordinance. 
C.  Landscaping standards. The following landscaping requirements shall be maintained by the tower owner and shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations: 
1.  New construction. New wireless communication facilities with support structures and attached wireless communication facilities with new building construction shall be landscaped with a minimum landscaped area of 60 feet around the perimeter of the opaque security fence. Monopole type structures shall have a minimum of 30 feet around the perimeter of the security fence meeting the following standards: 
a.  One row of drought tolerant, nondeciduous trees with a minimum caliper of 1.75 inches shall be installed with a maximum spacing of 25 feet. 
b.  Drought tolerant, nondeciduous shrubs capable of creating a continuous hedge and obtaining a height of at least five feet shall be planted with a maximum spacing of five feet. Plants shall be at least three-gallon container plants and at least 24 inches tall at the time of planting. 
2.  Land form preservation. Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided however, that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed or removed. 
3.  Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation on a wireless communication facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the zoning administrator or designee. 
4.  Minimum site disturbance. Grading for the new wireless communication facility shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new facility. 
D.  Aesthetics, placement, materials and colors. The following standards shall apply to all new antenna arrays and new wireless communications facilities: 
1.  Antenna array attachments shall be designed so as to be compatible with the wireless communication facility to which it is to be affixed; including but not limited to matching the proposed array with existing structural design, façade colors, and camouflage technology. 
2.  New wireless communication facilities shall be designed to be compatible with existing structures and surroundings to the extent feasible. For all new facilities' locations; including but not limited to considerations of scale and space of the immediate vicinity of the new facility, placement in a location which is consistent with proper functioning of the wireless communications facility, the use of compatible or neutral colors, and camouflage technology. 
E.  Lighting standards. The following lighting requirements shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations. Wireless communications facilities shall not be artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for: 
1.  Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site; and 
2.  Such illumination of the wireless communications facility as may be required by the FAA or other applicable authority installed in a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences. 
3.  Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, the required night lighting shall be red and a type of lens used to reduce ground lighting when the site is within 300 feet of a residential dwelling. 
F.  Signage. Wireless communications facilities shall not display any signage, logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a commercial or noncommercial nature, except for a small message containing provider identification and emergency telephone numbers and such other information as may be required by local, state, or federal regulations governing wireless communications facilities. 
G.  Fencing. Wireless communications facilities with support structures shall be enclosed by an opaque fence not less than six feet in height and approved by the zoning administrator. Security features may be incorporated into the buffer and landscaping requirements for the site. All fencing shall meet the requirements of state or federal agencies. 
H.  Radio frequency emissions/sound. The following radio frequency emissions standards shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations: 
1.  Radio frequency impact. The FTA gives the FCC jurisdiction of the regulations of radio frequency (RF) emissions, and wireless communications facilities that do not exceed the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF impact. 
2.  FCC compliance. In order to provide information to its citizens, copies of ongoing FCC information concerning wireless communications facilities and RF emissions standards may be requested from time to time. Applicants for wireless communications facilities shall be required to provide information with the application on the measurement of the effective radiated power of the facility and how this meets the FCC standards. 
3.  Sound prohibited. No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the like are permitted. 
I.  Structural integrity. Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be constructed to the Electronics Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antennas Towers and Antenna Support Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each support structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays. 
J.  Collocation support structure design. All wireless communication facilities with a support structure up to a height of 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three antenna array. All wireless communication facilities with a support structure up to a height of 199 feet or greater shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least four antenna array. 
K.  Collocation agreement. All applicants for wireless communication facilities are required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and reasonably market collocation opportunities to other wireless communications facility users. The statement shall include the applicant's policy regarding collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers. The collocation agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a special use permit. A special use permit shall not be issued unless the applicant complies with the collocation policy outlined in this ordinance. 
    4.11.8.6 Review process. The applicable development criteria referred to herein are those set forth in this section: 
A.  Permitting procedures. Attached wireless communications facilities without new building construction that meet the development criteria may be permitted by administrative review, or antenna array attachments onto existing structures may also be permitted by administrative review. All other proposed wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the special use permit process. 
B.  Wireless communications facilities as a part of a coordinated development approval. Wireless communications facilities as part of a proposed "major" residential or nonresidential subdivision, planned unit development, conditional rezoning, or other coordinated development approval shall be reviewed and approved through those processes. 
C.  Temporary wireless communications facilities may be permitted by administrative approval for a term not to exceed 90 days. Once granted, a temporary wireless communication facility permit may be extended for an additional 90 days upon evidence of need by the applicant. In case of emergency, (e.g., storm damage to an existing tower or other circumstances resulting in the interruption of existing service) the administrative review shall be expedited to the extent feasible. 
    4.11.8.7 Approval process. 
A.  Proposals. A new wireless communication facility shall not be approved unless the board of adjustment finds that the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers, buildings, or alternative structures within a qualified search ring of the proposed wireless communications facility due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, building or structures, as documented by a qualified or licensed North Carolina Professional Engineer, and the existing or approved tower, building or structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
2.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower, building, or other structure as documented by a qualified or licensed North Carolina professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
3.  Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures within the qualified search ring, or combinations thereof, cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified or licensed North Carolina professional engineer. 
4.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunication equipment upon an existing or approved tower, building, or other structure. 
B.  Special use application required. No person, firm or corporation shall install or construct any wireless communication facility unless and until a special use permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Pre-existing wireless communications facility. Wireless communications facilities which were installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be considered as nonconforming. 
D.  Amateur radio exclusion. This section shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator. 
E.  Relationship to other ordinances. This section shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other ordinances regarding the locating and permitting of wireless communication facilities. 
F.  Building codes. Construction of all wireless communication facilities shall comply with the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Codes and permitting process in addition to the requirements of this section. 
G.  Application submission. All applications, regardless of wireless communication facility type shall include all of the requirements contained in this section: 
1.  Application contents. Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this ordinance shall submit a sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed architect or engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view, and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation showing the location and dimensions of the wireless communications facility and all improvements associated therewith, including information concerning specification, antenna locations, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping, parking, access, fencing and, if relevant as determined by staff, topography, adjacent uses, and existing vegetation. 
a.  A "zone of visibility map" map which shall be provided in order to determine locations from which the tower may be seen. 
b.  Pictorial representations of "before and after" views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the town as may be appropriate, including but not limited to state highways and other major streets; local parks; other public lands; and historic sites normally open to the public. 
c.  Applications proposing to collocate on an existing wireless communication facility shall include a radio frequency intermodulation study with their application. 
2.  Submission requirements. Application for a special use permit shall be submitted to the town on forms prescribed by the town. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan containing the information described above and a SHPO report showing no adverse effects. If review is required, the application and site plan shall be placed on the next available board of adjustment agenda in accordance with the agenda deadlines established by the town. 
3.  Application fees. A wireless communication application fee shall accompany each application. Please refer to the current approved rate and fee schedule as approved by the Town of Angier Board of Commissioners. 
H.  Administrative review. The following administrative review process shall apply to all wireless communications facility collocation applications eligible for administrative review: 
1.  Review authority. Review of the attachment and collocation of antenna under this section shall be conducted by the zoning administrator or the designee upon filing an application. 
2.  Review criteria. Each application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria specified in this section. 
3.  Timing of decision. The zoning administrator or designee shall render a decision on the wireless communication facility application by written response to the applicant within 20 business days after receipt of the complete application, except that an extension may be agreed upon by the applicant. 
4.  Application denial. If administrative approval is not obtained or is denied due to noncompliance with the development criteria, the applicant may appeal the denial by applying for board of adjustment review. 
5.  Application approval. If the application together with all required addenda are in compliance with the development criteria and otherwise meets the requirements of this section, the zoning administrator or designee may approve the application and authorize issuance of the proper permits. 
I.  Board of adjustment review. The following shall apply to all special use permit applications requiring submission to the board of adjustment: 
1.  Review authority. The board of adjustment shall be the review authority for special use permit applications not eligible for administrative review. 
2.  Notice. Notice of the application and the evidentiary hearing for the special use permit by the board of adjustment shall be in accordance with this ordinance. 
3.  Hearing. The board of adjustment shall review and consider the TAA application at a quasijudicial evidentiary hearing. At the hearing, interested persons may appear and offer information in support of or opposition to the proposed application. The board of adjustment shall consider the following in reaching a decision: 
a.  Development criteria. The complete special use permit application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria set forth in this section. 
b.  Tower siting conditions. The board of adjustment may recommend alternative development criteria, impose conditions, or add restrictions on the application as it deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the compatibility of the wireless communication facility with the surrounding property, in accordance with the purposes and intent of this ordinance, provided the alternative development criteria, conditions, or restrictions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished. The inclusion of additional conditions, development criteria, or restrictions shall be by specific inclusion in a motion for approval. 
c.  The special use permit shall be granted when each of the following findings of fact has been made by the board of adjustment: 
i.  The wireless communication facility will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted; 
ii.  The wireless communication facility meets all required conditions, specifications, and development standards of this ordinance; 
iii.  The wireless communication facility will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; 
iv.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan submitted, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development of the jurisdiction and its environs; 
v.  If applicable, additional development conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this ordinance; and 
vi.  If applicable, additional development conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished. 
d.  Action. Following the evidentiary hearing and presentation of evidence, the board of adjustment shall take one of the following actions: 
i.  Approve the application as submitted; or 
ii.  Approve the application with conditions or modifications; or 
iii.  Refer the application for additional information or neighborhood input; or 
iv.  Deny the application in writing. 
4.  Findings. All decisions rendered by the board of adjustment concerning a special use permit application shall be supported by written findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon substantial evidence of record. 
5.  Timing of decision. The board of adjustment shall hold a hearing within 60 days or less of the final submission of all required application documents and technical review, however, this time may be increased due to deferrals by either the applicant or the board of adjustment. 
6.  Appeals. An appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the final action by the zoning administrator or the board of adjustment. Only the applicant and those who registered an objection to the special use permit application in the record of the board of adjustment shall have standing to appeal. 
    4.11.8.8 Shared facilities and collocation policy. All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered, designed, and constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other applicants, to collocate with other existing wireless communication facilities, and to accommodate the future collocation of other wireless communication facilities. A special use permit shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a new wireless communications facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith attempt to locate its wireless communication facility onto an existing structure. Competitive conflict and financial burden alone are not deemed to be adequate reasons against collocation. 
    4.11.8.9 Removal of abandoned support structures. Any support structure that is not operated for a continuous period of one year shall be considered abandoned, and the town, at its election, may require the support structure owner to remove the support structure within 90 days after notice from the town to remove the support structure. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the support structure. If the owner of an abandoned support structure cannot be located or is no longer in business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose property the support is located. 
    4.11.8.10 Nonconforming. Wireless communication facilities in existence on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which do not comply with the requirements of this ordinance (nonconforming wireless communications facility) are subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Expansion. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this ordinance except as further provided in this section. 
B.  Additions. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers) subject to administrative review under this ordinance. 
C.  Repairs or reconstruction. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities which become damaged due to any reason or cause, may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of this ordinance. Provided, however, that if the damage to the wireless communication facility exceeds 50 percent of replacement cost, said wireless communication facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this ordinance. 
D.  Non use. Any nonconforming wireless communication facility not in use for six months shall be deemed abandoned and all rights as a nonconforming use shall cease. 
    4.11.8.11 Revocation of special use permits. The approval of any special use permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be revoked after a hearing as provided hereinafter. If the zoning administrator or designee finds that any permit holder has violated any provision of this ordinance, or the conditions, restrictions, or additional development standards of an approved special use permit; or has failed to make good faith reasonable efforts to provide or seek collocation, the zoning administrator or designee shall notify the permit holder in writing that the special use permit is revocable due to the permit holder's noncompliance with the conditions of the permit and the zoning administrator or designee shall convene a meeting with the permit holder no later than 30 days from the date of the letter. The zoning administrator or designee may require the permit holder to correct the violation within a reasonable amount of time or the zoning administrator or designee may recommend to the town commissioners that the special use permit be revoked. After the appropriate public hearing, the town commissioners may revoke the special use permit upon such terms and conditions, if any, that the town commissioners may determine. Prior to initiation of revocation proceedings, the town shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance and specify the date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of deficiencies shall not exceed 60 days. The permit holder shall provide the town with evidence that the required corrective action has been taken. Should the permit holder fail to correct any deficiencies in the time required, the administrator and town commissioners shall convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the special use permit. At any such hearing, the permit holder may be represented by an attorney and may cross-examine opposing witnesses. Other interested persons may comment. The administrator and town commissioners may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure. The proceedings shall be recorded; provided, however that stenographic services, if desired, shall be provided by the requesting party at that party's expense. 
    4.11.9 Town Center Planned Development (TCPD). A TCPD is permitted in all zoning Districts, as indicated within the permitted uses table, located in the Town Center District as shown on the Town of Angier Land Use Map. 
    4.11.9.1 Intent. It is recognized that only through ingenuity, imagination, and high quality design can a TCPD be produced that is in keeping with the intent of this ordinance while departing from the strict application of the conventional use and dimensional requirements therein. This is accomplished by allowing flexibility and a mix of residential and nonresidential uses, and/or varying types of both residential and nonresidential uses. Coordination of such developments in conjunction with adequate public facilities while maintaining the small town character of the Town of Angier is a necessity for this type of development. 
    The intent of the TCPD regulations within the Town of Angier is to provide for minimum, conventional development regulations, while allowing a developer the flexibility to determine how to attain superior development through the criteria listed herein. 
    4.11.9.2 Uses. 
A.  Residential uses included in the TCPD include single-family detached, two-family, townhome developments, condos, apartments and customary accessory uses and structures. 
a.  Density shall be determined on a project by project basis. 
B.  Nonresidential uses included in the TCPD include all use listed as permitted under the Central Business zoning district. 
    4.11.9.3 General provisions. 
A.  Minimum development size. No minimum development size is required, however the development has to be of a nature that is not achievable under current criteria of this ordinance and meet the intent of the TCPD. 
B.  Minimum building setbacks. In order to facilitate innovative design the minimum building setbacks shall be determined by the developer and noted on the development plan. All single-family developments with a building setback of less than five feet shall be required to provide maintenance easements along the impacted property line as determined by the TRC. In cases where the setback is not stated on the approved plan the underlying zoning district standards shall apply. 

C.  Maximum building height for single-family residential detached and two-family dwellings the building height shall not exceed 35 feet. All other uses may exceed 35 feet with the approval of the local fire department. 
D.  Restrictive covenants and/or property owner's association by-laws shall be required for all projects, residential and commercial, approved as a TCPD. 
    4.11.9.4 Streets and access. All streets within the TCPD shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Angier approved thoroughfare plan, construction manual, or the latest NCDOT Construction Manual depending on whichever is applicable. 
A.  Residential parking. 
a.  A minimum of two spaces are required per residential unit. One space may be covered. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
b.  The parking of commercial vehicles is limited to one commercial vehicle with a one ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
c.  A parking area may not exceed 30 feet of contiguous area or 50 percent of the lot width as measured at the front yard setback, depending on whichever is less. 
d.  Within the front yard, a parking/driveway area is only allowed between the garage/carport and the street, except as an area contiguous to the allowed parking/driveway. 
e.  No parking is permitted within the front yard when the parking area: Is detached from the allowed parking/driveway area; or would result in an area greater than the allowable width as described above. 
B.  Nonresidential and multifamily parking. 
a.  Both nonresidential and multifamily development shall meet the standards of the Town of Angier UDO located in the parking standards section. An alternative parking plan may be submitted as part of the development plan. The alternative plan should address parking demand characteristics for the specific land uses proposed. 
b.  Parking lot design shall include the following: 
a.  Location of street access. 
b.  Internal circulation. 
c.  Location of buildings on the site along with building entrance. 
d.  Pedestrian flows within the parking area. 
e.  Topography, service and delivery facilities. 
f.  Landscape requirements. 
c.  The plan shall separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic such that pedestrians can safely walk both to and from businesses and parking areas. The plan shall also promote access from adjacent residential development into nonresidential development areas, regardless of whether or not the residential development is existing or is included as part of the nonresidential TCPD. 
    4.11.9.5 Sidewalks and curb and gutter. All streets within a TCPD shall provide sidewalks, curb and gutter in accordance with the Town of Angier approved construction manual. Alternatives may be approved as part of the TCPD. 
    4.11.9.6 Architectural and site design. The purpose of this section is to ensure architectural compatibility, permanence, and style, and the establishment and preservation of architectural character throughout the town. The developer shall provide standards that address the following characteristics for the proposed TCPD. These standards shall be addressed in the restrictive covenants. 

a.  Building materials, colors, textures and architecture style. 
b.  Building variation. 
c.  Building orientation. 
d.  Master sign plan. 
e.  Lighting. 
f.  Fencing-Shall be required for all residential projects. 
(1)  Graphic illustration shall be required for fence type and construction. 
Fences, including walls and hedges, shall not exceed the maximum heights shown in the following table: 
Front yard 3 feet maximum Side yard 6 feet maximum Rear yard 6 feet maximum Corner yard 6 feet maximum  
(1)  Corner lot fencing may be placed within the required side yard setback, but shall be no less than three feet from the back of the sidewalk and positioned out of the public right-of-way. 
(2)  No fence shall obstruct the sight distance triangle as prescribed by NCDOT or the Town of Angier. 
(3)  When the fence abuts a public or private street the finished side shall face the street or access. 
    4.11.9.7 Accessory structures. The developer shall provide standards that address accessory structure for the proposed TCPD, this includes the following, but is not limited to. These standards shall be addressed in the restrictive covenants. 
a.  Dog enclosures. 
b.  Swimming pools. 
c.  Storage buildings. 
    4.11.9.8 Landscaping, buffers and screening for nonresidential and multifamily projects. Landscaping, buffering, and screening will be required for all projects. An alternative landscape, buffer, and screening plan may be submitted as part of the development plan. This plan shall meet the intent of the requirements within the UDO. 
    4.11.9.9 Review and approval procedures. 
a.  A master plan including building lot typical shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements for planned developments set forth in chapter 11. In addition procedures for all subdivisions shall be followed in accordance with the UDO. 
b.  A written notice of the proposed master plan shall be sent by first class mail to all contiguous property owners and posting a public notice sign at the subject property at least ten days prior to the planning board meeting. 
c.  The TRC shall review the master plan and restrictive covenants for completeness and compliance with this section and applicable provisions of this ordinance prior to review of the special use permit or planning board. 
d.  Modifications-Minor changes in the TCPD may be approved by the TRC. 
(Ord. No. 2012.02, 10-2-2012; Ord. of 5-7-2013(2)) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Section 5.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure architectural compatibility, permanence, and style, and the establishment and preservation of architectural character throughout the town. The town desires that all development be treated as a lasting contributor to the community and as a good neighbor to its surroundings. Enumerated in the sections below are general requirements for all buildings as well as requirements specific to building use and typology. All new construction shall conform to the architectural requirements of this chapter. 
Section 5.2. - General provisions. 
A.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in regards to spacing, setbacks, proportions, materials, massing, and scale. 
B.  The primary entrance shall be architecturally and functionally designed on the front façade facing the primary public street. 
C.  The front façade of the principal structure shall be parallel to the front lot line and street. 
D.  Materials used shall be of lasting design and quality. 
E.  A single, large, dominant building mass shall be avoided. Where large structures are required, mass should be broken up through the use of setbacks, projecting and recessed elements, and similar design techniques. 
Section 5.3. - Residential buildings. 
A.  Exterior materials shall be durable and residential in character. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Accessory structures located in residential districts shall be constructed of similar materials and colors as used for the main dwelling unit; however, accessory structures that are 12 feet × 12 feet or smaller are exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 1-3-2016(3)) 
Section 5.4. - Nonresidential buildings. 
    5.4.1 Building design along state highways and in town center. The following requirements shall apply to nonresidential development and/or property located along or within 200 feet of the right of way of Highway 55 or Highway 210, or the Central Business District. 
    5.4.1.1 Materials and color. 
A.  The administrator shall make a façade determination for nonresidential structures proposed within existing nonresidential developments or adjacent to existing nonresidential structures. This determination shall take into account the age and appearance of existing adjacent structures, the distance between the proposed structure and existing structures, and the distance between the proposed structure and a public street. In every case, the proposed structure shall meet or exceed the façade quality of the adjacent existing nonresidential structure with the highest percentage of acceptable façade materials as listed in Item B. 
B.  For all other nonresidential structures, front facades shall be entirely covered by brick, decorative concrete block, stucco, stone, fiber cement siding, or other materials similar in appearance and durability (as approved by the administrator). In addition, exterior walls on the sides of the structure shall be at least 50 percent covered by an approved material. For every ten percent increase in approved material on exterior walls, a ten percent break in setback requirements shall be given, not to exceed 50 percent of the total setback. 
C.  Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one façade. The heavier material should be below. 
D.  Façade colors shall be of low reflectance earth tone, muted, subtle, or neutral colors. Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material. The use of high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent or neon colors shall be prohibited. Variations in color schemes are encouraged in order to articulate entryways, architectural features, and public amenities so as to give greater recognition to these features. 
E.  Nonresidential structures shall have plantings as provided in the approved plantings table in Section 7.4.1 installed along the side and rear exterior walls within 15 feet of the base of the structure prior to receiving the Certificate of Occupancy. 
    5.4.1.2 Building design in all other locations. The following requirements shall apply to nonresidential development not located along or within 200 feet of Highway 55, Highway 210, or the Central Business District: 
A.  The administrator shall make a facade determination for nonresidential structures proposed within existing nonresidential developments or adjacent to existing nonresidential structures. This determination shall take into account the age and appearance of existing adjacent structures, the distance between the proposed structure and existing structures, and the distance between the proposed structure and a public street. In every case, the proposed structure shall meet or exceed the façade quality of the adjacent existing nonresidential structure with the highest percentage of acceptable façade materials as listed in Item B. 
B.  For nonresidential structures proposed in a new nonresidential development, all exterior façades shall be at least 50 percent brick, decorative concrete block, stucco, stone, fiber cement siding, or other materials similar in appearance and durability (as approved by the administrator). For every ten percent increase in approved material on exterior walls, a ten percent break in setback requirements shall be given, not to exceed 50 percent of the total setback. 
C.  Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one façade. The heavier material should be below. 
D.  Façade colors shall be of low reflectance earth tone, muted, subtle, or neutral colors. Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material. The use of high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent or neon colors shall be prohibited. Variations in color schemes are encouraged in order to articulate entryways, architectural features, and public amenities so as to give greater recognition to these features. 
E.  Nonresidential structures shall have plantings as provided in the approved plantings table in Section 7.4.1 installed along the side and rear exterior walls within 15 feet of the base of the structure prior to receiving the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2017) 
Section 5.5. - Building design alternatives. 
    5.5.1 Use of alternate plan, material, or methods. Alternate design plans, building materials, or construction techniques may be used when unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the application of architectural design standards. Such situations may result from unique site conditions, innovative design applications, and/or unified development design. 
    5.5.2 Evaluation by planning board. 
A.  The application for alternate design shall include which specific standards cannot be met and how the alternative methods will achieve the intent of the standards. 
B.  The performance building design alternatives shall be evaluated by the planning board, in accordance with the planning board approval process outlined in chapter 11, to determine if the alternate design meets the intent and purpose of this ordinance. This determination shall take into account the land use of adjacent property, the orientation of the building to public streets, the building typology, the intended use of the structure, attention to architectural detail, scale and mass. 
    5.5.3 Appeal of the administrator. Appeal of the administrator's review and decision of architectural design applications shall be made to the planning board. 
Chapter 6 - OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Section 6.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is for the protection of existing environmental resources including open space, streams, wetlands, watersheds, floodplains, soils, forest stands, specimen trees and other significant vegetation and wildlife. These elements are of economic value to the town and make it a desirable place to live and visit. 
Section 6.2. - Environmental assessment and suitability of land. 
    6.2.1 Preservation of trees and natural features encouraged. 
A.  Significant forest stands, natural vegetation, specimen trees, severe natural topography, drainage features and water courses are encouraged to be preserved to the extent that is reasonable and practical while otherwise not reasonably prohibiting development. 
B.  Forested and vegetated areas whose physical site conditions render them unsuitable for development should be set aside as conservation areas or as open space. Wooded sites should be developed with careful consideration of the natural characteristics of the site. When portions of forested stands must be developed, careful consideration should be given to preserving wooded perimeters or the most desirable natural features in order to retain the aesthetic or visual character of the site. Isolated pockets of existing trees or specimen trees should be protected as a valuable asset of the property. 
    6.2.2 Existing features plan. Existing features plans are required at the pre-application stage for all major subdivisions and shall be submitted in accordance with Section 12.2. 

Section 6.3. - Open space requirements. 
    6.3.1 Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to new developments with greater than five residential dwelling units (major subdivisions) in which the construction of new streets is proposed. Developments in which all lots are five acres or more are exempt from this provision. 
    6.3.2 General provisions for open space. 
A.  Land designated as open space on the approved development plan shall be maintained as open space and may not be separately sold, subdivided, or developed for any other purpose. Dedicated open space shall not be more than 50 percent covered by water. 
B.  Access from a public or private street shall be provided to all designated open space with a minimum 15-foot wide access to the open space area. Lakes or ponds within the subdivision used as open space shall provide adequate community access beyond this 15-foot minimum as determined by the administrator. 
C.  Open space shall be contiguous wherever possible. 
D.  All open space required as part of a development, including passive open space types, shall include improvements. 
    6.3.3 Minimum open space dedication. Open space shall be dedicated at a ratio of 15 percent of the total area for developments less than 20 acres in size and 20 percent of the total development area for developments equal to or greater than 20 acres. 
    6.3.4 Types of open space. All required open space shall be classified in accordance with this section. Dedicated open space shall fit into one or more of the following categories and be classified as private or public open space. Illustrations used herein are intended for general purposes only and shall not be used as a literal interpretation of requirements. The existing features plan should be used as a guide for the town and the developer to determine the most appropriate open space type and location. Also town and county plans, particularly park and open space plans, shall be considered when evaluating the most appropriate open space type. 
A.  Playground. Playgrounds are for active recreational use and provide sunny and shaded play equipment and play areas for children as well as open shelter with benches. Playgrounds may be part of other types of open space, such as parks, or may stand alone. 

B.  Square. Squares are areas for passive recreational use. Squares shall be bounded by streets on a minimum of 50 percent of their perimeter. Squares are encouraged to be entirely bounded by streets and/or lanes. Squares shall be planted parallel to all streets and shall contain canopy trees along street frontages. 

C.  Park. Parks may be designed for passive and/or active recreational use. Parks shall be bounded by streets on a minimum of 10 percent of their perimeter. Large parks should create a central open space which services an entire neighborhood or group of neighborhoods; or incorporates physical features which are an asset to the community (i.e. lake or river frontage, high ground, significant stands of trees). Undergrowth should be limited and landscaping shall be installed in a manner that promotes attractiveness and safety. Parks may be combined with greenways and greenbelts and may include golf courses and community gardens. 

D.  Green. The green is an open space which is more natural. Like the square, it is small and surrounded by buildings. Unlike the square, it is informally planted and may have irregular topography. Greens are usually landscaped with trees at the edges and open lawns at the center. Greens should contain no structures other than benches, pavilions, and memorials; paths are optional. 
E.  Greenway. Greenways are large, irregular open spaces designed to incorporate natural settings such as creeks and significant stands of trees within and between neighborhoods. Greenways are typically more natural and may contain irregular topography. Greenways shall be used for certain active recreational uses including, at a minimum, trails for walking, jogging, and biking. Greenways shall connect points of interest in the community such as schools, parks, and other civic uses. 

F.  Agricultural preserve. Open spaces designated as agricultural preserves shall be used for active farming in the form of crop cultivation, the keeping of livestock, or equestrian facilities. Agricultural preserves are encouraged to protect areas of agricultural and rural heritage and promote compatible active agricultural operations. 

G.  Nature preserve. Open spaces designated as nature preserves shall be left largely undisturbed except for the optional clearing of underbrush for the provision of a walking trail (mulch or other natural material only). Nature preserve areas are encouraged to protect large stands of trees, wildlife, and natural water features. Nature preserves are the preferred form of open space for steep slopes in excess of 25 percent grade. 

Section 6.4. - Open space ownership and maintenance. 
A.  Open space may be owned or administered by one or a combination of the following methods: 
1.  Fee simple ownership by a unit of government or private nonprofit land conservancy; 
2.  Common ownership by homeowner's association; 
3.  By individual private ownership such as a farmer, developer or other private entity that maintains the open space in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. (i.e. farming, equestrian facility, etc. excluding confined livestock operations). 
4.  Deed restricted open space easements on individual private properties. 
B.  The town board of commissioners shall have the authority to accept or reject land dedications made as a requirement of this section. They shall also have authority to sell land accepted pursuant to this section with the proceeds of such sale used only for the acquisition, expansion or improvement of recreation, park, or open space sites. 
C.  The owner of dedicated open space shall be responsible for the continuing upkeep and proper maintenance of the same. 
D.  In the case of common ownership by a homeowner's association, the restrictive covenants shall provide that, in the event the homeowner's association fails to maintain the open space according to the standards of this ordinance, the town may, following reasonable notice, demand that deficiency of maintenance be corrected, or enter the open space to maintain it. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged to the homeowner's association. 
E.  The developer shall place in a conspicuous manner upon the final plat of the subdivision a notation concerning control of open space. 
F.  The developer will provide proof of registration of the Articles of Incorporation with the appropriate state agency for the formation of the homeowner's association to the administrator prior to or at the time of final plat recordation. 
G.  Homeowners' associations or similar legal entities that are responsible for the maintenance and control of open space areas and common areas shall be established by the developer who shall record in the register of deeds a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association or similar legal entity. A copy of the recorded document shall be provided to the administrator and such document shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Provision for the establishment of the association or similar entity is required before any lot in the development is sold or any building occupied and membership shall be mandatory for each homeowner and any successive buyer. 
2.  The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over such common open space areas. 
3.  The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from residents of the development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs associated with the maintenance and upkeep of such common areas. Further, assessments levied can become a lien on the property if allowed in the master deed establishing the homeowners association or similar legal entity. 
4.  The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a period of years. 
5.  The association or similar legal entity must be responsible for liability insurance, applicable taxes and the maintenance open space and other facilities under their control. 
6.  The association or similar legal entity must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs. 
7.  The association shall be responsible for maintaining all public storm water drainage systems and easements within the subdivision not being maintained by the town, county, state or other approved entity. 
8.  It shall be expressly stated within the restrictive covenants/homeowners association documents that it will be the responsibility of the developer or successors or assigns to enforce such covenants or restrictions until such time as control has been transferred to the Homeowners Association Board of Directors. It shall be the sole responsibility of the developer, successor or assigns to correct any deficiencies prior to transfer of control over to the homeowner's association board of directors. 
Section 6.5. - Payment-in-lieu-of dedication. 
A.  If open space within a development is physically impractical due to unusual conditions then the town may accept a fee paid in lieu of dedication. 
B.  Fees collected in lieu of dedications and any proceeds from such transactions or sales shall be accounted for by the town, and the funds shall be used by the town for the purposes of acquiring and developing recreation, greenway and open space areas as shown on the land development plan or in the parks and recreation and greenway/bikeway master plans and for no other purposes. The depository for such funds may be the same as permitted other funds of the town, pending their expenditure in accordance with the terms of this Code; such funds may be invested as other funds of the town. The town may, at its discretion, add additional monies to the fund for the purposes of purchasing open space and recreational land to be used for recreational purposes. 
C.  Refunds shall not be granted to the developer should the project not be constructed after recording of final plat or if a reduction in density occurs. 
D.  Such payment in lieu of dedication shall be the product of the current assessed market value of the land to be subdivided (as established in subsection E. below) multiplied by the number of acres to be dedicated. 
E.  Payment in lieu of dedication shall be made in the amount of $500.00 per lot. 
Section 6.6. - Environmental protection. 
    A 30-foot undisturbed buffer shall be provided from the stream bank of all perennial streams as shown on the latest USGS map. Such buffer may only be disturbed for the installation of a narrow greenway path. 
Chapter 7 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 7.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
    7.1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the protection, installation, and long-term management of trees and shrubs and to minimize potential nuisances, such as visual impacts, noise, dust, odor, litter, and glare of lights, from adjacent properties. The appropriate use of existing and supplemental landscaping enhances the appearance of built environment and blends new development with the natural landscape. Existing vegetation should be retained where possible to ensure a natural established landscape. 
    7.1.2 Applicability. 
A.  All new developments (except for infill single-family detached residential uses) shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Any expansion of an existing building also requires compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Generally, the responsibility for screening is that of the more concentrated land use. However, new developments with a less intense use being constructed next to an existing more intense use shall provide the required landscaping on the new development's property. 
C.  In cases where an existing, landscaped, or vegetated area is located on the same property as the proposed development, further plantings and/or improvements shall not be required so long as said screened area is of sufficient width and depth and contains adequate and sufficient materials to meet the requirements of this ordinance. If the landscaped or vegetated area is deficient, the developer shall make needed improvements and/or additions to satisfy the landscaping requirements and intent of this ordinance. 
    7.1.3 Relief from landscaping requirements. 
A.  In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site or the location or size of the parcel to be developed would make strict adherence to the requirements of this section serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install and maintain the required landscaping, the planning board may alter the requirements of this section provided the spirit and intent of the section are maintained. Such an alteration may occur only at the request of the developer, who shall submit a plan to the administrator showing existing site features that would screen the proposed use and any additional screen materials the developer may propose to have installed. 
B.  The vacancy or non-use of an adjoining parcel shall not constitute grounds for providing relief to the landscaping requirements contained in this ordinance. Neither shall the desire of an owner to make a more intensive use or greater economic use of the property be grounds for reducing the landscaping requirements. 
Section 7.2. - General provisions. 
A.  To the extent that existing natural vegetation located on the same parcel of land as the proposed development can meet the required screening levels of this section, the use of such materials is encouraged. In such case, these areas shall be designated on the development plan as undisturbed vegetation areas. 
B.  No structure other than a wall, fence, sidewalk, mailbox, sign or driveway shall be permitted within a required landscaping area. No off-street parking may take place in any required landscaping area. Where plant materials are required, the required amount of plant materials shall be installed on the side of any wall or fence opposite the new development. 
C.  For any parcel of land (which is to be developed), the developer is encouraged to identify any and all significant trees with a caliper of 12 inches or greater located on the lot. Every effort shall be made by the developer to save such trees. No trees with a caliper of 12 inches or greater on designated lots (public or private) shall be cut down without the written permission of the administrator. 
Section 7.3. - Landscaping types and requirements. 
    The provisions of this section are designed to specifically address the application of landscape resources to varying styles of development and the impact of such applications on the appearance, health, and financial well-being of the community. The provisions are broken into three landscaping categories: 
A.  Buffers. 
B.  Parking lot landscaping. 
C.  Residential yards. 
    7.3.1 Buffers. 
A.  Buffers shall be required for all new or expanding development. Refer to the permitted uses table in chapter 3 to find the use group level for the new or expanding use, except as follows: 
1.  Development located within the CP zoning district shall provide a Type B buffer along property lines adjacent to any other zoning district. 
Use Groups and Buffer Types 
Proposed Use Adjacent Use Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Use Group 1 None None None None Use Group 2 Type A, C Type C Type C Type C Use Group 3 Type A, C Type A, C Type C Type C Use Group 4 Type B Type B, C Type A, C Type C  
Buffer Requirements 
Requirement Type A Type B Type C 
(street yard) Buffer Width: 15 feet 30 feet 10 feet Buffer Location: Side and rear yards Front, side and rear yards Front yard (within 20 feet of edge of right-of-way) Required Screening: REQUIRED SCREENING: A staggered row of large trees, spaced not more than 30 feet apart or a staggered row of medium trees spaced not more than 15 feet apart; and REQUIRED SCREENING: A staggered row of large trees, spaced not more than 30 feet apart or a staggered row of medium trees spaced not more than 15 feet apart; and REQUIRED SCREENING: A staggered row of large trees, spaced not more than 30 feet apart or a staggered row of medium trees spaced not more than 15 feet apart, supplemented by five (5) low growing shrubs for every required large maturing tree. OPTION 1: A row of evergreen shrubs placed not more than four (4) to six (6) feet apart which will grow to form a continuous hedge of at least six (6) feet in height within two (2) years of planting; or OPTION 1: An opaque fence located within the required buffer area; such fence shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet in height, finished side of fence must face out; or OPTION 2: A masonry wall located within the required buffer area; such wall shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet (above finished grade;) and, if a block wall, it shall be painted on all sides; or an opaque fence six (6) feet in height, finished side of fence must face out; or OPTION 2: A berm (maximum of 3:1 slope) and planting combination, with the berm an average height of three (3) feet and dense plantings which will, when combined with the berm, achieve a minimum height of six (6) feet and seventy-five (75) percent opacity within two (2) years. OPTION 3: A berm (maximum of 3:1 slope) and planting combination, with the berm an average height of three (3) feet and dense plantings which will, when combined with the berm, achieve a minimum height of six (6) feet and seventy-five 75 percent opacity within two (2) years. Ground Cover: Low-growing evergreen shrubs, evergreen ground cover, or mulch covering the balance of the buffer.  
B.  If a specific use is not mentioned then it will be the duty of the administrator to determine which existing use is most closely related to the proposed use in order to determine which group to classify the use under. Further, the following use group levels are assumed for undeveloped land: Residential and conservation zoned land is use group level 1, office and institutional zoned land is use group level 2, all commercial zoned land is use group level 3, and commerce park zoned land is use group level 4. 
C.  The buffer shall be located entirely on the property of the new or expanding development. 
D.  At least two different species of trees and shrubs shall be used to compose the required buffer. The use of crepe myrtles is encouraged. 
E.  Under overhead utility lines, two small maturing trees shall be used in lieu of each large maturing tree required. Crepe myrtles are preferred to fulfill this requirement. 
    7.3.2 Parking lot landscaping. 
A.  Parking lot landscaping is required within all parking lots except automobile sales display areas. Instead, perimeter landscaping around automobile sales display areas shall be utilized at the same rate as required below. 
B.  A minimum of one canopy tree shall be located within 60 feet of every parking space. The measurement shall be taken from the base of the tree. 

C.  Large maturing canopy trees shall be planted in a manner that provides shade for parking area at maturity. Two small maturing (ornamental) trees shall be used in lieu of canopy trees under overhead utility lines. Crepe myrtles are encouraged as the small maturing tree. 
D.  Each planting area shall be a minimum of 49 square feet, with a minimum dimension of seven feet. 
E.  Planting areas shall be protected with concrete curbing meeting the specifications for curbing in Chapter 9 Infrastructure. 
    7.3.3 Residential yard trees (single-family residential lots). 
A.  Yard trees are required for every major residential subdivision (five or more lots), except in the RA-30 District. 
B.  Trees shall be planted behind the sidewalk outside of the public right-of-way. Maintenance of the trees shall be the responsibility of the individual property owner. 
C.  Yard trees may be placed any where on the property except that at least one tree is placed in the front yard. Each lot shall provide canopy trees in accordance with the following schedule: 
Lot Size Yard Trees Less than 10,000 square feet 1 10,000-20,000 square feet 2 More than 20,000 square feet 3  
D.  Two small maturing (ornamental) trees shall be used in lieu of canopy trees under overhead utility lines. Crepe myrtles are encouraged as the small maturing tree. 
    7.3.4 Screening requirements for outdoor storage, waste containers, and mechanical equipment. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new and expanding nonresidential and multifamily development: 
A.  Any outdoor storage, waste container, and mechanical equipment existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the screening requirements of this section within six months of the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  Any outdoor storage or utility structures shall be screened in the form of a berm, wall, or fence and natural plantings as to provide an opaque screen for outdoor storage, waste containers, and utility structures. The screen shall exceed the height of the storage or equipment by a minimum of one foot, shall not interfere with the operation of utility equipment. 
C.  Dumpsters and other waste collection containers shall not be located in the front yard of any structure. 
D.  Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be located to the rear or side yard and screened from view of the street. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by a parapet wall or screen wall matching the primary building materials. 
E.  Any fencing used to fulfill the requirements of this section shall be supplemented with landscaping. Chain link fence with slats shall not be used to meet the requirement of this section. 
F.  All screens shall utilize building materials and design which are compatible with those used for the exterior of the principal building. 
    7.3.5 Fences and walls. Entrance gateways to residential subdivisions and all agricultural uses are exempt from the following fence and wall standards. Except as otherwise noted in this ordinance, fences or walls are permitted in the various districts subject to the following regulations: 
Residential & 
Agricultural Uses Animal, Office, Retail, & 
Industrial Uses Civic, 
Institutional, & 
Recreational Uses Front & 
Side Yards 2 Rear 
Yard Front & 
Side Yards Rear 
Yard Front & 
Side Yards Rear 
Yard Min. Height 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet Max. Height 4 feet (6 feet 
side) 6 feet 6 feet 10 feet 6 feet 10 feet Materials 1  wood 
 brick 
 stone 
 wrought iron 
 stucco 
 vinyl  chain link 
 privacy screening 
 wrought iron 
 wood 
 stucco 
 brick 
 stone 
 vinyl  brick 
 stone 
 wrought iron 
 stucco 
 wood 
 vinyl  chain link 3 
 wrought iron 
 stucco 
 brick 
 stone 
 vinyl  brick 
 stone 
 wrought iron 
 chain link 
 vinyl  brick 
 stone 
 wrought iron 
 chain link 
 vinyl  
  
1. Materials may include a combination of the listed permitted materials for each fence type. 
2. Lots with one zero side line setback and a zero front yard setback may have a wall on the opposite side yard lot line and front yard line a maximum height of eight feet. 
3. Barbed wire permitted for rear yard fences not visible from a street. 
Section 7.4. - Landscaping installation and maintenance. 
    7.4.1 Approved plant list. 
LARGE TREES: Mature height greater than 50 feet tall Common 
Name Scientific Name Growth 
Rate Fall 
Leaf Flower Environmental 
Tolerance Problems Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica Medium Pink high pH/Salt/Drought/Compaction Numerous seeds can be problematic on females Thornless honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis Medium Yellow Wet soils/Drought/Salt/High pH/Compaction Plant bugs, mites, webworm Pin oak Quercus palustris Medium Red Wide range of soils Adequate space Willow oak Quercus phellos Fast Wet or Dry sites/Compaction Northern red oak Quercus rubra Fast Red Drought/Compaction/Salt Acorn litter Shumard oak Quercua shumardii Medium Red Drought/Compaction/Salt Acorn litter Live Oak Quercus virginiana Slow Wet soils/Compaction/Salt Japanese pagodatree Sophora japonica Medium Drought/Compaction/Salt Litter problems; Canker can be a problem Baldcypress Taxodium distichum Medium Wet soils/Compaction Silver linden Tilia tomentosa Medium Drought/Salt/pH adaptable/Compaction Aphids Lacebark elm Ulmus parvifolia Medium Pink Drought/Salt/pH adaptable/Compaction Japanese zelkova Zelkova serrata Medium Red Drought/pH adaptable/Compaction Narrow crotch angle susceptible to splitting  
MEDIUM TREES: Mature height between 35 feet and 50 feet tall Common 
Name Scientific 
Name Growth 
Rate Fall 
Leaf Flower Environmental 
Tolerance Problems Red maple Acer rubrum Medium Red Wet soils/Compaction Tends to have cankers under heavy stress; over pinated American hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana Slow Yellow Acidic soils Sensitive to drought and compacted soils Easter redcedar Juniperus virginiana Medium Drought/High pH/Compaction/Salt Goldenraintree Koelreuteria paniculata Medium Yellow Drought/Salt/High pH Prunus sargentii Sargent cherry Slow Red Pink Drought/Salt/Acid soils Avoids poorly drained sites Japanese beetles  
SMALL TREES: Mature height suitable for planting under utility wires Common 
Name Scientific 
Name Growth 
Rate Fall 
Leaf Flower Environmental 
Tolerance Problems Serviceberry Amelanchier arborea Medium Red 
and 
Yellow White Specify tree form. Good alternative to crepe myrtle. Eastern redbud Cercis Canadensis Fast Yellow Pink pH adaptable Chinese fringetree Chionanthus retusus Slow White Kousa dogwood Cornus kousa Slow Red White Acidic soils Green hawthorn Crataegus viridis Medium Red 
and 
Yellow White pH adaptable/Drought/wet soils Crepe myrtle Lagerstromia spp. Slow Red 
and 
Yellow Red, White and Pink Wet soils Over planted and often unnecessarily topped Flowering crabapple Malus spp. Medium Red 
and 
Yellow Red, White and Pink Wide range of soils/Salt/Compaction Specify tree form; fruit litter problem; scab is a problem for many species Carolina cherry laurel Prunus caroliniana Fast White Drought/pH adaptable Avoid poorly drained sites Japanese tree lilac Syringa reticulata Medium White Drought/pH adaptable  
Source: North Carolina Division of Forest Resources 
SHRUBS: Mature Height 1 to 4 Feet Common 
Name Scientific Name Growth 
Rate Exposure Height Spread Remarks Aucuba, Dwarf Aucuba japonica 'Nana' Slow Shade 2 to 3' 3 to 4' Excellent, shade-loving dwarf plant Azalea, Dwarf Indica (Gumpo) Rhododendron eriocarpum Slow to moderate Partial shade 1 to 2' 1 to 2' Late flowering; can be used as ground cover Azalea, Kurume Rhododendron, obtusum Moderate Partial shade 2 to 4' 2 to 5' Early blooming; dependable Azalea, Satsuki Rhododendron hybrida Moderate Partial shade 2 to 4' 2 to 4' Late blooming; large flowers; can be used as a ground cover Barberry, Red Japanese berberis thumbergii var. 'atropurpurea' Moderate Sun 3 to 6' 4 to 6' Crimson Pygmy'; dependable Boxwood, English Buxus sempervirens 'Suffruticosa' Very slow Partial shade 2 to 4' 2 to 4' True dwarf English boxwood; requires excellent drainage Boxwood, Korean Buxus microphylla var. 'koreana' Slow Sun to shade 3 to 4' 4 to 6' Most hardy of boxwoods; bronze colored foliage in winter Boxwood, Littleleaf Buxus microphylla Slow Partial shade 3 to 4' 3 to 4' Compacta' useful for low hedge Cotoneaster, Bearberry Cotoneaster dammeri Moderate Sun 1 to 2' 3 to 5' White flowers; red fruit; good for groundcover Cotoneaster, Rockspray Cotoneaster horizontalis Slow Sun 2 to 3' 4 to 8' Good rock garden plant Daphne, Winter Daphne odora Slow to moderate Sun to shade 3 to 4' 2 to 3' Flowers in late winter; very aromatic; needs good drainage English laurel, Dwarf Prunus laurocerasus cvs Moderate Sun to shade 3 to 4' 5 to 6' Otto Luyken' and 'Zabeliana' are dwarf forms of English laurel Euonymus, Dwarf Japanese Euonymus japonicus 'Microphyllus' Moderate Sun to shade 2 to 3' 1 to 3' Used for edging, border; very susceptible to scale insects Fothergilla, Dwarf Fothergilla gardenii Slow Sun to partial shade 2 to 3' 3 to 4' Requires good drainage; white, spring flowers; excellent fall color Gardenia, Creeping Gardenia jasminoides 'Radicans' Slow Partial shade 1 to 2' 2 to 3' White, fragrant flowers; can be used as a ground cover Hawthorn, Indian Rhaphiplepsis × Delacourii Slow Sun to shade 3 to 4' 3 to 5' Excellent coastal landscape plant; several cultivars available; white pink spring flowers Holly, Carissa Ilex cornuta 'Carissa' Slow Sun to partial shade 3 to 4' 4 to 6' Excellent formal shrub for grouping accent Holly, Dwarf Chinese Ilex cornuta 'Rotunda' Slow Sun to partial shade 3 to 4' 3 to 4' Requires little care; very spiney foliage Holly, Dwarf yaupon Ilex vomitora 'Nana' Slow to moderate Sun to shade 3 to 4' 3 to 5' Excellent for eastern N.C. Holly, Japanese cultivars Ilex crenata cvs Slow Sun to shade 3 to 4' 3 to 4' Cultivars: Stokes, Helleri, Tiny Tim, Repandens, Carefree Hydrangea, Annabelle Hydrangea arborescens 'Annabelle' Slow Sun to partial shade 3 to 6' 3 to 5' Large, white summer flowers; very hardy Hydrangea, Pia Hydrangea macrophylla 'Pia' Moderate Partial shade to shade 2 to 3' Deep pink 4 to 5" flowers most of the summer; dried bloom heads are attractive; a JC Raulston Arboretum Selection Jasmine, Showy Jasminium floridum Slow to moderate Sun 3 to 4' 3 to 4' Yellow flowers in winter Jasmine, Winter Jasminum nudiflorum Moderate Sun to shade 2 to 4' 3 to 5' Yellow flowers in winter Juniper, Creeping Juniperus horizontalis cvs Moderate to rapid Sun 1 to 2' 3 to 4' Cultivars: Plumosa, Compacta, P.C. Youngstown Juniper, Parsons Juniperus davurica 'Expansa' Moderate Sun to partial shade 2 to 3' 4 to 7' Long slender branches; good for coastal areas Juniper, Shore Juniperus conferta Moderate Sun 1 to 2' 4 to 5' Emerald Sea, Blue Pacific are improved cultivars Laurel, Alexandrian Danae racemosa Slow to moderate Shade 3' 2 to 3' Elegant evergreen shrub with showy, orange-red berries Leucothoe, Coastal Leucothoe axillaris Slow Shade 3 to 4' 4 to 5' Needs high moisture Leucothoe, Drooping Leucothoe fontanesiana Slow Shade 3 to 4' 4 to 6' Cultivars: Nana, dwarf form; Girard's Rainbow, new growth is pink and white Ligustrum, Curlyleaf Ligustrum japonicum 'Rotundifolium' Slow Sun to partial shade 3 to 4' 3' Lustrous dark green foliage Mahonia, Oregon holly-grape Mahonia aquifolium Slow Partial shade to shade 3 to 4' 3 to 5' Upright stems; broadly clumped; yellow flowers in early spring Mugo pine, Dwarf Pinus mugo 'Compacta' Slow Sun 3 to 4' 2 to 4' Use grafted plants for true dwarf form Nandina, Dwarf Nandina domestica cvs Slow to moderate Sun to partial shade 1 to 2' 1 to 2' Cultivars: Atropurpea, Nana, Harbour Dwarf, Harbor Dward Fire Power Skimmia, Japanese Skimmis japonica Slow Partial shade to shade 4' 3' Excellent foliage; showy red fruit on female plants Spirea, Snowmound Spiraea nipponica 'Snowmound' Rapid Sun to partial shade 3 to 5' 4 to 5' White flowers in early spring; buish-green foliage Spirea, Thunberg Spirea thunbergii Moderate Sun to partial shade 3 to 4' 3 to 5' Very early blooming spirea; requires pruning to maintain neat appearance Quince, Japanese Flowering Chaenomeles japonica Rapid Sun to partial shade 3 to 4' 3 to 4' Flowers in early spring Viburnum, David Viburnum davidii Moderate Sun to partial shade 3 to 5' 3 to 5' Good dwarf vibernum; blue fruit on female plants.  
Source: NC State University Horticultural Department 
    7.4.2 Plant installation standards. The following standards shall apply to all new plant material installed as part of a screen required under these regulations: 
A.  Trees to be planted shall be selected from the approved species listed in this chapter. The administrator may approve alternative large or small maturing trees excluding Bradford pears, sweet gum, catalpa, wild cherry, wild elm, princess, hackberry, and tree-of-heaven. 
B.  Minimum tree caliper shall be measured six inches above ground on all trees. In cases where medium trees are required, Crepe Myrtle trees are encouraged. 
1.  Medium and large tree caliper shall be two and one-half inches or the minimum height shall be ten feet. 
2.  Minimum caliper for small trees shall be two inches or the minimum height shall be eight feet. 
C.  Minimum shrub size shall be three gallons or the minimum height shall be 18 inches. 
D.  Minimum perennial or ground cover size shall be one gallon. 
E.  No trees identified as large trees shall be planted under overhead utility lines or within five feet of a utility easement. This does not include low-voltage insulated or covered lines of 240 volts or less, or telephone or cablevision lines. 
F.  All plant material installed shall be free from disease. 
G.  Plant materials shall be planted in accordance with generally accepted and recommended planting and growing practices. 
H.  All plant material shall be installed in a fashion that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain health growth. 
I.  All plant material shall be planted in a manner which is not intrusive to utilities or pavement. 
    7.4.3 Landscaping maintenance. Plantings, fences, walls, or berms that are required landscaping shall be properly maintained. The owner of the property where landscaping is required shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the landscaped area free of litter and debris; to keep plantings healthy; to keep plant growth from interfering with safe vehicular and pedestrian travel, or use of parking areas, or from creating nuisances to adjoining properties; and to keep walls, fences, and berms in good repair and neat appearance. Any vegetation that is part of a required landscaping area shall be replaced within 60 days in the event that it dies. All landscaping materials shall be protected from damage by erosion, motor vehicles, or pedestrians which could reduce the effectiveness of the required landscaping. 
    7.4.4 Existing trees and root protection standards. During the development and construction of a subdivision, commercial development, or any lot therein, adequate protective measures shall be provided to minimize damage to existing trees and other vegetation. The developer shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines, and grasses not actually lying in public streets, drainage-ways, building foundation sites and a construction activity area equal to 20 feet around the building foundation, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths, and trails. 
A tree and root preservation plan shall consist of the following type of preventative measures: 
A.  Prior to construction, tree protective barriers {such as two-inch by four-inch standards and one-inch by four-inch rails, silt fencing or orange safety fencing, minimum four feet in height} shall be placed around all landscaping to be saved or around root protection area(s), to prevent damage to existing landscaping. These barricades shall be installed prior to grading, construction, or other land disturbing activity, and cannot be constructed from any material not substantial enough to protect the roots, trunks, and crown of the tree. The barricade standards or rails shall be placed a minimum distance of six feet from the edge of the trunk and no less than the drip line of the tree. 
B.  No soil disturbance or compaction, stock piling of soil, or other construction materials, vehicular traffic, storage of heavy equipment are allowed in the tree and root protection area(s), or within the drip line of trees to be retained. 
C.  Dead trees and scrub growth shall be cut flush with adjacent grade. 
D.  Root pruning should be kept to an absolute minimum. 
E.  Pruning of existing trees shall be done according to the National Arborists Association standards in a manner that preserves the character of the crown. 
F.  Existing trees that die within one year of construction completion shall be removed and replaced by the developer with a new tree(s) selected from the approved tree species list. 
G.  No ropes, signs, wires, unprotected electrical installation or other device or material, shall be secured or fastened around or through a tree or shrub. 
H.  Unprotected electrical service wires should not be allowed to come into contact with any significant tree or large mature shrubs in the tree and root protection area. 
I.  Except for sidewalks and curbs and gutters, no paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within the drip line of trees to be retained shall be allowed, unless no practical alternative exists as determined by the planning board. 
    7.4.5 Visibility at intersections. Except as herein provided, on a corner lot in any district, no hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth, sign, fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be placed or maintained within the sight triangle. In instances where NCDOT sight triangle provisions are applicable, such regulations shall prevail. 
Chapter 8 - PARKING AND DRIVEWAYS 

Section 8.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to ensure that adequate and well-designed parking is provided for developments in the Town of Angier. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified, the requirements of this chapter apply to all developments. The expansion of existing development shall follow these requirements to the greatest extent possible. 
Section 8.2. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    8.2.1 General provisions. The following requirements shall apply to both residential and nonresidential uses. 
A.  All off-street parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 7, excluding single-family residential. 
B.  Area(s) used for parking spaces, parking areas, stacking, and/or loading areas to meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance shall not be used for any other purposes except for temporary sales or event. 
C.  No off-street parking area shall be located over an active or auxiliary septic tank field. 
D.  Off-street parking areas shall be properly maintained in all respects. In particular, off-street parking area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from potholes, etc.) and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly visible and distinct, as applicable. 
E.  All parking, including for single-family and two-family residential, shall be in designated areas with a durable wearing surface and shall not take place on lawn or landscaped areas. 
    8.2.2 Parking area design. 
A.  Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach upon, extend onto, or cause vehicles to back into public rights-of-way, sidewalks or strike against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other structure. 
1.  Sidewalks or other walkways shall have a minimum unobstructed width of four feet. Vehicle encroachment is measured beginning at two feet beyond the curb. 
B.  Curb and gutter or an equivalent drainage system shall be provided along the perimeter of the parking area, except where it is determined by the administrator that such system is not practical for storm drainage purposes. 
1.  In cases where raised curbing is not utilized, wheel guards, curb stops, ballasts, or bumpers must be installed for all parking spaces. 
a.  Wheel guards, curb stops, or bumpers shall be constructed of a material suited and designed for such and shall be a minimum of five inches high. 
b.  Location of such shall be so that no part of a parked vehicle extends beyond the property line or more than two feet into a required planting area. 
C.  Off-street parking areas shall be designed to facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles. 
D.  Landscaped islands shall be required at the ends of parking aisles for traffic and drainage control. 
E.  No surface parking or circulation driveway is permitted within any required or established buffer area, except that driveways providing access to the parking area may be installed across these areas. 
F.  No more than six parking rows shall be located back to back without the separation of a landscaping area and walkway a minimum of ten feet wide. 

G.  For nonresidential uses (except for civic uses and developments in the CP district), a maximum of two rows of parking spaces may be located in the front yard of the principal building. All other parking shall be located in either the rear or side yards of the principal building. For large-scale developments with large parking areas that have more than two rows of parking in front, parking may be shared and screened with outparcel buildings as shown in the diagram below: 

    8.2.3 Parking surface. Parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or similar material approved by the administrator and lines shall be painted to demarcate each parking space. Parking areas in addition to the minimum requirement may be surfaced in five-inch thick gravel or other similar material. 
    8.2.4 Parking dimensions. 
    8.2.4.1 Parking space dimensions. Each parking space, (other than those designed for the disabled) shall contain a rectangular area at least 18 feet long and nine feet wide. For parallel parking spaces, the minimum size is 20 feet long by eight feet wide. 
    8.2.4.2 Parking aisle dimensions. 
Angle of Parking Spaces Aisle 
Direction 0 (parallel) 30 45 60 90 
(perpendicular) One-Way 13 feet wide 13 feet wide 13 feet wide 18 feet wide 20 feet wide Two-Way 19 feet wide 19 feet wide 20 feet wide 22 feet wide 24 feet wide  
    8.2.5 Residential parking. 
A.  Multifamily residential:. Habitual parking for residential purposes shall be limited to one vehicle per one and one-half bedrooms unless otherwise stated by this ordinance or justification can be made as to why this is not feasible. In such cases, the administrator shall have the authority to increase this number by up to two vehicles. 
B.  Single-family residential. Habitual parking for residential purposes shall be limited to what can be reasonably considered a driveway. 
    No residentially-developed lot may be used as the base of operation for any freight hauling truck, except in RA-30 Zoning Districts. 
Section 8.3. - On-street parking requirements. 
A.  On-street parking may be used to satisfy parking requirements where the streets being accessed by the use are designed to accommodate on-street parking, unless otherwise specified for individual uses with special requirements in chapter 4. The on-street parking used to satisfy the requirements must be adjacent to the subject property. 
B.  On-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of 20 feet long by eight feet wide. 
C.  To the greatest extent possible, nonresidential uses shall not utilize on-street parking for the parking of company vehicles. 
Section 8.4. - Minimum parking space requirements. 
    8.4.1 Parking requirements by use. 
A.  The minimum number of parking spaces for an individual use is indicated in the Permitted Uses Table in chapter 3. 
B.  The administrator may reduce the minimum number of parking spaces required by up to ten percent if the applicant can demonstrate that the number of required parking spaces is excessive due to use or property constraints. 
C.  Site development located within the town center land use classification that cannot meet the parking requirements included herein shall submit a parking plan and justification for such to the planning board. 
D.  In no case shall the number of parking spaces exceed 110 percent of the required number of spaces unless approved by the administrator. 
    8.4.2 Parking spaces for the disabled. 
A.  Parking spaces for the disabled shall be in accordance N.C. State Building Code. 
B.  The number of such spaces shall be in addition to those required by the minimum parking ratios but shall not count towards the maximum number of allowable parking spaces. 
Section 8.5. - Shared parking and connectivity. 
    8.5.1 Shared parking. The joint use of shared off-street parking between two uses may be made by contract by two or more adjacent property owners. Developments that operate at different times may jointly use or share the same parking spaces with a maximum of one-half of the parking spaces credited to both uses. 
    8.5.2 Parking connectivity. 
A.  Adjacent parking lots shall be interconnected between the sites. 
B.  Driveway stubs shall be provided to nonresidentially zoned or used adjacent properties along major thoroughfares in cases where the subject property and the adjacent property are included in the same land use classification. 
Section 8.6. - Loading area requirements. 
A.  Every new or expanding nonresidential development shall provide space as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles. 
B.  Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a public right-of-way, but shall not be directly located on such. 
C.  The CB district is exempt from off-street loading requirements. 
    8.6.1 Minimum off-street loading space requirements. 
A.  The following minimum loading space requirements shall apply to new or expanding nonresidential development: 
Gross Floor Area 
(square feet) Number of Spaces 0-10,000 0 10,001-20,000 1 20,001-50,000 2 50,001-100,000 3 For each additional 90,000 
square feet or fraction thereof 1  
B.  There shall be no maximum number of loading spaces to provide for additional loading when necessitated by the proposed or existing use. 
    8.6.2 Design of loading spaces. 
A.  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces must be designed so as to not interfere with the normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on any public right-of-way. 
B.  Off-street loading spaces shall be located in the rear yard. 
C.  No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities. 
D.  Each loading space shall meet the following requirements: 
Minimum width 12 feet Minimum length 65 feet Minimum vertical clearance 14 feet  
Section 8.8. - Driveways. 
    These driveway requirements do not apply to single-family detached and two-family attached residential uses: 
A.  Driveways shall be not less than 12 feet in width for one-way traffic and 24 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
B.  Eighteen-foot wide driveways are permissible for two-way traffic when: 
1.  The driveway is not longer than 50 feet; and 
2.  The driveway provides access to not more than six parking spaces; and 
3.  Sufficient turning space and stacking area is provided so that vehicles need not back into a public street. 
C.  In no case shall a driveway width exceed 30 feet, except as required by NCDOT. 
D.  Driveways shall be as nearly perpendicular to the street right-of-way as possible. 
E.  Nonresidential driveways shall line up with other driveways across the street and be shared between adjacent uses wherever possible. 
F.  Driveways shall comply with NCDOT standards, unless otherwise stated herein. 
Section 8.9. - Junked motor vehicle parking requirements. 
    These requirements shall not apply to those uses meeting the standards of "Junkyards, Junked Motor Vehicles, Salvage Operations and Similar Uses" section of chapter 4. Further, the requirements found in the Angier Town Code shall be met for tracts of land located within the town limits: 
A.  In no case shall there be more than two junked motor vehicles located outside any enclosed building on any single tract of land, whether residentially or nonresidentially used, unless otherwise specified by this ordinance. 
B.  In situations where a person owns multiple tracts of land that are located within 500 feet of each other, the owner of such land shall be limited to two junked motor vehicles located outside any enclosed building unless otherwise specified by this ordinance for all lots located within the distance requirement. 
C.  The junked motor vehicle(s) shall not be a health or safety nuisance, nor shall the area constitute a health or safety nuisance according to the Harnett County Environmental Health Department. 
D.  Junked motor vehicles shall be entirely concealed during all seasons of the year from public view from the public right-of-way and from adjoining properties. The vehicles may be concealed by an automobile cover or tarpaulin, with the cover adequately secured to prevent removal by wind. The automobile cover or tarpaulin must remain in good repair and not allowed to deteriorate. 
Chapter 9 - INFRASTRUCTURE 

Section 9.1. - Street standards. 
    9.1.1 Conformance with comprehensive transportation plan (CTP). The location and design of streets shall be in conformance with the adopted comprehensive transportation plan (CTP). Where conditions warrant, right-of-way width and pavement width in excess of the minimum street standards may be required. In any case where any part of a development lies within the corridor of a thoroughfare shown on an official Thoroughfare Map adopted pursuant to N.C.G.S. Chapter 136, Article 2E, no development approval shall be granted with respect to the property in the corridor. Provided, however, no development plat approval shall be delayed by the provision of the official thoroughfare map procedure for more than three years from the date of its original submittal. 
    9.1.2 Blocks. 
A.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; zoning requirements; needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; control and safety of street traffic; limitations and opportunities of topography; and convenient access to water areas. 
B.  Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length. Where a longer block will reduce the number of railroad grade crossings, major stream crossings, or where longer blocks will result in less traffic through residential developments from adjoining business or industrial areas, the technical review committee may authorize block lengths in excess of 1,200 feet. 
C.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where single tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or another type of use, in nonresidential developments, or where abutting a water area. 
D.  Where deemed necessary by the planning board or administrator, a pedestrian crosswalk at least 15 feet in width may be required to provide convenient public access to a public area such as a park or school, to a water area, or to areas such as shopping centers, religious or transportation facilities. 
    9.1.3 Street design. 
A.  In any new development, the street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width and location indicated by an official plan or map for the town. In areas for which such plans have not been completed, the streets shall be designed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by such streets. 
B.  Residential collector and local streets shall be laid out in such a way that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Streets shall be designed or walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to parks, playgrounds, schools, or other places of public assembly. 
C.  Proposed streets should be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots, and streets shall be kept to a minimum. 
    9.1.4 Street construction standards. All new streets and street improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details. 
    9.1.4.1 On-street parking. On-street parking shall be at least eight feet wide and 22 feet long and be marked on the pavement. 
    9.1.4.2 Sidewalks. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets to provide pedestrian linkages in multifamily developments, on collector streets, on major and minor thoroughfares, and in residential developments with lots of 10,000 square feet or less. All other streets shall have sidewalks along one side. Developments located within the RA-30 zoning district and the Town of Angier's extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be exempt from this requirement unless one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The development is within 1/4 mile of existing pedestrian system, or 
2.  The development is within 1/4 mile of city limits, or 
3.  The development is within 1/4 mile of a school, park or recreational facility, retail commercial or restaurant, or public transportation node. 
B.  Sidewalks shall also be required along all streets that extend the sidewalks of an existing sidewalk network. 
C.  Sidewalks shall be required along the rights-of-way of a nonresidential development when the street is identified for future need by the Angier Pedestrian Plan. The sidewalk shall extend the entire length of the street frontage and stub out to each adjacent property. 
D.  Sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum width that meets American Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
E.  All sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, unless the development is platted as a planned development, and shall be separated from the street pavement by a minimum distance of four feet. Sidewalks shall consist of a minimum of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings. 
F.  The town board may waive the sidewalk requirement, along one side of a street, when a development is located within the watershed. In order for a waiver to be considered the applicant or developer must propose an alternative including pedestrian trails that meet all local and state requirements. 
G.  Installation of all sidewalks in residential subdivisions shall be completed at such time that a building permit has been issued on 50 percent of all recorded lots or within two years of the date of final plat approval, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2012.04, 10-2-2012; Ord. of 7-11-2017(2)) 
    9.1.4.3 Curb and gutter. 
A.  Concrete curbs and gutters, that meet department of transportation standards shall be constructed along both sides all streets within the subdivision. Developments located within the RA-30 zoning district, specifically within the Town's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ), shall be exempt from this requirement. 
1.  Any new residential and nonresidential development located along the designated Highway 55 corridor, specifically from Maude Stewart Road to Old Buies Creek Road, shall comply with, and be constructed in accordance with the approved cross-sections located within the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details, as applicable to the project's portion of adjacent right-of-way. 
2.  For the purposes of these requirements, the "3 Lane Cross Section" shall be an 80-foot right-of-way section, applicable between Maude Stewart Road and Old Buies Creek Road. 
3.  Minor design alterations, including but not limited to turning lanes, medians, planting strips, etc., if determined necessary, may be allowed by the technical review committee (TRC). 
B.  It is the responsibility of the developer to take future roadway plans, of the town and NCDOT, into account when proposing a development. As a result of the driveway permit, additional improvements may be required by NCDOT. 

(Ord. No. 2013.01, 1-8-2013) 
    9.1.4.4 Cul-de-sacs. 
A.  As a feature of development design, cul-de-sacs should be discouraged and kept to a minimum. 
B.  Cul-de-sacs should not be used to avoid connection with an existing street or to avoid the extension of an important street, unless an exception is granted by the town board. 
    9.1.4.5 Alleys. 
A.  Alleys shall be required to serve lots used for commercial and industrial purposes except that this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured provision is made for service access. 
B.  The width of an alley shall be at least 20 feet. 
C.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end as may be approved by the town board. 
D.  Sharp changes in alignment and grade shall be avoided. 
E.  All alleys shall be designed in accordance with NCDOT Standards. 
    9.1.4.6 Sight distance. No planting, structure, sign, fence, wall, or obstruction greater than three feet in height shall be placed or maintained within the sight triangle. The following are the distances used to establish a sight triangle as measured from an intersecting right-of-way: 
    9.1.5 Access management, driveways, and connectivity. 
    9.1.5.1 Development access. At least two entry points will be provided in developments that contain 100 or more dwelling units and to all lots within the development. The board of commissioners may allow other alternatives if the curb cuts for the two accesses cannot meet the minimum distance allowed according to NCDOT regulations at any location. 
    9.1.5.2 Restriction of access. Where a tract of land to be subdivided adjoins a principal arterial street, the developer may be required to provide a marginal access street parallel to the arterial street or reverse frontage on a minor street for the lots to be developed adjacent to the arterial. Where reverse frontage is established, private driveways shall be prevented from having direct access to the principal arterial. 
    9.1.5.3 Through traffic. Residential collector and local streets shall be laid out in such a way that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. The intent of the street design is to provide multiple connections to existing and future developments, disperse traffic, and maintain reduced speeds. Streets shall be designed or walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to parks, playgrounds, schools, or other places of public assembly. 
    9.1.5.4 Intersections. 
A.  Where public and private streets intersect, the design standards of the NCDOT Division of Highways, Development Roads Minimum Construction Standards shall apply. An approved permit is required for connection to any existing state system street. This permit is required prior to any construction on the street. The application is available at the office of the nearest district engineer of NCDOT. 
B.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less than 60 degrees. 
C.  Offset intersections are to be avoided unless exception is granted by NCDOT. Intersections which cannot be aligned should be separated by a minimum length of 200 feet between survey center lines. 
    9.1.5.5 Connectivity. 
A.  The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land planning practice for the type development proposed and shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding areas. The arrangements of streets in new developments shall make provision for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining developments or, when adjoining property is not developed, their proper projection insofar as they may be necessary for vehicular circulation in the future. The street and alley arrangement must be so designated as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. When a new development adjoins developed land, the new streets shall be carried and stub to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be developed and a temporary turnaround provided, except where it is determined by the planning board that certain streets may not be required to be so extended for the following reasons: 
1.  Physical barriers or environmentally sensitive area be crossed (for example, railroad, watercourses, steep topography, or flood area). 
2.  There is a large discrepancy in the size of the adjacent parcel (a smaller parcel being subdivided may not have to provide a stub to a much larger parcel, if other, more desirable, interconnections are available to the large parcel). 
3.  The stub street would connect to property for which development rights have been sold for a public purpose and access to the property is not desirable for orderly development of the street network. 
4.  The stub street would cause the existing roads to go over the design capacity on that portion of the street. 
B.  Where a temporary turnaround is provided as required in subsection A., a sign shall be erected at the temporary turnaround that informs the public of the intended future connection of the street to future development. 
    9.1.6 Street names and signs. 
A.  Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall be given the same name. In assigning new names, duplication of existing names shall be avoided and in no case shall the proposed name be phonetically similar to existing names in the town or its planning area irrespective of the use of a suffix such as street, road, drive, place, court, etc. 
B.  The town shall provide and erect street name signs at all intersections within the development. The town shall be reimbursed by the developer for the cost of the signs. 
    9.1.7 Right-of-way dedication. 
A.  Developments that adjoin existing streets maintained by either the town or NCDOT shall dedicate the additional street right-of-way necessary to meet the minimum width requirements for the type of classification of the adjoining street. 
B.  When any part of the development is on both sides of an existing street, the entire minimum right-of-way shall be provided. 
C.  When the development is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the minimum right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing street, shall be provided. 
D.  The dedication requirements of this section shall not apply to infill single-family residential and two-family residential lots fronting on existing streets that have already been accepted for maintenance by the town or NCDOT. 
Section 9.2. - Water, sewer and fire hydrants. 
A.  All water lines, sewer lines, and fire hydrants shall be constructed or installed in accordance with section in accordance with the latest edition of the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details. 
B.  Any property seeking connection to the Town of Angier public sewer system must first receive voluntary annexation approval. If the property is annexed, the property owner shall be responsible for installing any infrastructure necessary for connection to the sewer system, and all infrastructures shall be turned over to the town upon final acceptance from the town. 
C.  Connection to Town of Angier public water and/or sewer systems is required when the closest portion of a proposed nonresidential structure or development is located within 1,000 feet of an existing town owned and operated system. The property owner shall be responsible for extending water or sewer to the proposed structure or development, and all extensions shall be turned over to the town upon final acceptance by the town. 
D.  Connection to Town of Angier public water and/or sewer systems is required when a proposed residential structure or subdivision is located within that number of feet of an existing town owned and operated system which equals the product of the number of structures or lots within the subdivision (including lots to be developed in the future) multiplied by 100; provided however that the maximum distance required for connection shall be 5,000 feet. In such cases where the public water and/or sewer supply system is of insufficient capacity to permit the delivery of either water or sewer supply, the subject proposed structure or subdivision shall be relieved of the requirement to connect to such public system. 
E.  Where public water and/or sewer systems are to be installed as part of the development improvements, such systems shall be constructed to provide tap-on stub-outs for each lot plotted in the development. 
F.  Uses requiring an excess of 20,000 gallons per day of water or sewer usage shall be required to improve infrastructure capacity as determined by the town board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the town engineer. 
G.  Where community water and/or sewer systems are to be installed as part of the development improvements, such systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the county health department and/or the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources agency responsible for the approval of such systems. 
H.  Prerequisite to final plat approval, all lots on the plat to be recorded must be certified in writing by the county health department to meet minimum standards for on-site water and/or sewer systems when either or both of such systems are proposed to be used. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Section 9.3. - Lighting. 
    9.3.1 Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the installation of all outdoor lighting within the jurisdiction of this ordinance except that the following shall be exempt from this section: 
A.  Outdoor lighting installed for governmental purposes by local, state or federal governmental units and their agents. 
B.  Outdoor lighting required to be installed by laws or regulations of a local, state or federal governmental unit. 
C.  Outdoor lighting associated with a bona fide farm operation. 
    9.3.2 Prohibited outdoor lighting. The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited unless exempted by the subsection above: 
A.  Light fixtures that imitate an official highway or traffic control light or sign. 
B.  Light fixtures in the direct line of vision with any traffic control light or sign. 
C.  Light fixtures that have a flashing or intermittent pattern of illumination. 
D.  Privately owned light fixtures located in the public right-of-way. 
E.  Light fixtures that are a source of glare by their design, orientation or intensity. 
F.  Searchlights. 
G.  Structure highlighting that is illuminated between 12 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
H.  Unshielded open vertical light fixtures. 
I.  Light fixtures that violate any law of the State of North Carolina relative to outdoor lighting. 
    9.3.3 Plan approval required. Outdoor lighting is subject to approval by the administrator and technical review committee (TRC). The lighting plan shall show sufficient information to determine compliance with the standards of this section and may require a photometric plan upon determination of the administrator. In approving lighting plans the administrator and TRC may modify the standards of this section where the applicant agrees and where equal or better performance would result. In granting modifications, the administrator and TRC may require such conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable, the objectives of the requirements modified. 
    9.3.4 Outdoor lighting requirements. 
A.  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be installed in a manner to protect the street and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Glare or hazardous interference are situations where the sensation produced by luminance within the visual field is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, such as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
B.  Outdoor lighting shall be constructed and operated to minimize the spillover of obtrusive light onto property outside the boundaries of the property on which the lighting is sited which could result in annoyance, discomfort or distraction to persons on the other property. 
C.  All outdoor lighting fixtures, subject to this section, except for temporary and emergency lighting, that would otherwise cause glare or obtrusive spillover shall be shielded, recessed or otherwise oriented or treated in such a way to prevent glare or obtrusive spill over. 
D.  As a general principle, all outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjoining property and streets. 
E.  The maximum light level shall not exceed one-half (1/2 or 0.5) maintained footcandle at any property line in a residential district, or on a lot occupied by a dwelling, and shall not exceed two maintained footcandles at any public street right-of-way. 
F.  All floodlights shall be installed such that the fixture shall be aimed down at least 45 degrees from vertical, or the front of the fixture is shielded such that no portion of the light bulb extends below the bottom edge of an external shield. Floodlights and display lights shall be positioned such that any such fixture located within 50 feet of a public street right-of-way is mounted and aimed perpendicular to and away from the right-of-way, with a side-to-side horizontal aiming tolerance not to exceed 15 degrees from perpendicular to the right-of-way. 
G.  The mounting height of all outdoor lighting shall not exceed 40 feet above finished grade, except that the mounting height of outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed 80 feet from finished grade. 
H.  All light fixtures shall meet the IESNA definition of cutoff fixtures. Forward throw fixtures (type IV light distribution, as defined by the IESNA) are required within 25 feet of any public street right-of-way. Alternatively, directional fixtures (such as floodlights) may be used provided they shall be aimed and shielded in accordance with this section. 
I.  Sign lighting shall be regulated in accordance with chapter 10. 
J.  Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located, aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the building facade, plantings, and other intended site features and away from adjoining properties and the public street right-of-way. 
K.  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall use metal halide or light emitting diode (LED) bulbs. 
    9.3.5 Street lighting provisions. Street lighting shall be provided and installed at the developer's expense throughout the development in accordance with the latest edition of the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details. The developer shall be required to pay to the electric company the cost of street lighting installation. The developer shall be required to install all fixed items such as conduit, pads, hand holes and pole foundations. The Town of Angier will own and maintain the said fixed items. 
A.  High-pressure sodium fixtures shall be permitted only within residential subdivisions. 
    9.3.6 Town Center (TC) District Lighting Standards. The following requirements shall apply to the town center district, as designated on the Town of Angier Land Use Plan: 
    Types of Outdoor Lighting Fixtures and Posts Allowable: 

A.  Fixtures: 
1.  Mitchell with Ribs, Band and Medallions 

B.  Posts: 
1.  Style V 
Height: 12 ft., 16 ft. 
Color: Black Aluminum 
    9.3.7 The following requirements shall apply to the Commercial (COM) Zoning District, new subdivision developments, and modifications of existing developments that do not meet the requirements of this section: 
    Types of Outdoor Lighting Fixtures and Posts Allowable: 
A.  Fixtures: 
1.  Cutoff Enclosed 

Mounting Heights: 25 feet, 30 feet, 35 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
2.  Nightcap 

Mounting Heights: 25 feet 
Metal Halide Options: No 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
3.  Semi-Enclosed 

Mounting Heights: 25 feet 
Metal Halide Options: No 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Non-Cutoff 
4.  Shoebox 

Mounting Heights: 30 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
5.  Decorative Black Cutoff Enclosed 

Mounting Heights: 25 feet, 30 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
6.  Post Stop Style "S" 

Mounting Heights: 12 feet, 13 feet, 16 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
7.  Sanibel 

Mounting Heights: 12 feet, 13 feet, 16 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Option: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Full Cutoff 
8.  Post Top Style "M" 

Mounting Heights: 12 feet, 13 feet, 16 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Option: No 
High Pressure Sodium: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Cutoff 
9.  Post Top Style "A" 

Mounting Heights: 12 feet, 13 feet, 16 feet 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED): No 
High Pressure Sodium: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: Non-Cutoff 
10.  Roadway 

Mounting Heights: 25 feet, 30 feet, 35 feet 
Metal Halide Options: No 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: Yes 
High Pressure Sodium Options: No 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
11.  Site Lighter 

Mounting Heights: 30 feet, 35 feet 
Metal Halide Options: No 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: Yes 
High Pressure Sodium Options: No 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
12.  Mitchell 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
13.  Michell with Ribs, Band and Medallions 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
14.  Mitchell Top Hat 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
15.  Mitchell Top Hat with Ribs, Band and Medallions 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
16.  Monticello 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium Options: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
17.  Twin Bracket A 

Mounting Heights: N/A 
Metal Halide Options: Yes 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Options: No 
High Pressure Sodium: Yes 
IESNA Cutoff Classification: N/A 
B.  Posts: 
1.  Decorative Aluminum 

Height: 12 foot 
Color: Black 
Type: Anchor Base 
2.  Fluted Concrete 

Height: 13 feet 
Color: Black 
Type: Direct Burial 
3.  Decorative Tapered Metal 

Height: 35 feet 
Color: Dark Bronze 
Type: Anchor Base 
4.  Decorative Square Metal 

Height: 30 feet 
Color: Black or Dark Bronze 
Type: Anchor Base 
5.  Concrete 

Height: 29 feet 
Color: Black 
Type: Direct Burial 
6.  Smooth Concrete 

Height: 12 feet, or 16 feet 
Color: Black 
Type: Direct Burial 
7.  Fiberglass 

Height: 16 feet 
Color: Black 
Type: Direct Burial 
8.  Fiberglass 

Height: 25 feet, 30 feet or 35 feet 
Color: Gray 
Type: Direct Burial 
(Ord. No. 2011.01, 7-5-2011; Ord. of 1-3-2016(2)) 
Section 9.4. - Stormwater management. 
    9.4.1 General provisions. The developer shall provide a surface water drainage system constructed to the standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, as reflected in the Handbook for the Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures, subject to review by the Town of Angier consulting engineer. 
A.  No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer. 
B.  Where feasible, the developer shall connect to an existing surface water drainage system. 
C.  Where an existing surface water drainage system cannot feasibly be extended to the development, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the proposed development from water damage. 
D.  Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical distance, and courses shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding, and designed to comply with the standards and specifications for erosion control of the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act, G.S. 143-34.12, Chapter 113A, Article 4 and the North Carolina Administrative Code Title 15, Chapter 4, and any locally adopted erosion and sedimentation control ordinances. 
E.  The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall be a vertical fall of at least one foot in each 200 feet of horizontal distance. 
F.  Stream banks and channels downstream from any land disturbing activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land disturbing activity in accordance with the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act, G.S. 143-34.12, Chapter 113A, Article 4 and the North Carolina Administrative Code Title 15, Chapter 4. 
G.  Anyone constructing a dam or impoundment within the development must comply with the North Carolina Dam Safety Law of 1967 and the North Carolina Administrative Code Title 15, Subchapter 2 K. 
H.  In all areas of special flood hazards, all development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
I.  In areas contained within water supply watershed boundaries, all development proposals shall comply with the requirements of the Town of Angier Water Supply Watershed regulations. 
    9.4.2 Stormwater construction standards. Stormwater improvements shall be constructed and installed to the in accordance with the latest edition of the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details. 
    The Town of Angier is in Harnett County, which is designated as a "Phase II Tipped" County. Future development in Harnett County would be subject to Phase II Post-Construction stormwater requirements. Decide whether to include the model ordinance in the UDO or in the Standard Specifications and Construction Details. 
    9.4.3 Easements. 
A.  Where a development is traversed by a stream or drainage way, an easement shall be provided conforming with the lines of such stream and of sufficient width as will be adequate for the purpose of drainage. 
B.  The Administrator may require any water course or stormwater management facility to be located within dedicated a drainage easement officially recorded at the Harnett County Register of Deeds as a "public storm drainage easement" that provides sufficient width for maintenance. 
C.  Maintenance easements may be required depending upon the size of the drainage way and the maintenance responsibility as determined by the town. 
D.  Where easements are required, they shall be noted on the final plat. 
    9.4.4 Obstruction of drainage channels prohibited. No fences or structures shall be constructed across an open drainage channel that will reduce or restrict the flow of water. 
    9.4.5 Grading standards. The following standards shall be followed in establishing the grading plan for a development: 
A.  Developments shall be designed and constructed with a positive drainage flow away from buildings towards approved stormwater management facilities. Plans for drainage facilities shall be approved by the town engineer. 
B.  In the design of site grading plans, all impervious surfaces in the proposed development (including off street parking) shall be considered. 
C.  Site grading and drainage facilities shall protect sinkholes, wetlands, ponds and lakes from increased sediment loading. 
D.  Site grading shall not increase runoff flow rate onto downstream properties. 
E.  A site shall not be graded to create a slope greater than two to one at adjacent properties unless the slope already existed on the undeveloped land. In no case shall the slope be made steeper than it was on the undeveloped land. Terraced or stepped slopes that achieve the overall slope requirement may be considered by the TRC on a case by case basis. 
F.  All disturbed areas within the dedicated right-of-way and easements of any development street shall be restored with vegetation and the landscaping standards of Chapter 7 shall be met. 
Section 9.5. - Garbage and refuse collection. 
A.  Dumpster pads shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the latest edition of the Town of Angier Standard Specifications and Construction Details and shall be screened in accordance with Chapter 7. 
B.  The method of garbage disposal shall be indicated on each site plan or preliminary plat that is submitted. 
Section 9.6. - Other infrastructure requirements. 
    9.6.1 Placement of monuments. Unless otherwise specified by this ordinance, the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying as adopted by the N. C. State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, under the provisions of Title 21 of the North Carolina Administrative Code, Chapter 56 (21 NCAC 56), shall apply when conducting surveys for subdivisions; to determine the accuracy for surveys and placement of monuments, control corners, markers, and property corner ties; to determine the location, design, and material of monuments, markers, control corners, and property corner ties; and to determine other standards and procedures governing the practice of land surveying for subdivisions. 
    9.6.2 Construction procedures. No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved, and all plans and specifications have been approved by the appropriate authorities. No building, zoning or other permits shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of this ordinance until the requirements of this ordinance have been met. The developer, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the administrative officer to provide for adequate inspection. The administrative officer or his representatives shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release of the sureties. 
    9.6.3 Oversized improvements. The Town of Angier may require installation of certain oversized infrastructure or the extension of utilities to adjacent property when it is in the interest of future development. If the town requires the installation of improvements in excess of the standards required in this ordinance, including all standards adopted by reference, the town shall pay the cost differential between the improvement required and the standards in this ordinance. 
Section 9.7. - Improvement guarantees. 
    For any required improvement that cannot be installed prior to final zoning inspection or final plat approval the following shall apply: 
A.  In order to ensure compliance with this ordinance, in lieu of requiring the completion and installation of required improvements prior to occupancy or final plat recordation, the Town of Angier may enter into an agreement with the developer whereby the developer shall agree to complete all required improvements. To secure this agreement, the developer shall provide to the Town of Angier one of the following guarantees. The amount of such guarantee shall be equal to one and one-quarter times the cost of purchasing, installing, and completing all required improvements of this ordinance. All such guarantees shall be subject to the approval of the town board of commissioners and shall be made payable to the Town of Angier. The developer shall provide either one or a combination of the following guarantees: 
1.  Surety performance bond(s). The developer shall obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety company authorized to do business in North Carolina. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the town board of commissioners. 
2.  Cash or equivalent security. The developer shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the Town of Angier. If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution as herein provided, the developer shall then file with the Town of Angier an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following: 
a.  That said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the town board of commissioners and may not be used or pledged by the developer in any matter during the term of the escrow; and 
b.  That in the case of a failure on the part of the developer to complete said improvement, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the Town of Angier and submission by the Town of Angier to the financial institution of a landscape architect's estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately either pay to the town the funds estimated to complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to the town. 
B.  Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the developer to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the financial institution holding the escrow account, shall, if requested by the town board of commissioners, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the Town of Angier up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on a landscape architect's estimate. Upon payment, the town board of commissioners, in its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The town shall return to the bonding firm any funds not spent in completing the improvements. Should the amount of funds needed to complete the installation of all required improvements exceed the amount in the bond or escrow account, the developer shall nonetheless be responsible for providing the funds to cover such costs. The developer shall at all times bear the financial burden for the installation of all required improvements. A lien shall be attached to the property if the developer fails to provide the full financial responsibility. 
C.  The administrator may authorize the release of a portion of any security posted as the improvements are completed and approved. Such funds shall then be released within ten days after the corresponding improvements have been so approved. 
Chapter 10 - SIGNS 

Section 10.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  This chapter is intended to regulate signs and their placement throughout the Town of Angier and its extraterritorial area for the following purposes: 
1.  To provide a pleasing overall environmental setting and good community appearance, which is deemed vital to the continued economic attractiveness of the town and its environs; 
2.  To create a more productive, enterprising, professional business atmosphere; 
3.  To allow signs appropriate to the planned character and development of each zoning district; 
4.  To ensure that permitted signs do not become a hazard or nuisance; 
5.  To promote traffic safety; 
6.  To prevent conflicts with public safety signs; 
7.  To protect and enhance the value of properties; and 
8.  To promote the public safety and general welfare of the Town of Angier and its ETJ. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, alteration, use, type, number, location, size, height, and maintenance of all signs. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or replace any sign visible from off-site, without first having obtained a sign permit for such sign from the zoning administrator as required by this ordinance. 
Section 10.2. - General provisions. 
    10.2.1 Sign design standards. 
A.  Materials, colors, and shapes of proposed signs shall be designed so as to integrate with the buildings and the surrounding area. In the Central Business zoning district, sign design and color shall closely match the current theme as determined by the administrator. 
B.  The sign shall not be excessive or confusing. 
    10.2.2 Sign area. For freestanding signs, neighborhood identification signs, and other similar signs, the area shall not include the area of the surface to which the sign is affixed. For example, a decorative framework or wall shall not be included in the sign area. 
    10.2.3 Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the highest point of a sign to the point of ground surface beneath it. Ornamentation such as caps, spires, and finials shall not extend more than two feet from the top of the sign. The use of berms or raised landscape areas is only permitted to raise the base of the sign to the mean elevation of the fronting street and shall not be used as a means to avoid compliance with regulations. 
    10.2.4 Sign setbacks. 
A.  All signs shall set back a minimum of ten feet from side property lines. 
B.  No sign shall be placed in the street right-of-way or sight triangles. 
C.  No freestanding ground sign shall be located within 50 feet of any other freestanding ground sign. In cases where this requirement prevents location of a sign on a site on which no other sign exists, a sign may be placed at the furthest distance possible from existing freestanding ground signs on adjacent property. 
    10.2.5 Sign illumination. Illuminated signs shall conform to the following: 
A.  All illuminated signs shall have their lighting directed in such a manner as to illuminate only the face of the sign. 
B.  External light sources shall not be visible from the right-of-way nor cause glare hazards to pedestrians, motorists, or adjacent properties. 
C.  A maximum of ten footcandles may be permitted on any portion of sign. 
D.  All lighting shall meet all applicable building and electrical codes. 
E.  A sign within 100 feet of an existing residential use shall not be illuminated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
F.  Lighting for signs shall be maintained and shall not create excessive noise. 
G.  Back lit signs located in the town center land use classification shall be limited to two colors. 
    10.2.6 Maintenance and upkeep of signs. 
A.  All signs and all components thereof, including supports, braces, and anchors shall be kept in a good state of repair, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance (unless deemed a legal nonconforming sign by nonconformities chapter of this ordinance). Any sign which is determined by the zoning administrator or building inspector as being insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise endangering the public safety shall be immediately removed by its owner unless it is repaired and made to otherwise comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, then that sign and sign structure shall be considered discontinued regardless of reason or intent and shall, within 30 days after such discontinuation, be removed by the owner of the property where the sign is located. A blank sign face shall be provided to prevent any exposed sign light bulbs and other internal sign components. 
C.  If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed 50 percent or more of its assessed value, such sign may be reconstructed only in compliance with the regulations found herein. 
    10.2.7 Amortization of nonconforming signs. Any sign which was erected, placed, attached, suspended, or otherwise put into use prior to the adoption date of this ordinance shall, within ten years of the effective date of this ordinance, comply in every respect with the provisions contained herein. After that time, any such sign which does not comply with these regulations shall be removed or held to be in violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016) 
Section 10.3. - Signs that do not require a permit. 
    The following types of signs are exempt from permit requirements and may be placed in any zoning district. Such signs shall otherwise be in conformance with all applicable requirements contained in this ordinance. All such signs (except government signs) shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and shall not be illuminated. 
A.  Building marker signs. Signs etched into building or wall plaque that identify the name of the building, designer, year constructed, or provides similar information. 
1.  Maximum size: Two square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per building entrance. 
B.  Address signs. Signs that identify the address of a property. 
1.  Maximum size: Two square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per building side. 
3.  Occupant/street number signs. 
C.  Directional signs (on-premises). Signs that are located on the premise/property to provide directions. Such signs contain no copy other than directional information. 
1.  Maximum size: Three square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Forty-three inches tall. 
3.  Maximum number: As necessary. 
D.  Flags. Flags or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county or municipality, any religious, civic or fraternal organization, or any educational or cultural facility and/or any one corporate flag per lot. 
1.  Maximum size: Forty-five square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Maximum district height. 
3.  Maximum number: Four per lot of record. 
4.  Use of the American flag shall be in conformance with the Federal Flag Code. 
E.  Government signs. Signs posted or authorized by various local, state, and federal agencies in the performance of their duties including providing community information and facilitating economic development. Such signs include regulatory signs, traffic signs, welcome signs, bulletin board, and directory signs. 
F.  Wayfinding signs (town-sponsored). Town sponsored wayfinding signs may be posted within the zoning jurisdiction of Angier. Such signs shall direct travelers and tourists to points of interest including the town center, government facilities, cultural arts facilities, historical sites, galleries, accommodations, restaurants, and shops. These directory signs shall meet the design requirements of town sponsored signage as directed by the town board of commissioners. The town shall install and maintain the signs and shall have discretion over the text posted on the signs. This shall not apply to directory signs installed and maintained by NCDOT. 
G.  Legal and warning signs. Signs erected to warn of danger or hazardous conditions such as signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies; signs required for or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. 
H.  Incidental signs. Signs that cannot be read from the street right-of-way which inform or instruct customers or visitors on-site (i.e. drive-through menu boards, gas pump signs, bulletin boards). 
I.  Stadium signs. Signs located within a stadium intended to be read only by persons seated within the stadium. 
J.  Real estate signs (on-premises). On-premises real-estate signs advertise the sale or lease of the property on which said sign is located. Signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale or lease of the property. Signs advertising lots for sale within an approved subdivision may be posted at the entrance to the subdivision and shall be allowed until 75 percent of the lots are sold within the subdivision. 
1.  Maximum size. Six square feet for individual single-family residential properties and 32 square feet for multifamily residential properties, nonresidential properties, vacant properties, and subdivisions. 
2.  Maximum height. Four feet tall for single-family residential and six feet for multifamily and nonresidential. 
3.  Maximum number. One per street frontage per lot of record. 
K.  Real estate signs (off-premise). Off-premise signs that advertise the sale of residential property. Signs shall only be displayed on weekends and shall not be erected before 5:00 p.m. on Friday and shall be removed by 7:00 a.m. on Monday. 
1.  Maximum size: Three square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Three feet tall. 
3.  Maximum number: Three off-premises signs. 
L.  Holiday decorations (nonresidential only). Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday/celebration may be displayed not more than 45 days prior to and not more than 14 days following said holiday. 
M.  Yard sale signs. Signs shall only be displayed on weekends and shall not be erected before 5:00 p.m. on Friday and shall be removed by 7:00 a.m. on Monday. 
1.  Maximum size: Four square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Three feet tall. 
3.  Maximum number: One on-premises sign per street frontage and two off-premises signs. 
N.  Window signs. Signs temporarily attached or temporarily painted to a window or door, announcing sales or special features. Signs that exceed the maximum coverage shall be treated as wall signs. 
1.  Maximum coverage: Thirty percent of window area. 
O.  Sidewalk signs. A-frame or sandwich board signs may be used to announce sales or special feature during hours of operation only. Such signs shall be professionally made of materials intended for sign manufacturing and shall not impede pedestrian traffic, safety, or access. 
1.  Maximum size: Six square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Three feet. 
Section 10.4 - Temporary signs that require a waiver. 
    Temporary signs shall not be subject to a sign permit or fee, but persons or entities placing temporary signs shall sign a waiver stating that they understand and agree to adhere to the requirements for each type of temporary sign. Temporary signs shall not be located within a public street right-of-way or sight triangle and shall not be attached to trees or utility poles or on publicly-owned property. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated except for temporary holiday decorations. Temporary signs that do not fit into one of the following categories are not permitted. 
Section 10.5. - Signs that require a temporary permit. 
A.  Political signs. Signs may be displayed during a period beginning 45 days prior to an election, primary, or referendum and concluding seven days after the election. In the event of a runoff election, political signs for the candidates involved may remain on display until 48 hours after the runoff election. 
1.  Maximum size: Six square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Four feet tall. 
3.  Maximum number: One per candidate/referendum per lot of record. 
B.  Special event signs (on and off-premise). Signs may be erected by public or nonprofit organizations such as schools and churches for promoting public events such as fund drives, fairs, festivals, sporting events, etc. Signs may be displayed during a period beginning seven days prior to the event and concluding 48 hours after the event. Such signs shall not be illuminated. Off-premise signs will be on town property only. 
1  Maximum size: Thirty-two square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Six feet tall. 
3.  Maximum number: One on-premises sign and three off-premises signs. 
C.  Banners. Banners advertising sales or special features may be hung against a wall face only for a 14-day period of time, no more than six times annually. 
1.  Maximum size: Thirty-two square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per business up to six times annually. 
D.  Inflatable signs. Inflatable signs, including inflated balloons, having a diameter of greater than two feet may be flown only for a 14-day period of time, no more than six times annually. 
1.  Maximum size: Thirty-two square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per business up to six times annually. 
Section 10.6. - Signs that require a permit. 
    Unless otherwise listed herein, signs shall obtain a permit as outlined within this section. 
    10.6.1 Signs permitted by type. 
Max. # of 
walls 
with 
signs Max. # signs per Max. sign area Max. 
Height Min. distance 
between signs 
on same 
property Notes Street 
Frontage Project Entrance Project < 
one acre Project > 
one acre SINGLE 
TENANT Ground 1 2 70 sq. ft. 70 sq. ft. 20 ft. 300 ft. Wall 3 sq. ft. = Total linear ft. of mounting wall sq. ft. = Total linear ft. of mounting wall MULTI-TENANT & 
SHOPPING COMPLEX Ground 1 40 sq. ft. + 10 sq. ft. for each tenant up to 100 sq. ft. 40 sq. ft. + 12 sq. ft. for each tenant up to 150 sq. ft. 20 ft. 300 ft. Wall 2* sq. ft. = Total linear ft. of mounting wall sq. ft. = Total linear ft. of mounting wall Applies to each tenant of 
complex NEIGHBORHOOD 
IDENTIFICATION Ground 1 NA 32 sq. ft. per entrance 20 ft. CIVIC & 
INSTITUTIONAL Ground 1 2 70 sq. ft. 70 sq. ft. 20 ft. 300 ft. Wall 3 sq. ft. = Total linear ft. of mounting wall sq. ft. =Total linear ft. of mounting wall Applies to each facility OFF- 
PREMISES 
CIVIC Ground 2 6 sq. ft. NA 8 ft. CONSTRUCTION Temporary Ground 1 1 32 sq. ft. 64 sq. ft. 8 ft. 300 ft. Must be 
removed at 
completion 
or end MANUFACTURED HOME PARK Ground 1 24 sq. ft. /side 
MIN AREA: 16 sq. ft. 24 sq. ft. /side 
MIN AREA: 16 sq. ft. 12 ft. Name of MHP and owner/operator phone num. shall be included.  
(Ord. of 10-1-2013) 
    10.6.2 Additional requirements by sign type. 
A.  Ground signs. 
1.  All ground signs shall be monument, pole, or arm style. Monument signs shall be constructed with the bottom of the sign portion of the structure beginning no more than three feet from the ground and shall not exceed six feet in height. Pole signs shall include encasement around any and all poles on the sign. 
2.  Developments with two or more tenants shall utilize a multitenant sign. 
3.  If changeable copy, electronic reader board, or LED signs are utilized as part of a permitted ground sign, then the total area of such sign shall be a minimum of 30 percent and a maximum of 50 percent changeable copy, electronic reader board, or LED signage. Electronic reader board or LED signs that display anything other than the time and temperature shall not change messages or images more often than every five seconds. 
B.  Wall signs. 
1.  The total allowable area for wall signs in the table above shall include canopy signs and awning signs. 
2.  Maximum projection is 12 inches from the wall face. 
3.  Signs shall not extend above the parapet or eave of the building. 
4.  Wall signs shall not utilize changeable copy, electronic reader board, or LED area. 
5.  As indicated with an asterisk (*) in the "Signs Permitted by Type" Table, a second wall sign shall be permitted for multi-tenant and shopping mall complexes in cases where the second wall has frontage on a major corridor or if entrances are located on both walls. 
    10.6.3 Amortization of nonconforming signs. Any sign which was erected, placed, attached, suspended, or otherwise put into use prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall, within ten years of the date of adoption of this ordinance, comply with the following provisions. After that time, any such sign that does not comply shall be removed or be considered in violation of this ordinance. All poles that are included as part of, or are related to, an existing pole sign shall be encased. 
Section 10.7. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Any sign which the administrator determines obstructs the view of bicyclists or motorists using any street, approach to any street intersection, or which interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures any traffic sign, device, or signal shall be prohibited. 
B.  Illuminated, highly reflective signs, or spot lights which hamper the vision of motorists or bicyclists. 
C.  Signs not erected by a public authority which may be erroneously construed as government signs or emergency warning signs. An example of this is a sign which contains a picture of a traffic sign plus the word "Stop", "Yield", "Slow", "Danger", or any other simulation of traffic or regulatory signs or messages. 
D.  Any sign located outdoors which interferes with free passage from or obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window, door, stairway, ladder, or opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing light or air. 
E.  Any sign (other than a government sign), banner or display placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on, over, or across any public street or right-of-way, unless otherwise permitted. 
F.  Illuminated tubing or strands of lights except for temporary holiday displays as permitted in this chapter. 
G.  Portable signs and any sign whose sign face was initially constructed and designed to be placed and/or transported on wheels, regardless if said sign face is removed from its base and placed on or in the ground so as to otherwise classify said sign as a "ground" sign as herein defined. 
H.  Parked vehicles with messages (exempting vehicles with commercial advertising which are used regularly and customarily to transport persons or property for business and are not intended for primarily for advertising use). 
I.  Rotating signs. 
J.  Roof signs and signs that extend above the parapet wall. 
K.  Billboards. 
L.  Off-premises signs and signs placed on property without permission of its owner(s) or agent, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
M.  Wind-blown advertisement devices including flags, banners or signs. 
N.  Other signs not expressly permitted in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-1-2016) 
Chapter 11 - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS AND APPROVALS 

Section 11.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
    11.1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish an orderly process to develop land within the Town of Angier. It is also the intent of this chapter to provide a clear and comprehensive development process that is fair and equitable to all interests including the petitioners, affected neighbors, town staff, related agencies, the planning board, the board of adjustment, and the town board of commissioners. Approved plans shall be the guiding documents for final approval and permitting. 
    11.1.2 Applicability. 
A.  The development review process applies to all new developments and alterations of existing development within the Town of Angier. 
B.  The administrator or designee may waive the required development review for a change in principal use, where such change would not result in a change in lot coverage, parking, or other exterior site characteristics. The development review may also be waived if the administrator determines that the submission of a development plan in accordance with this chapter would serve no useful purpose. 
C.  The town board of commissioners shall set, and from time to time amend, fees applicable to one or more of applications and processes outlined in this chapter. Said fees shall be part of the town fee schedule, available at the town hall, and are necessary for the processing, administrative costs, and advertising of applications (if applicable). 
D.  The following chart indicates the appropriate approval authority for each development type: 
Development 
Type Development Approval Process Technical 
Review 
Committee Administrative Planning 
Board Town Board Board of 
Adjustment Land use permit (single-family and two-family residential) X (plot plan, no site plan) Site plan X X Partial site plan X X Exempt subdivision X Minor subdivision 
(1 or 2 Lots) X Minor Subdivision 
(3-5 Lots) X X Major subdivision-Preliminary plat X X X Major subdivision-Engineering drawings X X Major subdivision-Final plat X X Building design alternatives X X Landscaping design alternatives X X Vested rights request X X Appeals X Special use permits X Variances X Administrative variances X Map amendment (rezoning) (Recommendation) X Conditional zoning map amendment (Recommendation) X  
(Ord. of 5-3-2016) 
Section 11.2. - Town board. 
    To effectively carry out the purpose and intent of this ordinance, the Angier Town Board shall have the authority to implement the Town of Angier Unified Development Ordinance, Land Use Plan, and any other adopted plans, as amended, including but not limited to the powers and duties set forth by in this chapter, other provisions included in this UDO, as well as those duties vested by the North Carolina General Assembly. 
    11.2.1 Submittal procedure. 
A.  The applicant shall submit an application, fee, and plan, as required by this ordinance. When required, the application shall be reviewed by the planning board prior to being considered by the town board of commissioners. 
B.  Applications for zoning map amendments (standard or conditional rezonings) shall include a statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies and the surrounding area and a statement regarding the reasonableness of the request. 
    11.2.2 Public notice. 
A.  A notice shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town once a week for two consecutive weeks provided that the first notice is published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days prior to the date established for the public hearing. The expanded published notice option for map amendments (rezonings) outlined in [subsection] B. below shall consist of a notice not less than one-half of the newspaper page in size. 
B.  A notice of the public hearing shall also be sent by first class mail by the zoning administrator or designee to the affected property and to all contiguous property owners. The first class mail notice shall not be required if a map amendment (rezoning) directly affects more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners. In such case, an expanded published notice option may be utilized, as outlined in [subsection] A. above, except for those property owners whose addresses are not within the general circulation area of the newspaper. 
C.  The town shall conspicuously post a notice of public hearing at the subject property at least ten days prior to the public hearing. When multiple parcels are included for a request, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. The notice shall be removed only after the public hearing has been held. 
    11.2.3 Town board of commissioners public hearing and consideration. 
A.  For vested rights requests a quasi-judicial public hearing shall be held. 
B.  After the public hearing, the town board of commissioners shall have up to 60 days to refer back to the planning board, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. Alternatively, the town board may suspend the review period and request additional information of the applicant, other governmental agencies, or interested/affected parties in order to aid in the review of the request or deferral of its consideration. 
    11.2.4 Additional approvals as required. Approval of a conditional zoning map amendments, vested rights request, by the town board of commissioners does not constitute final approval of the development plan. Development plans reviewed at the town board level still may be subject to the administrative or other approval process depending on the size and type of development that is proposed, as outlined herein. 
Section 11.3. - Planning board. 
    11.3.1 Establishment. The Town of Angier Planning Board is hereby re-established in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160A-361. 
Section 11.4. - Board of adjustment. 
    11.4.1 Establishment. The Town of Angier Board of Adjustment is hereby re-established in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160A-388. 
Section 11.5. - Administrative and staff duties. 
    11.5.1 Establishment. The administrative approval process shall apply to land use permits requiring minor subdivisions, administrative variances, and other applications, as outlined in section 11.1 of this chapter. The administrator shall also be known as the titles included herein, for the purposes of this ordinance. Specifically, the administrator shall have the authority to necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the following titles: 
A.  Zoning administrator. 
B.  Subdivision administrator. 
C.  Flood plain administrator. 
D.  Water supply watershed administrator. 
E.  Zoning enforcement officer. 
    11.5.2 Administration of planning and zoning authority. The administrator shall have the authority to delegate his or her duties to qualified staff as the administrator feels is necessary and appropriate to carry out the powers and duties of the administrator and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 11.6. - Technical review committee. 
    11.6.1 Establishment. The technical review committee (TRC) shall hereby be considered to be under the direction of the administrator. 
    11.6.2 Membership, terms and vacancies. Membership of the technical review committee (TRC) shall be as follows: 
Technical Review Committee Others Administrator (Planning Staff) Town Manager Town Engineer Town Attorney Public Works Department NCDOT Fire Marshal NC DENR Police Department Parks and Recreation Department Building Inspector Utilities Providers Health Department Board of Education Capital Area Metropolitan Planning Organization US Army Corps of Engineers Other agencies as needed  
    11.6.3 General procedures. 
A.  Formal application submittal. The applicant shall submit the applicable application, fee, and the site plan, preliminary plat, engineering drawings, or final plat that meets the requirements of chapter 12 and other required materials. 
B.  Administrator and TRC review. 
1.  The administrator and technical review committee (TRC) shall review the plan, plat, or drawings in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and any other applicable requirements. 
2.  The TRC shall provide comments to the administrator regarding the design of the development. It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to address those comments wherever possible. 
C.  After the effective date of this ordinance, no subdivision plat of land within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be filed or recorded unless it has first been submitted to the administrator and approved by the proper body as set forth in this ordinance, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the technical review committee. Such shall not be required of any subdivision of land which, by definition herein, is exempt from the terms of this ordinance. 
Section 11.7. - Land use permits. 
    11.7.1 Land use permit required. 
A.  No building or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or sign or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided in this ordinance. 
B.  No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered, or moved or its use changed, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance or except after written order from the board of adjustment. 
C.  A building permit shall not be issued by the building inspector unless a land use permit has been issued by the Town of Angier. 
D.  The issuance of a valid land use permit shall confer with it the right to undertake and complete the development and/or use of property under the terms and conditions of such permit provided that such action as authorized by the permit is commenced within six months of issuance and provided that all other permits are obtained. Otherwise the permit shall be void. 
    11.7.2 Land use permit not required. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no land use permit is necessary for the following uses, but shall not include utility structures: 
A.  Street construction or repair; 
B.  Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas, water, and sewer lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles or structures, located within a public right-of-way; 
C.  Specific signs exempted in chapter 10 of this ordinance; 
D.  Mailboxes, newspaper boxes, walls, birdhouses, flag poles, pump covers, and doghouses; 
E.  Interior alterations and renovations which do not alter the footprint, elevation, height, or use of an otherwise conforming use and/or structure. 
    11.7.3 Application procedures. 
A.  For single-family and two-family residential structures, a plot plan and the following information shall be submitted to the administrator with the land use permit application and fee: 
1.  The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building or use is to be erected or conducted, 
2.  The location of said lot with respect to adjacent rights-of-way, 
3.  The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed, on the said lot, 
4.  The nature of the proposed use of the building or land, including the extent and location of the use, on the said lot, 
5.  The location and dimensions off-street parking and driveways, 
6.  The proposed impervious area including all buildings, driveways, sidewalks, and patios, 
7.  Building elevations of the front façade, and 
8.  Any other information which the administrator may deem necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  For all other developments requiring a land use permit, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with the development plan requirements of chapter 12 and follow the approval process as outlined in this chapter prior to land use permit issuance by the administrator. Any development project requiring a special use permit, shall follow the board of adjustment approval process outlined in the chapter prior to land use permit issuance by the administrator. 
    11.7.4 Conditions of approval. Land use permits issued on the basis of an application and plan approved by the administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved applications and plans. Use, arrangement, or construction that differ from that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable as indicated under chapter 15 of this ordinance. 
    11.7.5 Expiration of land use permit. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, any land use permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months from its date of issuance, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months. 
    11.7.6 Final zoning inspection. The administrator shall conduct a final zoning inspection of any new or expanded use or structure (except single-family and two-family residential uses) prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector. During the final zoning inspection, the administrator shall ensure that all minimum requirements and conditions of approval have been met and that the project matches the approved site plan. 
    11.7.7 Certificate of occupancy required. No structure hereafter erected, moved, structurally altered, or changed in use shall be used or occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building inspector. 
Section 11.8. - Site plan review. 
A.  Site plan review and approval shall be conducted by the technical review committee (TRC) under the direction of the administrator. In cases where a special use permit is required, said permit shall have been obtained prior to application for site plan approval. 
B.  The administrator may waive the requirement for TRC site plan approval on revised site plan review, existing site plan review, and site plan review for existing uses with minor expansions of less than 25 percent of the size of the existing structure. In such cases, administrative approval shall still be required. 
Section 11.9. - Subdivision review. 
A.  The register of deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the jurisdiction of this ordinance that has not been first approved in accordance with these provisions. 
    11.9.1 Issuance of land use permits and conveyance of subdivision lots. 
A.  No land use permit shall be issued by the Town of Angier for the construction of any building on any lot within a proposed subdivision until a final plat of said subdivision has been approved in a manner as prescribed by this ordinance and recorded at the county register of deeds office and, where applicable, an improvements permit has been issued by the county health department. 
B.  After the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be illegal for any person being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial jurisdiction of this ordinance, to subdivide his land in violation of this ordinance or to transfer or sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this ordinance. 
C.  The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The town board of commissioners, through its attorney or other official so designated, may enjoin an illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land by action for injunction. Further, violators of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided by N.C.G.S. § 14-4. Civil penalties may be issued in accordance with chapter 13. 
    11.9.2 Preliminary plat validity. 
A.  Preliminary plat approval shall be valid for two years unless a greater time period is granted through a vested rights request. If final plat approval has not been obtained within said two-year period, preliminary plat approval shall become void. A new preliminary plat shall be required to be submitted and such plat shall be in conformity with all current and applicable standards in this ordinance. 
B.  Notwithstanding, the developer may submit a request to the planning board for a time extension for up to one year for final plat submittal. Said request must be submitted to the administrator prior to the original plat expiration date. No more than one such extension may be granted per subdivision. 
C.  The developer may submit a final plat for only a portion of the subdivision given preliminary plat approval. Said submission shall extend the expiration date for the remaining portion(s) of the subdivision for an additional two years past the date of said final plat approval. 
    11.9.3 Engineering drawing submittal. Following approval of the preliminary plat, engineering drawings meeting the requirements of chapter 12 may be submitted and reviewed. The preliminary plat may be altered by no more than ten percent of the total subdivision area due to issues discovered during the engineering drawing process. If changes to more than ten percent of the total subdivision area result, a new preliminary plat shall be submitted and reviewed. Also, the total number of lots or units may be decreased but not increased. 
    11.9.4 Minor and exemption. 
A.  In no case shall utilization of the minor subdivision process allow for the number of new lots created as combined with the number of lots in the initial minor subdivision exceed the maximum number of lots permitted by the minor subdivision process. No other requirements set forth by the major subdivision process shall be circumvented by attempting to use the minor subdivision process. The minor subdivision procedure (administrative approval) may not be used a second time within three years within the original property boundaries or on any property adjacent to the original property boundaries by anyone who owned, had an option on, or any legal interest in the original subdivision at the time the subdivision received final plat approval, if the total number of lots would constitute a major subdivision. 
B.  If the administrator determines that a division of land does not meet the definition of a subdivision as set forth by N.C.G.S. § 160A-376 (see Appendix A Definitions), then the division shall be considered a subdivision exemption and shall not be subject to the development review process. 
Chapter 12 - DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Section 12.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform standards for all development plans requiring approval by the Town of Angier in accordance with chapter 11. Every development plan shall include notes and graphics depicting the requirements of all applicable sections of this ordinance. 
Section 12.2. - Existing features plan. 
    12.2.1 Existing features plan submittal requirements. The existing features plan shall be submitted as part of the original application for development. Said plan may be combined with other typically required plans. 
    12.2.2 Plan labeling. Plans analyzing each site's special features are required for all major subdivisions, as they form the basis of the design process for house locations, lot lines, street alignments, and conservation areas. The developer or his/her representative shall bring a copy of the existing features plan to the on-site walkabout, if applicable. Detailed requirements for the existing features plan shall include, at the minimum: 
A.  Property boundaries. 
B.  Contour lines based at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey. 
C.  The location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes (over 25 percent), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams and 100-year floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easements. 
D.  The location of significant features such as woodlands, treelines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from the property, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, streets, tracks and trails. 
Section 12.3. - Sketch plans. 
    12.3.1 Sketch plan submittal requirements. A sketch plan may be submitted upon the discretion of the applicant. In any case where a pre-development meeting is requested, a completed development shall be required prior to scheduling of such meeting. 
    12.3.2 Plan labeling. A sketch plan is drawn to illustrate the initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for building sites, street alignments, and conservation areas, taking into account the special conditions identified in the existing features plan. This is the stage where drawings are tentatively illustrated, before heavy engineering costs are incurred in the design of any proposed subdivision layout. The applicant shall submit a sketch plan with the following information: 
A.  A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, streets, and waterways; 
B.  The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided; 
C.  The total acreage to be subdivided; 
D.  The location of all potential conservation areas, using the existing features plan. These areas consist of wetlands, floodplains, slopes over 25 percent, soils susceptible to slumping, and noteworthy natural, scenic, and cultural resources. 
E.  The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it; 
F.  The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-of-way widths; 
G.  Proposed lot layout and size of lots; 
H.  The existing utility layouts; 
I.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner; 
J.  The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision; 
K.  Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties; 
L.  The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties; 
M.  A statement from the Harnett County Health Department that a copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them, if a septic tank system or other onsite water or wastewater system is to be used in the subdivision. 
Section 12.4. - Subdivision plats. 
    12.4.1 Preliminary plat submittal requirements (major subdivisions only). A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect, or professional engineer. The following number of copies shall be submitted for review: 
A.  Seven full size paper copies for review and revisions; 
B.  One reduced 11×17 copy for file; 
C.  Digital copy in PDF format. 
    12.4.2 Final plat submittal requirements. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping requirements set forth in N.C.G.S. § 47-30 and the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina. The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Harnett County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines. Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee and acreage fees (when applicable). A filing fee shall be adopted, and from time to time revised, by the town board. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the town clerk. The following number of copies shall be submitted for review: 
A.  Three full size paper copies for review; 
B.  Two Mylar copies for signature; 
C.  One copy of recorded plat for file; 
D.  Digital copy in PDF format. 
    12.4.3 Plat labeling requirements for preliminary and final plats. 
A.  Labeling matrix. The preliminary and final plats shall depict or contain the information indicated in the following matrix. An X indicates that the information is required. Preliminary plat information is only required for major subdivisions. 
Title Block Information: Preliminary
Plat Final
Plat a) Subdivision name x x b) Name of owner x x c) Name of the Subdivider/Developer x x d) PIN number x x e) Location (including township, county and state) x x f) Bar graph scale and north arrow x x Plat Preparation Information: Preliminary
Plat Final
Plat a) Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared x x b) Name and address of the Registered Land Surveyor x x c) Surveyor's registration number and seal x d) Names and addresses of all owners, mortgagees, Registered Land Surveyors, land planners, architects, landscape architects, utility planners, and professional engineers responsible for the subdivision x x Property and Site Calculation Information: Preliminary
Plat Final
Plat a) Sketch vicinity map with north arrow showing the relationship between the proposed subdivision and surrounding area x x b) Corporate limits, Extraterritorial Jurisdiction and county lines if on the subdivision tract x x c) Boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided, distinctly and accurately represented with all bearings and distances shown x d) Exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining lands x e) Adjoining property information including owner name, zoning classification, existing structures, and subdivision name x x f) Minimum building setback lines x x g) Zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided x x h) Acreage in total tract to be subdivided x x i) Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other nonresidential uses x x j) Total number of parcels created x x k) Acreage in the smallest lot in the subdivision x x l) Linear feet in streets x x m) Name and location of any property or buildings within the proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property that is located on the National Historic Register x x n) Topographic map with contour intervals of no greater than five feet at a scale of no less than one inch equals 200 feet may be required. x o) Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground every straight or curved line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distance for the center line of curved property lines that are not the boundary line of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute. x p) Accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers and control points. x q) Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains x x r) Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions x x s) The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision in a manner using only numeric symbols x t) Marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or stream beds and any other natural features affecting the site x x u) The exact location of the flood hazard area, floodway and floodway fringe areas from the county's Official Flood Maps, and Community Panel Number if applicable x x Street, Infrastructure and Open Space Information: Preliminary
Plat Final
Plat a) Proposed streets x x b) Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the proposed subdivision x x c) Rights-of-way, location and dimensions x x d) Pavement widths x x e) Approximate grades x x f) Design engineering data for all corners and curves x x g) Typical street cross sections x x h) Street names x x i) Private street disclosure statements indicating who will maintain private streets in subdivision and the right of access to any private street in the subdivision by all lots served by the street x j) Type of street dedication; all streets must be designated either "public" or "private". x x k) Where streets are dedicated to the public, but not accepted by the Town or State before lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the street x l) Utility and other easements x x m) Fire hydrants, if applicable x x n) Riding trails x x o) Buffer strips x x p) Pedestrian or bicycle paths x x q) Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated x x r) School sites (both existing and proposed) x x s) Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with the purpose of each stated x x t) The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to governmental body, for owners' to duly constituted homeowners' association, or for tenants' remaining in Subdivider's ownership) of recreation and open space lands x Agency Approvals (where applicable): Preliminary
Plat Final
Plat a) NCDOT approval of driveway permits and street construction drawings x b) NCDENR approval of Soil and Erosion Control Plan x c) Verification of private or community well and/or septic plan submittal to NCDENR x d) Septic approval from Health Department or disclaimer if septic systems are proposed and soil testing is not yet completed x e) NCDOT approval of storm water drainage plan x f) All certifications required below x x  
  
B.  Certificates and statements for preliminary plats. 
1.  Certificate of survey and accuracy. In accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina: On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgements and executed by the person making the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of information. The certificate shall take the following general form: 
"State of North Carolina         Town of Angier 
I, ___________ certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, Page ________, Book ________, Page _____, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: ________. (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book ________, Page _____): that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30, as amended. Witness my hand and seal this _____ day of _____, A.D. 20________. 
                                

Registered Land Surveyor 
Official Seal 
___________ 
Registration Number 
I, (officer authorized to take acknowledgements) do hereby certify that (name of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged and due execution of this certificate. Witness may hand and (where an official seal is required by law) official seal this the ________ day of _____ (year). 
Official Seal 
___________ 

Notary Public"      
2.  Water Supply Watershed Certificate 
All subdivisions of land shall have a statement signed by the Subdivision Administrator indicating whether or not a subdivision lies within a designated Water Supply Watershed. Said statement shall take one of the following forms, as appropriate: 
(a)  "The (name of subdivision) Subdivision, to the best of my knowledge, does not lie within a Water Supply Watershed designated by the Environmental Management Commission as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
(b)  "Lots (fill in appropriate lot numbers) of the (name of subdivision) Subdivision, to the best of my knowledge, lie within the (classification of watershed) of the (name of body of water), as designated by the Environmental Management Commission as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. Lots (fill in appropriate lot numbers) of the (name of subdivision) do not lie within a water supply watershed. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
(c)  "All lots within the (name of subdivision), to the best of my knowledge, lie within the (classification of watershed) of the (name of body of water), as designated by the Environmental Management Commission and as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
3.  Certificate of Approval for preliminary plat 
If the Planning Board approves the preliminary plat or if the plat is approved on appeal to the Board of Commissioners, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate: 
"I hereby certify that the preliminary subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of Angier, North Carolina and that this plat has been approved. 
________                                                    
Date                                 Subdivision Administrator" 
4.  Private Water/Sewer Statement 
"As the date of this recording, the lots represented on this plat have not been inspected or approved by the Harnett County Health Department. Until inspected, there is no assurance that a building permit will be issued." 
C.  Certificates and Statements for final plats 
1.  Certificate of Ownership and Dedication 
"I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Angier and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent, establish minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or private use as noted. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water lines to the Town of Angier. 
________                                                 
Date                                    Owners" 
2.  Certificate of Survey and Accuracy 
In accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina: On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgements and executed by the person making the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of information. 
The certificate shall take the following general form: 
"State of North Carolina          Town of Angier 
I, ___________ certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, Page _____, Book _____, Page _____, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: _____. (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____, Page _____): that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30, as amended. Witness my hand and seal this ___________ day of _____, A.D. 20________. 
                               

Registered Land Surveyor 
Official Seal 
___________ 

Registration Number 
I, (officer authorized to take acknowledgements) do hereby certify that (name of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged and due execution of this certificate. Witness may hand and (where an official seal is required by law) official seal this the _____ day of ________ (year). 
Official Seal 
___________ 

Notary Public" 
3.  Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improvements. 
"I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in a manner approved by the appropriate state or local authority and according to Town specifications and standards in the _____ Subdivision or that guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to Town of Angier has been received, and that the filing fee for this plat, in the amount of $_____ has been paid. 
___________                      ___________ 
Administrative Officer                               Date" 
4.  Water Supply Watershed Certificate 
All subdivisions of land shall have a statement signed by the Subdivision Administrator indicating whether or not a subdivision lies within a designated Water Supply Watershed. Said statement shall take one of the following forms, as appropriate: 
(a)  "The (name of subdivision) Subdivision, to the best of my knowledge, does not lie within a Water Supply Watershed designated by the Environmental Management Commission as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
(b)  "Lots (fill in appropriate lot numbers) of the (name of subdivision) Subdivision, to the best of my knowledge, lie within the (classification of watershed) of the (name of body of water), as designated by the Environmental Management Commission as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. Lots (fill in appropriate lot numbers) of the (name of subdivision) do not lie within a water supply watershed. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
(c)  "All lots within the (name of subdivision), to the best of my knowledge, lie within the (classification of watershed) of the (name of body of water), as designated by the Environmental Management Commission and as appears on the Watershed Protection Map of Angier. 
________                                                 
Date                              Subdivision Administrator" 
5.  Certificate of Approval for Recording 
If the Subdivision Administrator approves the final plat, then such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate: 
"I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of Angier, North Carolina and that this plat has been approved for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Harnett County. 
________                                                    
Date                                 Subdivision Administrator" 
6.  Review Officer Certificate 
"I, (name of Review Officer), Review officer of Harnett County, certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording. 
________                                                    
Date                                   Review Officer" 
7.  Street Maintenance Disclosure Statement 
(a)  Where streets are declared and dedicated as public State streets, the following Subdivision Streets Disclosure statement shall be shown: 
"All streets in this subdivision are hereby declared public and shall be maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The maintenance of all streets in this subdivision shall be the responsibility of the developer and it shall be their responsibility to build and install streets meeting the standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation before any public streets on this plat are included at any time after the approval of this plat, into the North Carolina State Road System." 
(b)  Where subdivision streets are declared and dedicated as public Town streets, the following Subdivision Streets Disclosure Statement shall be shown: 
"All roads in this subdivision are hereby declared public and shall be maintained by the Town of Angier. The maintenance of all streets and roads in this subdivision shall be the responsibility of the developer and it shall be their responsibility to build and install streets meeting the standards of the Town before any public streets on this plat are included at any time after the approval of this plat, into the Town's Street System." 
(c)  Where subdivision streets are declared private, the following Subdivision Streets Disclosure Statement shall be shown: 
"All roads in this subdivision are hereby declared private and shall not be eligible for inclusion into the North Carolina State Road System or for maintenance by the North Carolina State Road System. The maintenance of all streets in this subdivision shall be the responsibility of the developer until such time said streets are turned over to the Homeowners' Association, if applicable. It shall be the responsibility of the maintaining party to ensure all streets meet the standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation" 
Section 12.5. - Subdivision engineering drawings. 
    Engineering drawings are required for major subdivisions following approval of the preliminary plat and prior to final plat approval and permitting. The final plat shall substantially match the preliminary plat and engineering drawings. Any deviations from the preliminary plat shall be the result of issues discovered during field work and engineering. In no case shall the number of lots increase. Substantial deviations from the preliminary plat shall result in the entire approval process starting over. Engineering drawings for major subdivisions shall include but are not limited to the following information: 
    12.5.1 Engineering drawing submittal requirements. Engineering drawings shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer. The following number of copies shall be submitted for review: 
A.  Three full-size copies for review and revisions. 
B.  Two full-size copies for final approval. 
C.  One digital copy in PDF and DWG formats. 
D.  One full-size copy of as-built drawings (following construction). 
E.  One digital copy of as-built drawings in PDF and DWG formats (following construction). 
    12.5.2 Plan labeling. 
A.  Title. 
B.  Original submittal date. 
C.  Revision dates. 
D.  Vicinity map. 
E.  North arrow. 
F.  Scale (no smaller than 1" = 100'). 
G.  Lot lines with bearings and distances. 
H.  Zoning district and applicable overlay districts. 
I.  Adjacent property owner names, parcel numbers, and zoning. 
J.  Total acreage. 
K.  Acreage in lots. 
L.  Acreage in right-of-way. 
M.  Density per acre. 
N.  Building setbacks in table format and building envelopes show on lots. 
O.  Locations of existing structures. 
P.  Boundaries of flood plains or note stating that property is not within one. 
Q.  Open space calculations. 
    12.5.3 Plans and approvals. 
A.  Stormwater plan and analysis. 
B.  Landscaping plan. 
C.  Lighting plan. 
D.  Utility plan. 
E.  Street construction plans, profiles, and details. 
F.  Written approval from the department of public utilities certifying that there is adequate capacity to serve the requested number of lots. 
G.  Written approval from NCDENR for Soil and Erosion Control. 
H.  Written approval from NCDENR for a community sanitary sewer system (if applicable). 
I.  Written approval from NCDENR for a community water system (if applicable). 
J.  Written approval from NCDOT for driveway permits (if applicable). 
Section 12.6. - Site plans. 
    The requirements for this section apply to all site plans including those for special use permits and vested rights requests. 
    12.6.1 Site plan submittal requirements. 
A.  Seven full-size copies for review and revisions. 
B.  Two full-size copies and one reduced (11 × 17) copy for file following approval. 
C.  One digital copy in PDF and DWG formats. 
    12.6.2 Labeling. All site plans shall include the following: 
A.  Title; 
B.  Original submittal date; 
C.  Revision dates; 
D.  Vicinity map; 
E.  North arrow; 
F.  Scale {no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100')}; 
G.  Lot lines with bearings and distances; 
H.  Zoning district and applicable overlay districts; 
I.  Adjacent property owner names, parcel numbers, and zoning; 
J.  Total acreage; 
K.  Acreage in right-of-way; 
L.  Density per acre; 
M.  Building setbacks in table format and building envelopes show on lots; [and] 
N.  Locations of existing structures. 
    12.6.3 Plans and details. 
A.  Site plan. 
B.  Existing features plan. 
C.  Grading plan. 
D.  Soil and erosion control plan (if applicable). 
E.  Landscaping plan. 
F.  Utility plan. 
G.  Lighting plan. 
H.  Building elevations showing: 
1.  Exterior wall materials; 
2.  Roof materials; 
3.  Dimensions including building height, width, and roof slope; [and] 
4.  Front façade window dimensions including sill height, window height, window width, and window area. 
I.  Written approval from NCDENR for Soil and Erosion Control (if applicable). 
Section 12.7. - Master plans. 
A.  The initial master plan, shall be prepared and submitted, containing the following elements and according to the following requirements: 
Preliminary Site Map General Utilities and 
Environmental Plan General Open Space and 
Greenways Plan Total acres in Planned Development and acres in each phase Topographic contours Location of recreational land, passive and active, plus any other common open space, public and private Location map with location and sizes of structures, excluding sizes of single-family detached dwellings Principal geographic features Approximate location, amount and width of all greenway and other pathways (if applicable) Allocation of acres among housing types, commercial, office and industrial uses Special Flood Hazard Areas Density and number of units Soils maps Names of adjacent property owners Conceptual drainage plan Lot dimensions/area; and setbacks General locations of utility service lines - water, sewer, electric, gas, etc. Building heights Pump stations Ingress and egress Easements Street layouts Other General layout of pedestrian sidewalks and pathways General location of parking and off-street loading Landscaping including screening, and perimeter buffers  
Section 12.8. - Other required plans. 
Section 12.9. - Certifications. 
A.  The administrator shall affix the following certificate to the exemption plat: 
"This division of land does not meet the definition of a subdivision as set forth by North Carolina General Statute 160A-376 and is not subject to the subdivision requirements of the Town of Angier's UDO. The minimum lot requirements for the subject zoning district have been met. 
                                                       ___________ 
Subdivision Administrator                                      Date" 
Chapter 13 - NONCONFORMITIES 

Section 13.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and limit the continued existence of uses and structures established prior to the effective date of this ordinance (or any amendment subsequent thereto) that do not conform to this ordinance. 
B.  After the effective date of this ordinance, pre-existing lots or structures, or uses of lots or structures which are prohibited under the regulations for the district in which located, shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming lots, structures or uses may be continued, provided they conform to the following provisions. 
C.  Many nonconformities may continue, but the provisions of this chapter are designed to minimize substantial investment in nonconformities and to bring about eventual elimination and/or lessen their impact upon surrounding conforming properties in order to preserve the integrity of the area in which it is located and the intent of this ordinance. 
Section 13.2. - General provisions for nonconformities. 
A.  Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where nonconforming situations exist are permitted and encouraged. Major renovation (work estimated to cost more than 10 percent but less than 50 percent of the taxed value of the structure) may be done provided that the work will not result in a violation of any other paragraphs of this chapter. In no case, however, shall work costing more than 50 percent of the taxed value of the structure be done, singularly or cumulatively, within any five-year period. 
B.  Nothing herein shall prevent the maintenance, repair and extension of a nonconforming single-family dwelling, nor prevent the maintenance, repair, extension, or construction of a residential accessory building or swimming pool, provided done in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Nothing herein shall prevent the reconstruction of a nonconforming single-family dwelling that was destroyed by fire or natural disaster. 
Section 13.3. - Nonconforming lots. 
    13.3.1 Adjoining and vacant lots of record. 
A.  If two or more adjoining and vacant lots of record are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually have less frontage or area than the minimum requirements of the district in which such lots are located, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance. 
B.  Except as set forth in [subsection] A. above, if a lot, which was recorded prior to the passage of this ordinance, fails to meet lot area or width requirements or both in a district where single-family dwellings are permitted, such lot may be used as the location of a single-family dwelling with related accessory buildings. In such cases, the administrator is authorized to issue a permit with reduced width or area requirements, but in no case shall the lot size and/or yard requirements be reduced by more than 20 percent. 
    13.3.2 Occupied lots. This category of nonconformance consists of lots, occupied by buildings or structures at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, that fail to comply with the minimum requirements for area, width, yard and setbacks for the district in which they are located. These lots may continue to be used so long as the nonconformity is not increased. 
Section 13.4. - Nonconforming uses. 
    13.4.1 Uses of land: Open storage and sales. This category of nonconformance consists of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junkyards, and similar uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter, under this ordinance, in the district in which it is located. A legally established nonconforming open use of land may be continued except as follows: 
A.  When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter revert to any nonconforming use. 
B.  A nonconforming open use of land shall be changed only to a conforming use. 
C.  A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
D.  When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in the district in which the land is located. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 02012.01A, 1-3-2012) 
    13.4.2 Uses of structures. This category consists of buildings or structures used at the time of enactment of this ordinance for purposes or uses not permitted in the district in which they are located. Such uses may be continued as follows: 
A.  An existing nonconforming use of a structure may not be changed to another nonconforming use except as set forth in subsection E. below. 
B.  When a nonconforming use of a structure has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
C.  A nonconforming use of a structure may not be extended or enlarged, nor shall a structure containing a nonconforming use be altered except as follows: 
1.  Structural alterations as required by law or ordinance to secure the safety of the structure are permissible; 
2.  Maintenance and repair necessary to keep a structure containing a nonconforming use in sound condition are permissible; or 
3.  Expansion of a nonconforming use of a building or structure into portions of the structure which, at the time the use became nonconforming, were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use is permissible. 
D.  When any nonconforming use of a building or structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, the building or structure shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
E.  Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, or with the approval of the board of adjustment, to use in character with the uses permitted in the district. In permitting such changes, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02012.01A, 1-3-2012) 
Section 13.5. - Nonconforming structures. 
    This category includes any structure not in conformance with the restrictions of this ordinance after the effective date of adoption. Such nonconformities shall include, but not be limited to, height, bulk, and setback. Such nonconforming structures shall be allowed to remain with the following conditions: 
A.  A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered except where maintenance and repair are necessary to keep the structure in sound condition. 
B.  When any nonconforming structure is removed, it may not be replaced with another nonconforming structure. 
C.  When any nonconforming structure is damaged, repair must follow the guidelines listed in section 13.6. 
D.  Structural alterations as required by law or ordinance to secure the safety of the structure are permissible. 
E.  Conforming uses, except adult oriented businesses, may be established or re-established in nonconforming buildings or structures provided that off-street parking is provided as required by this ordinance and provided no other provision of this ordinance for the establishment of new uses is violated. 
Section 13.6. - Reconstruction of damaged structures. 
    Any nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use which has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or other causes may be repaired and used as before provided: 
A.  Damage does not exceed 50 percent of assessed value; 
B.  Repairs are initiated within six months and completed within one year of such damage; 
C.  The total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use may not be increased; 
D.  Reconstructed nonconforming structures may not be made more nonconforming by the repairs; and 
E.  Where possible, any nonconforming structure shall be repaired or reconstructed in such a manner so as to minimize or ameliorate the nonconformance(s). 
Section 13.7. - Continuation of nonconforming manufactured homes on individual lots. 
    Manufactured homes located on individual lots which become nonconforming structures may be continued until such time as the home is replaced. The replacement unit may not be another nonconforming structure. Manufactured homes on nonconforming lots may be continued. At such time as they are removed, the reestablishment of a manufactured home or any other structure on that lot is prohibited until such time as the lot is made to conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
    If an existing nonconforming manufactured home on a conforming lot is removed, it shall only be replaced with a conforming structure. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 7, 2013, repealed the former § 13.7, and renumbered former §§ 13.8-13.11 as new §§ 13.7-13.12. The former § 13.7 pertained to continuation of manufactured home parks. 
Section 13.8. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Subject to the restrictions of this section, nonconforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued. 
B.  No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign or causes a previously conforming sign to become nonconforming. 
C.  A nonconforming sign may remain if only the sign face is replaced. The structure of a nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this ordinance. Once a nonconforming sign is removed from the premises or otherwise taken down or moved, said sign may only be replaced with a sign which is in conformance with the terms of this ordinance. 
D.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs necessary to keep a nonconforming sign in sound condition are permitted. If repair or maintenance of a nonconforming sign results in the removal of the sign frame structure for any length of time, the replaced sign frame structure and any copy placed on it shall be in conformance with this ordinance. 
E.  If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the provisions of this ordinance, and the remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign shall be considered "destroyed" if it receives damage to an extent of more than 60 percent of the cost of replacing the sign. 
F.  Notwithstanding other provisions contained in this section, the message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not create any new nonconformities. 
G.  If a nonconforming sign which advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed or brought into compliance by the sign owner, property owner, or other party having control over such sign within 30 days after the use has ceased operation or the service or commodity has ceased being offered. If there is a change of use or name of business on a particular piece of property, and there were one or more on-premise signs which advertised the business, any new signs placed for the new use or business name must meet all sign requirements for the underlying zoning district. 
H.  If a nonconforming sign remains blank for a continuous period of 180 days, that sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be altered to comply with this ordinance or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign. For purposes of this ordinance, a sign shall be deemed "blank" if: 
1.  It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodations, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted; or 
2.  The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole or substantial part; or 
3.  It does not contain an advertising message. (For such purposes, the terms "Sign For Rent", "Sign For Lease", "Sign For Sale", etc. shall not be deemed to be an advertising message except for billboards). 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Note- See editor's note at § 13.7 above. 
Section 13.9. - Nonconforming landscaping and buffering. 
    In accordance with chapter 7 of this ordinance, certain uses are required to provide buffering and/or landscaping on-site. The following shall apply to nonconforming buffering and landscaping: 
A.  Except as herein provided, any expansion of an existing use, which is deficient in landscaping and/or buffering, or any change in principal use cannot occur without the required screening and/or landscaping having first been provided on-site. The CB district is exempt from this requirement. 
B.  Expansions to the parking area or loading areas which increase the total area more than 20 percent shall be required to comply with all applicable parking and loading area landscaping and screening. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Note- See editor's note at § 13.7 above. 
Section 13.10. - Nonconforming parking and loading. 
A.  On any lot in any zoning district, except the CB district, which contains a use which does not comply with the off-street parking and loading regulations contained in chapter 8 of this ordinance, no expansion or any change of use shall be approved which would result in a need to increase the number of off-street parking and/or loading spaces required (except as herein provided), until the requisite number of off-street parking spaces and all paving requirements have been met. 
B.  A zoning permit may be issued when there has been a change in a principal use and the number of off-street parking spaces required for the new use (per chapter 8 of this ordinance) is within ten percent or ten spaces, whichever is less, of the number of off-street parking spaces actually provided. Such relief may be granted on a one-time only basis per lot or planned development. In such instances where relief is provided, the additional parking spaces need not be paved (but shall have a graded gravel, crushed-stone or similar dust-reducing surface) if the parking lot prior to said expansion was not paved. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Note- See editor's note at § 13.7 above. 
Section 13.11. - Nonconforming automobile storage, junk yards, and salvage yards. 
    Nonconforming automobile storage, junk yards, and salvage yards shall provide an opaque buffer in accordance with chapter 7's requirement for outdoor storage no later than one year after the date of notification by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Note- See editor's note at § 13.7 above. 
Section 13.12. - Nonconforming adult establishments. 
A.  Any adult establishment that fails to comply with the use and locational requirements of this ordinance but which was lawfully operating before the effective date of this ordinance, shall not be deemed to be in violation of this ordinance but shall be nonconforming. Any such business which ceases active operation for a period of 30 days regardless of the purpose or reason shall be subject to all the requirements of this ordinance and the property may thereafter be used only for conforming uses. 
B.  Any adult establishment lawfully operating as of the effective date of this ordinance, but which subsequently fails to comply with the use and locational requirements of this ordinance as the result of changes within the vicinity or amendment to this ordinance, shall not be deemed to be in violation of this ordinance but shall be nonconforming. Any such business which ceases active operation for a period of 30 days regardless of purpose or reason shall be subject to all the requirements of this ordinance and the property may thereafter be used only for conforming uses. 
C.  Any adult establishment that is rendered a nonconforming use as a result of [subsections] A. and B. above shall either cease to operate or meet all of the requirements of this ordinance for the use no later than five years from the date that the adult oriented business becomes a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013(3)) 
Note- See editor's note at § 13.7 above. 
Chapter 14 - MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS 

Section 14.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures for amending the text of these regulations and the zoning classification of land as shown on the zoning map. Procedures for making amendments to the Unified Development Ordinance text or Zoning Map are also set forth herein. 
Section 14.2. - Amendment initiation. 
A.  Any amendment may be initiated by the town board of commissioners or planning board on its own resolution, by any owner of a legal or equitable interest in the property affected by the amendment, or by a local government agency of Angier, or by any other person living or owning property within the zoning jurisdiction of Angier in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
B.  For conditional zoning map amendments (rezonings), only an owner of a legal or equitable interest in the property may initiate the amendment. 
Section 14.3. - Application submittal. 
    14.3.1 Applications for all amendments. 
A.  An application form and fee shall be submitted by the applicant to the zoning administrator. The application shall include a description of the proposed change. The application form and fee shall be waived for any amendment request submitted by an Angier official or agency acting on behalf of the Town of Angier. Completed applications shall be forwarded by the administrator to the planning board and town board at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
B.  The town board of commissioners shall set a fee payable to the Town of Angier, North Carolina, to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a change or amendment. The set fee shall be posted in the town clerk's office. 
    14.3.2 Text amendments. The application shall contain a reference to the specific section, subsection, paragraph or item proposed to be changed, as well as the wording of the proposed change, and the reasons therefore. 
    14.3.3 Map amendments (rezonings). 
A.  For all map amendments (rezonings), applications shall contain a statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and the surrounding area. 
B.  For conditional zoning map amendments (rezonings), the application shall be accompanied by a description of the use or uses proposed and any conditions being proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall also provide a statement of reasonableness regarding the request on the application. In addition to the application, the applicant shall submit a site-specific plan. 
Section 14.4. - Text amendment process. 
    14.4.1 Planning board action. 
A.  The planning board shall consider and make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The following policy guidelines shall be followed by the planning board concerning zoning amendments and no proposed zoning amendment will receive favorable recommendation unless: 
1.  The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same category, or in appropriate complementary categories. 
2.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be in the general public interest and not merely in the interest of an individual or small group. 
3.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be appropriate in the area included in the proposed change. (When a new district designation is assigned, any use permitted in the district is allowable, so long as it meets district requirements, and not merely uses which applicants state they intend to make of the property involved.) 
4.  There is convincing demonstration that the character of the neighborhood will not be materially and adversely affected by any use permitted in the proposed change. 
5.  The proposed change is in accord with adopted plans and sound planning principles. 
B.  The planning board shall have 30 days from the initial referral of the request by the zoning administrator to either recommend approval or denial of an amendment in writing by simple majority vote of those present and voting. 
C.  The planning board shall include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies. 
    14.4.2 Town board of commissioners action. 
A.  Before taking such lawful action as it may deem advisable, the town board shall consider the planning board's recommendation on each proposed zoning amendment. If no recommendation is received from the planning board within 30 days after public hearing by the town board, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the planning board. 
B.  The town board of commissioners shall conduct a legislative public hearing. Notice of public hearing shall be given as required by N.C.G.S. § 160A-364 once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published the first time not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the public hearing date. 
C.  The town board of commissioners shall include with its decision a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies. 
Section 14.5. - Standard rezoning process. 
    14.5.1 General provisions. 
A.  Any proposed amendment to the zoning map shall follow the town board approval process as outlined chapter 11. However, a neighborhood meeting may be required prior to the town board public hearing as determined by the administrator. 
B.  When considering a standard rezoning request, neither the planning board nor the town board of commissioners shall evaluate the petition based on any specific proposal for the use or development of the affected property. The petitioner shall refrain from using any graphic materials or descriptions of the proposed use or development, except for those which would apply to any use permitted in the requested district. However, such information may be presented and considered when on an application for a map amendment for a conditional zoning district as outlined in section 14.6 below. 
C.  Upon approval of the map amendment, the zoning administrator shall oversee the updating of the zoning map to reflect the approved changes. 
    14.5.2 Planning board action. 
A.  The planning board shall consider and make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The following policy guidelines shall be followed by the planning board concerning zoning amendments and no proposed zoning amendment will receive favorable recommendation unless: 
1.  The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same category, or in appropriate complementary categories. 
2.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be in the general public interest and not merely in the interest of an individual or small group. 
3.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be appropriate in the area included in the proposed change. (When a new district designation is assigned, any use permitted in the district is allowable, so long as it meets district requirements, and not merely uses which applicants state they intend to make of the property involved.) 
4.  There is convincing demonstration that the character of the neighborhood will not be materially and adversely affected by any use permitted in the proposed change. 
5.  The proposed change is in accord with the land use plan and sound planning principles. 
B.  The planning board shall have up to 30 days from the date of referral by the zoning administrator to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the request to the town board of commissioners. 
C.  The planning board shall include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies and the surrounding area. 
    14.5.3 Town board of commissioners action. 
A.  Before taking such lawful action as it may deem advisable, the town board shall consider the planning board's recommendation on each proposed zoning amendment. If no recommendation is received from the planning board within 30 days after public hearing by the town board, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the planning board. 
B.  The town board of commissioners shall conduct a legislative public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as follows: 
1.  A notice shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town once a week for two consecutive weeks provided that the first notice is published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days prior to the date established for the public hearing. The expanded published notice option for rezonings (map amendments) noted in subsection 2. below shall consist of a notice not less than one-half of the newspaper page in size. 
2.  A notice of the public hearing shall also be sent by first class mail by the zoning administrator or designee to the affected property and to all contiguous property owners. The first class mail notice shall not be required if a rezoning (map amendment) directly affects more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners. Instead the town may elect to use expanded published notice as noted above in subsection A. However, property owners whose addresses are not within the general circulation area of the newspaper shall still receive a notice of public hearing by first class mail. 
3.  For rezonings (map amendments), the town shall conspicuously post a notice of public hearing at the site proposed for rezoning at least ten days prior to the public hearing. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. The notice shall be removed only after the public hearing has been held. 
C.  The town board of commissioners shall include with its decision a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies and the surrounding area. 
Section 14.6. - Conditional zoning process. 
    14.6.1 General provisions. 
A.  Any proposed amendment to the zoning map shall follow the town board approval process as outlined in chapter 11. Upon approval of the map amendment, the administrator shall oversee the updating of the zoning map to reflect the approved changes. 
B.  When considering a petition for a rezoning to a CZ District, the planning board and the town board of commissioners shall evaluate the petition based on specific proposal for the use or development of the affected property and the petitioner shall provide materials and descriptions of the proposed use and development. 
C.  Any use permitted under this process must also, as a minimum, conform to the development regulations for the corresponding underlying general zoning district. 
D.  In approving a CZ Rezoning, the town board of commissioners may impose such additional restrictions and requirements upon approval as it may deem necessary in order that the purpose and intent of this ordinance are served, public welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
E.  Any request to materially change the conditions specified within a CZ District once it has been rezoned shall be subject to the entire town board approval process. 
    14.6.2 Planning board action. 
A.  The planning board shall consider and make recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The following policy guidelines shall be followed by the planning board concerning zoning amendments and no proposed zoning amendment will receive favorable recommendation unless: 
1.  The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same category, or in appropriate complementary categories. 
2.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be in the general public interest and not merely in the interest of an individual or small group. 
3.  There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be appropriate in the area included in the proposed change. 
4.  There is convincing demonstration that the character of the neighborhood will not be materially and adversely affected by any use permitted in the proposed change. 
5.  The proposed change is in accord with The Land Use Plan and sound planning principles. 
B.  The planning board shall have up to 30 days from the date of referral by the administrator to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the request to the town board of commissioners. 
C.  The planning board shall include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies and the surrounding area. 
D.  The planning board shall also include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the reasonableness of the request. 
    14.6.3 Town board of commissioners action. 
A.  Before taking such lawful action as it may deem advisable, the town board shall consider the planning board's recommendation on each proposed zoning amendment. If no recommendation is received from the planning board within 30 days after public hearing by the town board, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the planning board. 
B.  The town board of commissioners shall conduct a legislative public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as follows: 
1.  A notice shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town once a week for two consecutive weeks provided that the first notice is published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days prior to the date established for the public hearing. The expanded published notice option for rezonings (map amendments) noted in subsection 2. below shall consist of a notice not less than one-half of the newspaper page in size. 
2.  A notice of the public hearing shall also be sent by first class mail by the zoning administrator or designee to the affected property and to all contiguous property owners. The first class mail notice shall not be required if a rezoning (map amendment) directly affects more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners. Instead the town may elect to use expanded published notice as noted above in subsection 1. However, property owners whose addresses are not within the general circulation area of the newspaper shall still receive a notice of public hearing by first class mail. 
3.  For rezonings (map amendments), the town shall conspicuously post a notice of public hearing at the site proposed for rezoning at least ten days prior to the public hearing. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. The notice shall be removed only after the public hearing has been held. 
C.  The town board of commissioners shall make a statement regarding the consistency of the Conditional Zoning District with the towns adopted plans and policies. The town board shall also provide a statement regarding the reasonableness of the request. 
    14.6.4 Effect of approval and expiration. 
A.  If a petition for a CZ Rezoning is approved as provided for herein, the district that is established and all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property as an amendment to the zoning map. Subsequent development shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved CZ District and any conditions attached to the approval. Except as herein provided for "minor changes", changes to the approved petition or to the conditions attached to the approval shall be treated the same as an amendment to the zoning map and shall be processed in accordance with the town board of commissioners approval process. Minor changes in the detail of the approved application may be made with the approval of the zoning administrator. The following criteria qualify as a "minor change": 
1.  The proposed change(s) will not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property; and 
2.  The proposed change(s) will not alter the uses permitted; and 
3.  The proposed change(s) will not increase the height of any structure to the extent that additional usable floor space will be added; and 
4.  The proposed change(s) will not increase the gross floor area of any nonresidential use by the smaller of ten percent or 10,000 square feet. Such limitations shall be cumulative and shall be based on the gross floor area specified in the CZ District as originally approved; and 
5.  The proposed change(s) will not result in an increase in the number of dwelling units constructed for any residential use; and 
6.  The proposed change(s) will not decrease the off-street parking below the minimum number of parking spaces required by this ordinance. 
B.  It is intended that property be rezoned to a CZ District only in light of firm plans to develop the property. Therefore, after the date of approval of the CZ District, if a building permit has not been secured or final plat recorded at the end of two years following the date of the approval of the CZ District, the administrator shall notify the applicant of such a finding. The zoning administrator shall then have the planning board to make a recommendation to the town board of commissioners regarding the rescission of the Conditional Use District and the zoning of the property revert to the zoning district in effect prior to the initial approval. 
Section 14.7. - Protest petition. 
A.  A protest petition shall not be valid unless it is in the form of a written petition bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless received by the town clerk at least two working days, prior to the public hearing on the proposed change or amendment. All protest petitions shall be on a form prescribed and furnished by the town, and such form may prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the town to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The protest petition must be valid at the time that the vote is taken and shall meet the requirements of N.C.G.S. §§ 160A-385 and 160A-386. 
B.  If a valid protest petition is filed, then a map amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the town board of commissioners. 
C.  Protest petitions shall not be applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise. 
Section 14.8. - Resubmission of request. 
A.  If the town board of commissioners has denied an application for the rezoning of a piece of property or has approved a rezoning to a general zoning district which is more restrictive than that which was originally requested, the planning board shall not review any applications for the same changes affecting the same property or any portion thereof until the expiration of one year from the date of such previous denial except as provided below. 
B.  The administrator may allow re-submission of such petition within said one-year period if he determines that, since the date of action on the prior petition: 
1.  There has been a significant change in the zoning district classification of an adjacent piece of property; or 
2.  The town board of commissioners has adopted a plan that changes public policy regarding how the property affected by the amendment should be developed; 
3.  Construction or expansion of a street, water line, sewer line, or other such facilities has occurred to serve the property and can comfortably accommodate the intensity of development allowed under the proposed classification; or 
4.  There has been some other extraordinary change in conditions or circumstances, outside the control of the petitioner, which justifies waiver of the one-year restriction on a new petition; this, however, shall not include a change in the ownership of the subject property. 
Chapter 15 - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 15.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the powers and duties of the administrator, board of adjustment, planning board, and town board of commissioners as they relate to this ordinance. This chapter also establishes the penalties for violation of the UDO. 
Section 15.1.1. - Administrator. 
A.  The town manager shall appoint a Unified Development Ordinance administrator to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The assistance of such other persons may be provided as the town board or town manager may direct. 
B.  Throughout this ordinance, the administrator may be referred to as "Administrator", "Zoning Administrator", "Subdivision Administrator", "Floodplain Administrator", or "Planning Director". 
C.  The various provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be administered by the administrator and designated planning staff. The administrator may appoint any member of the planning staff to assume his duties. It shall be the duty of the administrator to carry out and enforce this ordinance, remedy violations of this ordinance, follow the development approval processes of this ordinance, and issue permits in compliance with this ordinance. 
D.  The administrator shall maintain a record of all Zoning Permits, development approvals, Special Use Permits, Variances, Text Amendments, Map Amendments (standards and conditional rezonings) on file at his office, and copies shall be made available on request to interested parties. 
    15.1.1 Power and duties of the administrator. 
A.  Administrative variances. Administrative variances may be issued for encroachments of a principal building into any required yard up to a maximum of ten percent of the applicable required yard setback provided that: 
1.  The request involves only one encroachment into one required yard per lot; 
2.  The encroachment is a result of a construction error by the property owner or a person acting on his behalf; 
3.  The encroachment cannot be corrected without substantial hardship and expense to the property owner; 
4.  The encroachment, if approved, will not substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use of adjacent properties and will not pose any substantial danger to the public health and safety. 
B.  Pre-application meeting with sketch plan. Any property owner or applicant to meet with town staff prior to making official application with the town may schedule a pre-application meeting. Such meeting shall be scheduled only after a sketch plan has been submitted to the administrator. Sketch Plan review provided by, or under the direction of, the administrator or any other Town Staff is a courtesy and shall not constitute vested rights or plan approval. 
1.  This step is not applicable to Engineering Drawings or final plats for Major Subdivisions that have approved preliminary plats. The process for these items shall start at Step 2. 
2.  The applicant shall schedule a pre-application meeting with the administrator. The pre-application meeting is a non-binding and informal review of a development proposal intended to provide information to the applicant on the procedures and policies of the Town of Angier and does not confer upon the applicant any development rights. The applicant shall bring a Sketch Plan of the proposed development to the meeting that meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 12. 
3.  For Major Subdivision preliminary plats, the developer shall also provide an Existing Features Plan and participate in an on-site walkabout with the administrator. 
a.  An Existing Features Plan analyzing each site's special features is required for all developments, as it forms the basis of the design process for building locations, lot lines, street alignments, and conservation areas. 
b.  After an Existing Features Plan has been prepared in accordance with Chapter 12, the administrator shall schedule a mutually convenient date to walk the property with the applicant and his/her site designer. The purpose of this visit is to familiarize the administrator with the property's special features, and to provide him an informal opportunity to offer guidance to the applicant regarding the potential house locations, street alignments, and the tentative location of conservation areas. Following the walkabout, the applicant and the administrator shall discuss how the severely constraining elements and the significant features, which were identified in the Existing Features Plan, could be applied to the design and layout of the proposed subdivision. 
4.  The administrator shall review the Sketch Plan for general compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and any other applicable requirements. The administrator shall advise the developer or his authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed development and the procedures to be followed. 
5.  One copy of the Sketch Plan and the Existing Features Plan (if applicable) shall be retained as a part of the record of the administrator with one copy being returned to the developer or his authorized agent along with any comments made by the administrator concerning the proposed development. 
C.  Administrative approval. The administrator shall have the authority to approve the following, following the procedures outlined herein: 
1.  If a Site Plan is found to meet all of the applicable regulations of this ordinance, then the administrator shall issue a Land Use Permit. The developer may then obtain a building permit from the Building Inspections Department. 
2.  If a final plat for a Minor Subdivision is found to meet all of the applicable regulations of this ordinance, then the plat shall be approved. The developer shall record the plat within 30 days of said approval. If the developer fails to record the plat within 30 days of approval, said approval shall be null and void. 
3.  If a preliminary plat for a Major Subdivision is found to meet all of the applicable regulations of this ordinance, then the administrator shall approve the plat and the developer may proceed with completion of Engineering Drawings. 
4.  If Engineering Drawings for a Major Subdivision are found to meet all of the applicable regulations of this ordinance and all other applicable local, State, and Federal regulations, then the administrator and town engineer shall approve the Engineering Drawings, and the developer may proceed with the installation or guarantee of the installation of improvements and infrastructure. 
5.  If a final plat for all or a portion of a Major Subdivision is found to match the approved preliminary plat and meet all of the applicable regulations of this ordinance and all improvements have either been installed or guaranteed, then the plat shall be approved. The developer shall record the plat within 30 days of said approval. If the developer fails to record the plat within 30 days of approval, said approval shall be null and void. 
D.  Final building and zoning inspections for certificate of occupancy (site plan only). An as-built survey shall be submitted by the developer to the administrator and town engineer upon completion of the building foundation to ensure that setbacks and building orientation match the approved site plan. If the survey shows that the placement of the building is incorrect, then the administrator shall issue a stop-work order and all construction shall be halted until the problem is remedied. 
E.  For all developments, excluding single-family and two-family residential uses, prior the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the building inspector, the administrator or his designee and the town engineer shall conduct a final zoning inspection to ensure that the approved plan has been followed and all required improvements have been installed to town standards. 
Section 15.2. - Reserved. 
Section 15.3. - Board of adjustment. 
    15.3.1 Establishment of the board of adjustment. 
A.  The Town of Angier Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The word "board" when used in this section shall be construed to mean the zoning board of adjustment. Membership on the board shall include the seven members. Five of the members shall consist of the Angier Town Board of Commissioners and two shall be appointed by the Harnett County Board of Commissioners to represent the extraterritorial jurisdiction. In the event the board of county commissioners fails to make their appointments within 90 days after receipt of a resolution from the Angier Town Board, requesting that such appointments be made, the town board may thereupon make such appointments. The two members appointed by the board of county commissioners shall be residents of the territory surrounding the corporate limits of the Town of Angier within the extraterritorial area. 
B.  All meetings of the board shall be held at a regular place and shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings in a book maintained for that purpose only, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact; and final disposition of appeals shall be by recorded resolution indicating the reasons of the board therefore, all of which shall be a public record. No final action shall be taken on any matter unless a quorum is present. 
    15.3.2 Powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
    15.3.2.1 Appeal of the administrator. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by administration in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
A.  An appeal from the decision of the administrator may be taken to the board of adjustment by any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board or bureau of the town affected by such decision. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rule of the board by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The office to whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrator certifies to the board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him by reasons of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this ordinance. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application of notice to the administrator and on due cause shown. 
    15.3.2.2 Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in either districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variances. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship only upon findings by the board of adjustment after a public hearing that the following conditions exist: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
B.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the district in which the property is located. 
C.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the district in which the property is located. 
D.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare. 
E.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
F.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
    15.3.2.3 Special use permits. The development and execution of this ordinance is based on the division of the Town of Anger into districts within which the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are some land uses which are basically in keeping with the intent and purposes of the district where special, but which may have an impact on the area around them which can only be determined by review of the specific proposal. Special uses may be established, under certain conditions and with the proper controls, in such as manner as to minimize any adverse effects. In order to ensure that these uses, in their proposed locations, would be compatible with the surrounding development and in keeping with the purposes of the district in which they are proposed, their establishment shall not be a matter or right, but shall be only be permitted after review and approved of a Special Use Permit preceded by an evidentiary hearing. The board of adjustment shall find that the following conditions exist prior to granting approval of a Special Use Permit application: 
A.  The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the surrounding or adjoining districts; 
B.  The requested use will not be detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare; 
C.  Adequate utilities, access streets, drainage, sanitation and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided; 
D.  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and 
E.  That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the board of adjustment. 
    15.3.2.4 Right of appeal. If a Land Use Permit is denied, then the applicant may appeal the action of the administrator to the board of adjustment; and that from the decision of the board of adjustment, recourse shall be had to courts as provided by law. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days of such permit denial. 
    15.3.3 Hearing process. 
A.  Appeals from the enforcement and interpretation of this ordinance and requests for variances, shall be filed with the administrator specifying the grounds thereof. The administrator shall transmit to the board of adjustment all applications and records pertaining to such appeals and variances. 
B.  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide it within a reasonable time. 
C.  The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance, or to grant a variance from the provisions of this ordinance. 
D.  Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by the Harnett County Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any appeal to the superior court shall be taken within 30 days after the decision of the board is filed in the office of the zoning officer, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to the appellant by personal service or registered mail, whichever is later. 
    15.3.4 Administration of oaths. The chairman or any member temporarily acting as chairman is authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the board. All testimony before the board must be under oath and recorded. 
    15.3.5 Fees for variances or appeals. The board of commissioners shall set a fee, payable to the Town of Angier, North Carolina, to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a variance or appeal. The set fee shall be posted in the town clerk's office. 
    15.3.6 Stay of proceedings. 
A.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, with the following exceptions: 
1.  The administrator certifies to the zoning board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property; or 
2.  The administrator certifies to the zoning board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance because the violation charged is transitory in nature. 
B.  In either case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the zoning board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the administrator, and on due cause shown. 
Section 15.4. - Planning board. 
    15.4.1 Authority and duties. The planning board shall have the powers and duties given it by the North Carolina General Statutes and the town board including the power to: 
A.  Make studies and recommend to the town board plans, goals, and objectives relating to the growth, development, and redevelopment of the town and the surrounding extraterritorial planning area; 
B.  Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner; 
C.  Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of various means for carrying out plans that the town board may direct, including making recommendations on text amendments and map amendments (Standard and Conditional Zoning requests). 
D.  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance of a development plan for the town; 
E.  Promote public interest in and an understanding of its recommendations; 
F.  Building design alternatives. For building design alternatives, as provided for in chapter 5, the planning board may approve alternate design plans, building materials or construction techniques when unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the application of architectural design standards. Such situations may result from unique site conditions, innovative design applications, and/or unified development design. 
1.  Review and approval. The planning board shall make a determination on the request, as outlined in chapter 5. 
2.  Additional approvals as required. Approval of building design alternatives does not constitute final approval of the development plan. Plans reviewed by the planning board may be subject to additional administrative approvals depending on the size and type of development that is proposed. 
G.  Zoning map amendment (standard rezoning). 
1.  Review and approval. Following a complete review by the planning staff, the administrator shall schedule the application for review by the planning board at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
a.  The planning board shall have up to 30 days from the date of referral by the administrator to recommend approval or denial of the request to the town board of commissioners. 
b.  For all map amendment (rezoning) requests, the planning board shall include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the consistency of the request with adopted town plans and policies and the surrounding area. 
H.  Conditional zoning map amendment (conditional rezoning). 
2.  Review and approval. Following a complete review by the planning staff, the administrator shall schedule the application for review by the planning board at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
a.  The planning board shall have up to 30 days from the date of referral by the administrator to recommend approval or denial of the request to the town board of commissioners. 
b.  For conditional zoning map amendment requests, the planning board shall include with its recommendation a written statement regarding the reasonableness of the request. 
I.  Landscaping design alternatives. For landscaping design alternatives, as provided for in chapter 7, the planning board may approve alternate design plans, landscaping materials, or techniques when unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the application of landscaping design standards. Such situations may result from unique site conditions, innovative design applications, and/or unified development design. 
1.  Review and approval. The planning board shall make a determination on the request, as outlined in chapter 7. 
2.  Additional approvals as required. Approval of landscaping design alternatives does not constitute final approval of the development plan. Plans reviewed by the planning board may be subject to additional administrative approvals depending on the size and type of development that is proposed. 
    15.4.2 Membership. 
A.  There shall be a planning board consisting of seven members. Four members, appointed by the town board, shall reside within the town limits. Three members, appointed by the Harnett County Board of Commissioners, shall reside within that portion of the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) that lies within Harnett County. If, despite good faith efforts, a resident of the ETJ within the county cannot be found to fill the seat reserved for the residents of such area, then the county board of commissioners may appoint any other resident of the county (including residents of the Town of Angier) to fill such seat. If the county board of commissioners fails to make an appointment within 90 days after receiving a resolution from the town board requesting that an appointment be made, the town board may make the appointment. 
B.  Planning board members shall be appointed for two-year staggered terms but members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Terms shall expire on December 31. 
C.  Members may be appointed no more than three successive terms. 
D.  Faithful attendance at the meetings of the planning board is considered a prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the planning board. Planning board members may be removed by the town board at any time for failure to attend three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings or for failure to attend four or more of the meetings within any 12-month period or for any other good cause related to performance of duties. In the absence of regular planning board members, the town board may appoint alternates as it deems necessary. 
E.  All members may participate in and vote on all issues before the planning board, regardless of whether the issue affects property within the town or within the ETJ. 
F.  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term by the town board for in-town members of the planning board and by the county commission for the ETJ members of the planning board. 
    15.4.3 Meetings, hearings, and procedures. 
A.  The planning board shall elect a chair and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The term of officers shall be one year or until successors shall have been elected and installed, with eligibility for reelection. Vacancies in officers' positions prior to expiration of terms shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term by the planning board. The planning board shall adopt rules of transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public record. 
B.  The planning board shall hold at least one meeting monthly unless there is no business to be discussed or acted upon, and all of its meetings shall be in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 143-318.9 et seq., so as to process appeals and permit applications as expeditiously as possible. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the planning board for the purpose of taking any official action. All members of the planning board shall have voting power on all matters of business. However, any member of the planning board who is a part at interest to matters under consideration by the planning board shall declare such interest prior to a vote of the planning board on the question, and shall abstain from voting on the question. This provision shall not prohibit such members from participation in discussions of the planning board on such matters prior to a vote. 
C.  The planning board shall conduct its meetings so as to obtain necessary information and to promote the full and free exchange of ideas. 
D.  Minutes shall be kept of all board proceedings. 
E.  All board members shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible, the agenda for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting. 
F.  The planning board is charged with the responsibility to carry out its duties for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community. The planning board shall review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners; however, in the absence of a recommendation from the planning board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the request has been submitted in writing to the planning board, the town board of commissioners may take final action without receiving the recommendation, or may extend the time within which the planning board may report. 
Section 15.5. - Town board of commissioners. 
    The town board of commissioners shall hold the following powers and duties related to this ordinance: 
A.  To review, hold public hearings, and make decisions for vested rights requests, text amendments, and map amendments (Standard and Conditional Zoning requests). 
B.  To make decisions on all issues related to the Unified Development Ordinance, Zoning Map, Comprehensive Plan, and other land use plans which may be adopted from time to time. 
C.  Upon request of the applicant, the town board of commissioners may approve an extended vesting period of between two years and five years from the date of approval in accordance with the vested rights requirements of chapter 1, and provided that reasonable explanation is given as to why such extension is necessary. 
Section 15.6. - Enforcement. 
    15.6.1 Violations. If the administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of such violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violations of its provisions. 
A.  Nothing in this ordinance, nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this ordinance shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both. 
B.  In case any structure or use is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance as herein provided, an action for injunction or other appropriate action to prevent such violation may be instituted by the administrator, the Harnett County Building Inspector, any other appropriate town authority, or any person who may be damaged by such violation. 
    15.6.2 Penalties. 
A.  The administrator will notify any person, firm, or corporation of a suspected violation of this ordinance in person or in writing. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding $500.00 dollars and/or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  In addition to the other remedies cited in this ordinance for the enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-175, the regulations and standards in this ordinance may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by the administrator. 
C.  Subsequent citations for the same violation may be issued by the administrator if the offender does not pay the citation (except as otherwise provided in a warning situation) after it has been issued unless the offender has sought an appeal to the actions of the administrator through the board of adjustment. Once the ten-day warning period has expired, each day which the violation continues shall subject the violator to additional citations to be issued by the administrator. 
D.  The following penalties are hereby established: 
Citation Civil Penalty Warning Correct violation within ten days First $50.00 Second $100.00 Third and subsequent $200.00  
E.  If the offender fails to pay the civil penalties within five days after having been cited, the town may recover the penalties in a civil action in the nature of debt. 
    15.6.3 Remedy. 
A.  In any case where a building is created, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the administrator, or any other appropriate town authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violations. 
B.  The administrator or his designee may remove and destroy or otherwise dispose of any sign placed on public property or within any right-of-way of any public or private street. 
    15.6.4 Stop work order issuance and revocation of permits. 
A.  Whenever a building, structure or part thereof is being constructed, demolished, renovated, altered, or repaired in substantial violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance, the administrator may order the specific part of the work that is in violation, or would be when the work is completed, to be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing, directed to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for cessation and the action(s) necessary to lawfully resume work. 
B.  The administrator may revoke any permit by written notification to the permit holder when violations of this ordinance have occurred. Permits may be revoked when false statements or misrepresentations were made in securing the permit, work is being or has been done in substantial departure from the approved application or plan, there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of this ordinance, or a permit has been mistakenly issued in violation of this ordinance. 
Appendix A - DEFINITIONS 

Section A.1. - Purpose. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words, concepts, and ideas are defined herein. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this ordinance shall have their everyday meaning as determined by their dictionary definition. 
Section A.2. - Interpretation. 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. 
C.  Any word denoting gender includes the female and the male. 
D.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company as well as an individual. 
E.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel" or "tract". 
F.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
G.  The word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
H.  The term "street" shall include the word "road". 
I.  The term "Zoning Map," shall mean the Official Zoning Map of Angier, North Carolina. 
J.  The term "Town Board of Commissioners" shall mean the "Town Board of Commissioners of the Town of Angier, North Carolina." 
K.  The term "Planning Board" shall mean the "Planning Board of the Town of Angier, North Carolina." 
L.  The term "Administrator" shall mean the "Zoning Administrator, Subdivision Administrator, Floodplain Administrator, or Unified Development Ordinance Administrator of the Town of Angier, North Carolina." 
M.  The terms "Planning Department" and "Planning Staff" shall mean the "Planning Department of the Town of Angier, North Carolina." 
N.  The terms "Ordinance", "Code", and "Unified Development Ordinance" shall be synonymous and refer to the "Town of Angier Unified Development Ordinance." 
Section A.3. - Acronyms. 
    Below is a list of acronyms (other than zoning districts) and their meanings found throughout the ordinance: 
A. BOA: Board of Adjustment B. BFE: Base Flood Elevation C. CAMPO: Capital Area Metropolitan Planning Organization D. DUA: Dwelling Units per Acre E. FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency F. FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Maps G. HOA: Homeowners Association H. NC: North Carolina I. NCDENR: North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources J. NCDOT or DOT: North Carolina Department of Transportation K. N.C.G.S. or GS: North Carolina General Statute L. PB: Planning Board M. ROW: Right-of-way N. SR: State Road in the North Carolina Road System O. TRC: Technical Review Committee P. UDO: Unified Development Ordinance Q. US: United States of America  
Section A.4. - Definitions. 
    Abandonment. A use shall be deemed to be abandoned when: 
A.  The use is discontinued (other than in association with the settlement of an estate or for any use which is seasonal in nature); or 
B.  The premises are devoted to another use; or 
C.  When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of a nonconforming nonresidential use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by the same or similar equipment within 30 days; or 
D.  Failure to take all positive action to resume the nonconforming use with reasonable dispatch, including the failure to advertise the property for sale or for lease. 
    Accessory dwelling. A single-family residential unit that is subordinate to the principal dwelling located on the same property. 
    Accessory structure. A structure that is subordinate to and serves a principal use or structure; is clearly subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal use or structure served; and is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure. In no event shall "accessory structure" be construed to authorize a principal use or structure not otherwise permitted in the district in which the use is located. Accessory structures include but are not limited to detached garages, storage buildings, pools and pool houses, piers and other water related structures. 
    Accessory use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and located on the same lot with such principal use or structure. 
    Addition. An extension or increase in the footprint or floor area of building or structure. 
    Adjacent. Having common property boundaries or lot lines, including those which are separated by a street right-of-way or alley or body of water. 
    Administrator. The appointed town staff member that administers this ordinance, typically the town manager. 
    Adult establishment. Any principal structure or use of land which meets the definition of adult establishment as set forth in N.C.G.S. § 14-202.10, including topless bars. Notwithstanding the definition of "adult bookstore" provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-202.10(1), for purposes of this ordinance "adult bookstore" means a retail establishment: 
A.  Which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar month from the sale or rental of: 
1.  "Publications" which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(10), or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(11); and/or 
2.  Merchandise that are "sexually oriented devices", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(9); or 
B.  Having as a preponderance of its publications and/or merchandise: 
1.  "Publications" which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(10), or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(11), and/or 
2.  Merchandise that comprises "sexually oriented devices", as defined in N.C.G.S. § 1-202.10(9). 
    Adult establishment may consist of, include, or have the characteristics of any or all of the following: 
A.  Adult or sexually oriented bookstore sales and distribution. 
B.  Adult or sexually oriented paraphernalia sales and distribution. 
C.  Adult or sexually oriented cabaret. 
D.  Adult or sexually oriented mini motion picture theater. 
E.  Adult or sexually oriented motion picture theater. 
    Alley. A public or private right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration. A change in the size, configuration, or location of a structure; or a change in the use of a structure or lot from a previously approved or legally existing size, configuration, location, or use. 
    Amendment types. 
    Text amendment. A change to any text of the Angier Unified Development Ordinance. 
    Zoning map amendment (rezoning). A change of the zoning designation of a property or properties on the Angier Zoning Map. 
    Amusement arcade. A commercial facility providing recreational activities that typically include coin-operated amusement machines such as but limited to pinball machines, electronic video games, and skeet ball machines. A facility shall be deemed an amusement arcade if it has eight or more of such machines. 
    Animal services. A public or private facility for medical or surgical treatment, grooming, breeding, selling, or boarding of animals. Unless outdoor kennels are specifically allowed, all facilities associated with animal services shall be located indoors. 
    Appeal. A request by an applicant for the board of adjustment to review a decision or interpretation by the administrator. 
    Assembly halls, community centers, and similar structures. Places of gathering for community events, sporting events, performing arts events, or similar events. 
    Assembly and packaging. Typically a manufacturing and processing related use, including but not limited to: the fitting together of parts and/or the processing and packaging of manufactured products. 
    Auction house. A use, whether conducted primarily indoors or outdoors, where objects of art, furniture, equipment, and other goods are offered for sale to persons who bid on the object in competition with each other. 
    Automobile, abandoned. A motor vehicle which is left on private property without the consent of the owner(s), occupant, or lessee of the property. 
    Automobile services. Any building, premises, and land, in which or upon the primary use of land is a business which involves the maintenance, or servicing of automobiles, including but not limited to: auto body shops, auto service stations, car washes, gas stations, and oil/lube servicing. This does not include the sale of parts or related products (i.e. auto parts store) or storage of junked or abandoned vehicles. 
    Awning. A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from a building to a flat position against the building, but not to include a canopy. 
    Bar. An establishment, also referred to as a pub, tavern, saloon, beer garden, tap room or sports bar, that serves alcoholic beverages such as beer, liquor, wine and cocktails, for consumption on the premises, and where 51 percent or greater of the net sales is from alcohol and not food sales. 
    Bed and breakfast inn. A use, that takes place within a single-family dwelling, which consists of renting one or more rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business people, where provision of meals is limited to the breakfast meal, available only to guests. The homeowner shall reside on site and employment shall not exceed two full-time employees, not including the owner(s). 
    Block. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Boarding house. See rooming house. 
    Bona fide farm and agricultural uses. As defined in N.C.G.S. § 106-581.1, for purposes of this ordinance, the terms, "bona fide farm" "agriculture", "agricultural", and "farming" refer to all of the following: 
A.  The cultivation of soil for production and harvesting of crops, including but not limited to fruits, vegetables, sod, flowers, and ornamental plants. 
B.  The planting and production of trees and timber. 
C.  Dairying and the raising, management, care, and training of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, and other animals for individual and public use, consumption, and marketing. 
D.  Aquaculture as defined in N.C.G.S. § 106-758. 
E.  The operation, management, conservation, improvement, and maintenance of a farm and the structures and buildings on the farm, including building and structure repair, replacement, expansion, and construction incident to the farming operation. 
F.  When performed on the farm, "agriculture", "agricultural", and "farming" also include the marketing and selling of agricultural products, agritourism, the storage and use of materials for agricultural purposes, packing, treating, processing, sorting, storage, and other activities performed to add value to crops, livestock, and agricultural items produced on the farm, and similar activities incident to the operation of a farm. 
    Uses which shall not be deemed as "agricultural uses", for the purposes of this ordinance include zoos, kennels, and equestrian facilities. 
    Bottle shop. A retail establishment that primarily sells alcoholic beverages for off premise consumption. Alcoholic beverage consumption areas may be allowed on the premises as an accessory use. 
    Brewery/winery/distillery. A manufacturing use that produces alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages, including ales, beers, wine, liquor and/or similar beverages, on-site. Breweries are classified as a use that primarily manufactures such beverages and may or may not include on site alcoholic beverage consumption areas. 
    Buffer. A dedicated area of land with natural or planted vegetation that may include any required screening for the site. 
    Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
    Building. A temporary or permanent structure having a roof supported by exterior walls or constructed columns and which can be used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private purposes or accessory thereto. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or parts thereof". 
    Building envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and that is defined by maximum height regulations, and minimum yard setbacks or build-to lines, buffers, easements, or other applicable regulations. 
    Building footprint. The land area on which a building is located or proposed for location. 
    Building height. The vertical distance from the mean grade elevation taken at the fronting street side of a structure to the parapet or roofline of a flat roof, the eaves of a pitched roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof. Towers, spires, steeples, and enclosed rooftop mechanical equipment are not counted in height measurements. 

    Building line. The line formed by the front façades of buildings and extending to the property lines of the site on which the buildings are located. 
    Building permit. A permit obtained from the Town of Angier Inspections Department which sets the inspection schedule and construction techniques for a project. 
    Building setback line. See building envelope. 
    Build out. The completed construction of all phases of a development as allowed by all ordinances which regulate an area. The scale of build out can be from a single lot to the entire town's jurisdiction. 
    Caliper. The size of tree's trunk diameter as measured six inches above the ground. 
    Campsite. Any plot of ground within a campground intended for the exclusive occupancy by a cabin, recreation vehicle, or tent. 
    Canopy. A permanent structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal, or other material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure. 
    Carport. Prefabricated, roofed structure without any foundation, footings, enclosed walls, or sides, providing space for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Cemetery. Property used for the interment of the dead, which use may include the commercial sale and location of burial lots, crypts, or vaults for use exclusively on the subject property. A cemetery shall not be used for the preparation or embalming of bodies or the cremation of bodies. Setback for cemeteries shall be measured from the nearest structure or gravesite. This definition shall be construed to include pet cemeteries. 
    Certificate of occupancy (CO). A certificate allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable regulations. 
    Change of use. Any use of a building or land that differs from the previous use. 
    Church (house of worship). See religious institution. 
    Civic uses. Uses intended to serve as public gathering places. Such uses include governmental offices, schools, post offices, and nonprofit or charitable clubs and organizations. 
    Columbarium. A structure of vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns. 
    Commercial use. All retail sales establishments, office uses (i.e.: medical and financial), service industry uses (i.e.: restaurants, hotels/motels/inns), and general business (i.e.: mini-storage, automotive repair). 
    Common open space. Land and/or water areas within a site, designated for development and not individually owned, which are designed and intended for the common use of the residents of the development or town, but not including lands occupied or used for any other purposes. 
    Common open space, improved. Common open space which has been improved with recreational areas and amenities, such as but not limited to: ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, nature trails, clubhouses, etc. Not all of these uses may be appropriate in developments which lie in a water supply watershed where there are restrictions on the amount of impervious surface area. 
    Communications offices. Newspaper, internet, telephone, and similar communications businesses with no retail sales or visible towers or transmission equipment. 
    Conditional use. See special use. 
    Conditional zoning district. A district created through the approval of a zoning map amendment with a site specific plan in which the uses are limited to those in the base zoning district and are subject to conditions imposed by the town board of commissioners. 
    Construction trailer. A structure standing on wheels towed or hauled by another vehicle and used for neither overnight nor year-round occupancy at the construction site on a temporary basis for office purposes. 
    Contiguous. See adjacent. 
    Convenience store. Any retail establishment offering for sale gasoline and motor fuel, prepackaged food products, household items, or other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. Automobile services shall not be permitted or performed as part of or as an accessory to this use. 
    Correctional facility. A facility operated by the Town of Angier, Harnett County, or the State of North Carolina (or a private contractor thereof) used for the temporary incarceration of persons after arrest or pending hearing or trial or for the incarceration and or housing of persons serving sentences or incarceration or housing of persons serving criminal sentences. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition shall also include jail, prison, detention facility, or other terms commonly associated with the same. 
    Country club. A private or public recreational facility open to members and their guests. Uses at a country club include but are not limited to: golf courses, swimming pools, and club-houses. Meal service may be available, but is generally limited to members and their guests. A country club may be developed as a free-standing entity or as part of a residential community or planned residential development. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition shall also include golf club. 
    Cul-de-sac. The turn around at the end of a dead-end street and meeting the definition and standards of such by NCDOT. 
    Day care center. A place where care is provided to more than five children, handicapped persons, or senior citizens unrelated by blood or marriage. 
    Density. A ratio expressed as the number of dwelling units per acre (DUA). The ratio is derived by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the total land area (in acres) used or proposed to be used for purposes such as buildings, right(s)-of-way, public facilities, and open spaces. 
    Development plan types. 
    Phased development plan. A plan which has been submitted to the administrator for the gradual development of land over a period of time, which shows the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels with a lesser degree of certainty than the plan determined by the administrator to be a site specific development plan. 
    Site specific development plan. A plan which has been submitted to the town describing the type and intensity of a use for a specific parcel(s) of property, including: planned development plan, subdivision plat, preliminary development plan, special use permit, conditional zoning district plan, or other land-use approval such as a land use application. 
    Drip line. An imaginary vertical line extending from the outer most portion of the tree canopy to the ground. 
    Drive-through use. A facility designed to enable a person to transact business while remaining in a motor vehicle. This includes drive-in facilities in which vehicles pull into a designated parking spot to transact business. 
    Driveway. A means of ingress/egress from a public or private right-of-way to a specific parcel of land. 
    Dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof, provides complete and permanent living facilities for one family. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, bed and breakfast inn, manufactured home or other structure designed for transient residence. See also residential. 
    Emergency services. Police, fire, rescue, emergency medical, ambulatory, or similar services that respond in the event of an emergency. 
    Encroachment. The intrusion into an easement, dedicated right-of-way, or required setback. 
    Engineering drawings. The drawings necessary to prepare a site for construction, guide the construction of improvements, and complete the site following construction of improvements. These plans may include an overall site plan, grading plan, soil and erosion control plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, utilities plan, site details, street cross sections, stormwater detention details, etc. 
    Entertainment use. Any establishment which provides active recreational opportunities including but not limited to: miniature golf, batting cages, carnival games, waterslides, or passive recreation such as movie theaters. 
    Equestrian facilities. Businesses that specialize in the boarding of horses, horse riding, riding lessons, equestrian competition, or similar equestrian uses. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). An area outside and surrounding the Town of Angier corporate limits, extending from the municipal boundary, where the town exercises planning zoning, and subdivision regulations. 
    Façade. The vertical surface of a building which is set along a building line. The elevation of a façade is the vertical surface area. Façades are subject to visual definition by building height and setback lines. 
    Family campgrounds. Land containing two or more campsites which are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by people in temporary living quarters, such as tents, recreation vehicles, or travel trailers which are used for recreation or vacation purposes and are not intended as permanent living facilities. 
    Family care home. A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six resident handicapped persons, as defined by N.C.G.S. § 168-21(2). This does not include adult care homes, group homes, residential care homes, child or adolescent care homes, and health care homes that do not care for handicapped persons. 
    Farm and livestock. A farming use which meets the general definition of a bona fide farm (as included herein) but does not qualify as such. 
    Farmer's market. An outdoor market open to vendors at which locally grown fruits and vegetables are sold on a retail basis. 
    Final plat. A map depicting a subdivision (in its entirety or a phase thereof) intended for recordation at the register of deeds. 
    Flag. A piece of durable fabric of distinctive design attached to a permanent pole that is used as a symbol or decorative feature. 
    Flat roof. Flat roof lines infer a roof with no pitch. The actual roof structure is required to have a slope for drainage purposes. This is separate from the roof line which can be stepped or flat in appearance through architectural elements such a cornices, mansards, and parapets; or pitched as with residential homes. 
    Footcandle. A unit measuring the illuminance from a light source. Though not an SI unit, footcandles are widely used to set lighting levels. 
    Frontage. The lot boundary along a public or private right-of-way. 
    Game center. A business enterprise, whether principal or accessory, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices, including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals or other amusement devices, where cash, merchandise, or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by electronic games played. 
    Golf club. See country club. 
    Government buildings. A structure or group of structures intended to carry out the necessary day-to-day functions of federal, state, county, or local governments including government offices and public works facilities. This shall not include uses defined separately herein. 
    Ground cover. Low growing plants such as grasses, ivies, creeping bushes, and similar decorative plantings. Ground cover shall have the capability of soil stabilization and erosion control. 
    Group home. See residential care home. 
    Habitable. A space in a building for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Handicapped. A person with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in N.C.G.S. § 122C-3(11)b. 
    Hazardous material. Any substance or material that by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. 
    Home occupation. Any use conducted for gain entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use and which does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display. When observed from beyond the lot on which it is located, the home occupation does not give visual, audible, sensory, or physical evidence that the property is used for any nonresidential purpose. 
    Hospital. An institution providing physical and mental health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient services, training facilities, central service facilities, emergency services, and staff offices. 
    Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public which may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. 
    Impervious surface. Any material which reduces and prevents absorption of storm water into previously undeveloped land. This includes but is not limited to, buildings, roads, pavement, gravel surfaces, etc. Items not considered to be "impervious" include the water area of a swimming pool and wooden slatted decks. 
    Impervious surface ratio. The gross area of all impervious surfaces on a lot divided by the lot area. 
    In-home day care. A type of home occupation in which the occupant of a home cares for children in addition to his or her own children during day time hours, as regulated by the state and the special requirements included herein. 
    Infill. The development of new buildings on vacant sites in a primarily built-up area. 
    Inn. See hotel. 
    Institutional use. A use of a semi-public nature that typically serve community needs including but not limited to daycares, colleges, private schools, hospitals, research facilities, museums, residential care facilities, and other long-term medical care facilities. 
    Instructional school. A private business that instructs students on skills that may include but are not limited to dance, gymnastics, martial arts, art, and music, and shall not include truck driving or driver training schools. 
    Intense use. A use of land that typically has more of an impact on adjacent properties than most other uses. 
    Internet gaming, sweepstakes, and/or other gambling establishments. A commercial facility, whether as a primary or accessory use, providing activities that include, but not limited to, internet sweepstakes gaming machines, Keno, gambling rooms or facilities, and other similar games and activities. An accessory use would be a facility with three or less machines; a primary use would be four or more. 
    Junk. Scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, or other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material and dismantled or used white goods or parts thereof. 
    Junk motor vehicles. An unregistered and/or nonfunctional, dismantled, wrecked, or abandoned motor vehicle. 
    Junkyard. An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. Any lot containing more than three unregistered and nonfunctional (junk) motor vehicles shall constitute a junkyard for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Live/work development. A minimum of a two-story building in which the ground floor contains one or more commercial or nonresidential enterprises and at least one of the floors above contains residential units. 
    Loading space, off-street. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot. A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    Lot area. The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and thirty feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street. 
    Lot types. 
    Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lines to the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Double frontage lot. A continuous (through) lot that is accessible from both streets upon which it fronts (see through lot), but which streets do not intersect one another. 
    Flag lot. An irregularly shaped lot where the building portion of the lot is connected to its street frontage by an arm or "pole" of the lot. 
    Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one street. 
    Nonconforming lot. A parcel of land held in separate ownership, occupied, or intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure together with accessory buildings, and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas, or other open space provisions of this ordinance. 

    Lot line. A line bounding a lot that divides one lot from another or from a street or any other public or private space. 
    Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, the lot line separating said lot from the street; in the case of a corner lot or through lot, the lot line separating said lot from the street that is designated as the front street in the request for a permit. 
    Rear lot line. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Side lot line. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line; a lot line separating a lot from a side street is an exterior lot line, while a lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior lot line. 
    Zero lot line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line. 

    Lot width. The distance from side lot line to side lot line measured at the required minimum front yard setback parallel to the front property line. 
    Manufactured home. A dwelling unit that: 
A.  Is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code but that is constructed to HUD standards; and 
B.  Is composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home site on its own chassis; and 
C.  Exceeds 40 feet in length and eight feet in width (commonly called a mobile home). 
    Manufactured home lot. A manufactured home lot is a piece of land within a manufactured home park whose boundaries are delineated in accordance with the requirements of the ordinance, and that is designed and improved in accordance with the requirements of the ordinance to accommodate a single manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home park. Any site or parcel of land under single ownership where land is rented, and utilities are provided for the installation or placement of two or more manufactured homes. 
    Manufacturing types. 
    Heavy/industrial manufacturing. The assembly, fabrication, production, or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily have greater than average impacts on the environment, or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of other properties in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, health or safety hazards, or uses that otherwise do not constitute "light manufacturing,". "Heavy manufacturing" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: enameling, lacquering, or the plating or galvanizing of metals; foundries or mills producing iron and steel products; industrial chemical manufacture; meat packing plants; mixing plants for concrete or paving materials, and manufacture of concrete products; oxygen manufacture and/or storage; pottery, porcelain, and vitreous china manufacture; poultry dressing for wholesale; pressure treating of wood; stonecutting; tire recapping and retreading; tobacco products manufacture. This shall not include resource extraction and recycling and salvage operations. 
    Light manufacturing. All operations involved in textile manufacturing currently conducted within the Town of Angier, and all industrial processes of less intensity than such operations including the assembly, fabrication, production, or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where such assembly, fabrication, production or processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a building. This shall not include uses that constitute "heavy manufacturing", resource extraction, or recycling and salvage operations. 
    Massing. The shape and form buildings assume through architectural design. There are ten architectural design elements which create urban space. A specific project may not need to incorporate all ten elements. 
    Building silhouette. Similar pitch and scale to a roof line. 
    Spacing between building façades. Setbacks or notches between primary façades which frame the structure. 
    Proportion of windows, bays, and doorways. Vertical or horizontal elements tied together in bands across façade lengths. 
    Proportion of primary façade. Size of façades similar in area and height to width ratios. 
    Location and treatment of entryways. Important visual commonality between structures. 
    Exterior materials used. Similar materials and treatment add to detail and monumentality of a building. 
    Building scale. Similarity of building height and configuration. 
    Landscaping. Ties together buildings and defines space. 
    Shadow patterns form decorative features. The light and dark surfaces from materials used and projections from window bays and setbacks create visual breaks. 
    Mausoleum. A large tomb, usually a stone building, with spaces and used for the entombment of the deceased above ground. 
    Mini-warehouse. A structure or structures containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis that may also include outdoor storage. 
    Mining. The extraction of minerals, including solids, liquids, and gases and/or the excavating and removing material from the surface and/or subsurface. 
    Mobile home. See manufactured home. 
    Modular home. A manufactured building designed to be used as a single family dwelling unit which has been constructed and labeled indicating compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code for residential structures. 
    Motel. See hotel. 
    Motor vehicles. A self-propelled device licensed, registered, and functional as a motor vehicle and used for transportation of people or goods; or any device attached to a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Multifamily residential. The development of three or more attached dwelling units. This includes condominiums, townhomes, apartments, quadraplexes, triplexes, and more than one duplex (two-family dwelling) constructed as part of a single project. 
    Apartments. One or more one- or two-story multifamily structures, with each structure containing three or more dwelling units, including related off-street parking, and which units share means of ingress and egress and other essential facilities. 
    Condominiums. A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, or other floor area, are owned individually and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Townhome. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series of at least three attached units separated by property lines, and in which no unit is located over another unit. 
    Two-family attached (duplex). A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two families in units separated from each other by an unpierced wall, and the structure having only two dwelling units located on the same lot of record. 

    Nightclub. An establishment that is either public or private in which people gather for dancing and/or listening to recorded or live music, and which may include the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises. 
    Noncommercial copy. A sign message through pictures, illustrations, symbols and/or words, or any combination thereof, which does not contain any reference to a business or product but displays a substantive message, statement, or expression that is protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
    Nonconforming use. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure on the effective date of this ordinance or on the effective date of any amendment thereto rendering such use nonconforming, which does not comply with all the regulations of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, whichever might be applicable. 
    Nonconforming lot. Any lot of record which does not meet the minimum yard or area requirements established in these regulations at the time of this ordinance's adoption or any amendment thereto. 
    Nonconforming sign. A sign that, on the effective date of this ordinance or the date of any subsequent amendment thereto, does not conform to one or more of the regulations set forth in this ordinance. 
    Nonconforming structure. Any structure lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations, or any amendment to it rendering such structure nonconforming, which does not comply with all of the standards and regulations of these regulations or any amendment thereto. 
    Nonprofit organization. An organization that does not distribute its surplus funds to owners or shareholders, but instead uses them to help pursue its goals, and that has obtained proper State approval to operate as such. 
    Nursery. A commercial enterprise conducted on land where flowers, shrubs, and similar horticultural products are raised and sold to the general public. Nurseries may include the use of greenhouses for growing purposes. 
    Office use. Professional occupations within a building or buildings which do not generally involve the on-site sale of goods to customers. 
    Open space. Any area which does not consist of buildings, streets, right(s)-of-way, parking, or easements, and serves as a passive or active recreational area, as conservation land, or as pervious area for watershed requirements. This area provides, or has the potential to provide, environmental, social, and/or economic benefits to the community whether direct or indirect. 
    Outdoor kennel. A commercial enterprise that involves the containment of animals outside of a building. 
    Outdoor storage. The storage of goods, products, or vehicles as an ancillary use by their owner or on a commercial basis outside of a permanently constructed building. 
    Outparcel. A parcel of land associated with and located within a shopping center or multi-tenant nonresidential development, which is designated on an approved site plan as a location for a structure with an intended use. 
    Overlay district. A set of regulations which add an additional layer of provisions to an underlying, regulating zoning district, and implemented when necessary due to special circumstances including protection of special environmental features. 
    Parapet. That portion of a building wall that extends above the roof line. 
    Parking bay. A parking module consisting of one or more sets of one or two rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave. 
    Parking space, off-street. An area located outside of any street right-of-way which is designed to accommodate the parking of vehicles which meets all area requirements contained in chapter 8 of this ordinance. 
    Pedestrian-oriented development. Development which accommodates the needs of the pedestrian. Such development will have parking to the side or rear of a building, will mix uses and provide them in proximity to one another, will allow the pedestrian the option or choice of not having to use a car to accomplish certain trips, and will provide a variety of interesting and detailed streetscapes which balance the need of the pedestrian and car equally. 
    Permit types. 
    Building permit. Written permission by the Town of Angier Inspections Department issued for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
    Land use (zoning) permit. Written permission issued by the administrator or his designee for the construction, or enlargement of a structure, including signs, or the grading or excavation of a site in preparation of construction or for the installation of underground utilities. 
    Personal service uses. Services provided by licensed professional stylists, aestheticians, and therapists including but not limited to hair care, nail care, waxing, massage therapy, and similar spa services. 
    Photometric. Data regarding the luminous intensity of light sources on a particular site. 
    Pitch. The slope of a roof expressed as rise over run. (i.e. for a roof that rises four inches vertically for every 12 inches it runs horizontally the pitch is 4:12) 
    Plat. A map representing a tract of land, including boundaries and location of individual properties and streets; and/or a map of a subdivision or site plan. 
    Construction plat. A map of the infrastructure and improvements required as part of a subdivision. 
    Final plat. A map of all or a portion of a subdivision that is the legal instrument for recordation. Final plats shall be consistent with the approved preliminary plat and be reviewed and recorded following engineering document and/or construction plat approval. 
    Preliminary plat. A map indicating the layout of a subdivision submitted, sometimes after sketch plan approval, prior to or simultaneously with construction plat. 
    Planned development. An area planned as a single entity containing at least more than one of the following: residential, commercial, mixed-use, institutional, and other nonresidential clusters located on tracts or lots, and planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity. 
    Principal structure. A building in which is conducted the principal use on the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential zoning district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot where it is located. 
    Principal use. The primary or predominant use of any lot. Also known and referred to as the primary use. 
    Privately owned public utility structures and facilities. Any structures and facilities owned or operated by a privately owned electric, telephone, gas, cable, or water and waste water company 
    Produce stand. The sale of any form of agricultural or horticultural products at a retail stand located on the same site where the products are grown. Off-site produce stands shall be considered separately and regulated as such. 
    Produce/arts and crafts market. A parcel of land which is used for the display and sale of locally grown fruits and vegetables, as well as locally hand crafted items which include but are not limited to: art work, pottery, jewelry, seasonal decorations and similar items. For interpretational purposes, locally shall be defined as within 50 miles of Town Hall. 
    Protest petition. A formal written objection to a zoning change filed by the property owners most directly affected by the proposed amendment. If a qualifying petition is filed as least two working days prior to the day of the public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment, the amendment can only be adopted if approved by a three-fourths majority of the governing board. A protest petition shall be deemed qualifying if signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the subject area or five percent of the surrounding property extending 100 feet from the subject area. Where the subject area abuts a street right-of-way, the 100 feet shall be measured starting from the opposite side of the street right-of-way unless the right-of-way is greater than 100 feet. 
    Publicly owned utility structures and facilities. Any structures and facilities owned by Harnett County or its agencies, or any other local government entity, including, but not limited to: water lines, waste water lines, stormwater facilities, water treatment plants, waste water treatment plants, lift stations, pumping stations, booster stations, water tanks, and associated facilities. 
    Quasi-judicial hearing. The process by which the board of adjustment reviews requests for variances, appeals and, special use permits; and by which the town board of commissioners reviews vested rights requests. Sworn testimony is given during the public hearing and an evidentiary record is kept and voted upon based on specified findings of fact. 
    Recreational facility types. 
    Private recreational facility. A privately owned area of land that is developed for active and/or passive recreational pursuits with various manmade features and is designed to serve the immediate neighborhood or community in which it is located, or can be regional in scope, serving several neighborhoods. 
    Public recreational facility. A publicly owned area of land that is developed for active and/or passive recreational pursuits with various manmade features and is designed to serve the immediate neighborhood or community in which it is located, or can be regional in scope, serving several neighborhoods. 
    Recreation vehicle. A vehicular-type unit without a permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. A recreation vehicle shall not be considered as being a single-family dwelling. Also refer to the North Carolina State Building Code. 
    Recycling center. A facility or portion thereof, or tract of land or portion thereof, used only for the drop-off and temporary storage of recyclables and specifically excluding onsite recycling operations or processing. 
    Religious institution. A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services whose site may include an accessory area for the interment of the dead. Day care centers and/or schools operated by the church on the facilities of the religious institution shall be considered separate principal uses when there is an enrollment capacity in excess of 25 enrollees. 
    Repair services. The repair of any item, typically of household or personal goods, that takes place entirely within an enclosed structure with no outdoor storage. 
    Residential care home. An institutional home in which supervision, personal care, social services, counseling services, transportation, and/or therapeutic services are provided for six or more persons in a residential capacity to serve special needs in addition to providing food and shelter. Also known as a group home, halfway home, or boarding home for sheltered care. 
    Residential care facility. An institutional facility in which supervision, care, therapeutic, or medical services are provided for more than six persons in a residential capacity. This includes nursing homes, transitional medical care homes, and similar residential care services that do not meet the definition of residential care home. 
    Residential sales office. Structures, whether temporary or permanent, located in a subdivision containing 25 or more lots, and used as sales offices for the subdivision development in which it is located. 
    Restaurant. A commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
    Retail uses. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    Community retail uses. A retail establishment in which certain low-intensity retail trade are accessible by pedestrians from and serve the daily convenience needs of surrounding neighborhoods, and is 15,000 square feet or less in size. 
    Neighborhood retail uses. A retail establishment which has provisions to serve the community as a whole, and ranging in size up to 50,000 square feet. 
    Regional retail uses. A retail establishment, as defined herein, of 50,000 or more square feet in size, which has the ability to serve a region surrounding the community. 
    Rezoning. See amendment, zoning map. 
    Right-of-way. An area of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a public street, for such purpose, areas claimed by a municipality or the State of North Carolina for such purposes, or actually used for such purposes, or privately held and maintained. 
    Roof line. The highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof and the lowest point of a pitched roof, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projections. 
    Rooming house. A building or portion thereof which contains not more than five rooms designed or intended to be used for residential occupancy by not more than ten individuals for compensation. It may also serve meals for compensation to the boarders. 
    Screening. A fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, earth berm, buffer area or any combination of these provided to create a visual and/or physical separation between certain land uses. Screening may be located on the property line or elsewhere on the site. 
    Service uses. Uses that include the provision of work that does not typically result in ownership of physical goods and that create benefits by facilitating a change in customers, a change in their physical possessions, or a change in their intangible assets (i.e. beauty shops, dry cleaning, appliance repair, check cashing, etc.). This does not include automotive/boat/heavy equipment/manufactured home services. 
    Setback. A distance measured inward from a property line which shall remain unoccupied by structures and parking areas except as permitted by this ordinance. 
    Front setback. The required distance from the fronting or primary street right-of-way to a structure. 
    Rear setback. The required distance from the rear property line to a structure. 
    Side setback. The required distance from the side property line to a structure. 
    Side corner setback. The required distance from the nonfronting or nonprimary street right-of-way to a structure. 
    Sign setback. The required distance from the property line or right-of-way to the nearest point of the sign or its supporting member. 
    Sewer, public. Any package treatment plant or other sewage treatment facility serving two or more sources not connected to individual or public systems and having a design capacity of greater than 3,000 gallons daily and/or a discharge to surface water, as permitted by the State of North Carolina. In addition the definition shall include all connections to such a system. 
    Shopfront. A business or retail use. The façade of a shopfront is aligned directly on the building line with the entrance at grade. This is typical for sidewalk retail. Shopfronts often have awnings or a colonnade. 
    Shopping center. A group of three or more retail establishments constructed and developed in one or more phases with customer and employee parking and merchandise and other loading facilities provided on-site. A shopping center may be located and developed on one or more lots and may include one or more principal buildings. 
    Shrub. An ornamental plant that is at least two feet tall above the highest root at the time of planting. 
    Sight distance triangle. The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting property lines (or a property line and the curb or a driveway) within which no planting, structure, sign, fence, wall, or obstruction greater than two feet in height shall be placed or maintained. 
    Sign. Any object, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. The term "sign" does not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, political subdivision thereof, or any fraternal, religious or civic organization; works of art which in no way identify a product or business; scoreboards located on athletic fields; or religious symbols. 
    Accessory use sign. Signs which are located on the same premises with a principal permitted use and which are clearly incidental, secondary and/or supportive of the principal use. 
    Advertising sign. A sign, other than a directional sign which directs attention to or communicates information about a business, commodity, service, or event that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained or provided at a location other than the premises where the sign is located. Any advertising sign allowed under this ordinance may display either a commercial or noncommercial copy. 
    Banner sign. Temporary signs advertising a special sale, event, or feature that are made of vinyl, fabric, or similar material. 
    Billboard sign. Large off-premises advertising signs. 
    Building marker sign. A sign etched into masonry, bronze or similar material on a building that identifies the name of the building, designer, year constructed, or provides similar information. 
    Canopy and awning sign. Signs attached to or painted or printed onto a canopy or awning. For the purposes of the ordinance, the permitted size of a canopy or awning sign will be calculated on the basis of the size of the building wall to which the canopy is attached. It will, for measuring purposes, be considered a wall sign. 
    Civic signs (off-premises). Signs which denote the location of religious, charitable, fraternal, military or service organizations. 
    Construction/contractor's or subdivision project sign. Signs that identify future tenants, home builders, contractors, and architectural or engineering designers during the period of construction. 
    Directional sign (on-premises). Signs that are located on the premise/property to provide directions for entrances and exits to the property. Such signs contain no copy other than directional information. 
    Directory sign. A sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building or property is identified. 
    Flashing sign. Signs that use an intermittent or flashing light source or windblown and/or mechanical moved reflective material to attract attention. 
    Ground (free-standing) sign. Signs that are not affixed to a building and is securely and permanently mounted in the ground. 
    Government (civic) sign. Signs posted or authorized by various local, state, and federal agencies in the performance of their duties including providing community information and facilitating economic development. Such signs include regulatory signs, traffic signs, welcome signs, bulletin boards, and wayfinding signs. 
    Illuminated sign. Signs lit from either internal or external light sources. 
    Incidental sign. Signs used in conjunction with equipment or other functional elements for a use or operation that cannot be read from the street right-of-way which inform or instruct customers or visitors on-site (i.e. drive-through menu boards, gas pump signs, bulletin boards). 
    Legal or warning sign. Signs erected to warn of danger or hazardous conditions such as signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies; signs required for or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. 
    Monument sign. Free-standing permanent ground signs in which the bottom of the signs are no than three feet from the ground. 
    Neighborhood identification sign. Signs which display only the name of recognizable communities or subdivisions. 
    Occupant/street number sign. Signs affixed to structures, mailboxes, decorative light posts, driveway entrances, etc., which serve to identify the address of the structure or occupant. 
    Off-premises sign. Signs that draw attention to or communicate information about businesses, services, commodities, that exist or are conducted, sold, offered, maintained or provided at locations other than the premises where the signs are located. This includes billboards. 
    On-premises sign. Signs that draw attention to or communicate information about businesses, services, commodities, that exist or are conducted, sold, offered, maintained or provided on the premises where the signs are located. 
    Placard sign. A small sign attached to a wall face near the building entrance which displays only the name, address, and/or crest, or insignia, trademark, occupation or profession of the occupant or building. 
    Pole sign. A detached sign erected and maintained on a free-standing frame, mast, or pole and not attached to any building but not including ground-mounted or monument signs. The bottom of such sign is more than three feet from the ground. 
    Political sign. Temporary signs displayed during a period prior to an election, primary, or referendum to advocate or denounce a particular candidate or cause. 
    Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; or umbrellas used for advertising. 
    Principal use sign. A sign which constitutes the sole and/or principal use of land. 
    Projecting sign. Any sign other than a wall, awning, canopy, or marquee sign, which is affixed to a building and is supported only by the wall on which the sign is mounted and has two sign faces perpendicular or close to perpendicular to the wall face. 
    Real estate sign. Temporary signs that advertise the sale or lease of a property. Signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale or lease of the property. Signs advertising lots for sale within an approved subdivision may be posted at the entrance to the subdivision and shall be allowed until 75 percent of the lots are sold within the subdivision. 
    Roof sign. A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof or parapet of a building. 
    Special event sign. Temporary signs erected by public or non-profit organizations such as schools and churches for promoting public events such as fund drives, fairs, festivals, sporting events, etc. 
    Stadium sign. Signs located within a stadium intended to be read only by persons seated within the stadium. 
    Vehicular sign. Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property, and said vehicles are not used in the normal day to day operations of said business. For the purposes of this ordinance vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other transportation purposes. 
    Wall sign. Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for its support and is parallel to the wall face. Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered wall signs. 
    Wayfinding sign (town-sponsored). Signs that direct travelers and tourists to points of interest including the central business district, government facilities, cultural arts facilities, galleries, accommodations, restaurants, and shops. This shall not include signs installed and maintained by NCDOT. 
    Window sign (temporary). Signs temporarily attached or temporarily painted to a window or door, announcing sale or special features. 
    Yard sale sign. Temporary signs displayed for the purpose of advertising yard sales. 
    Sign area. The entire face of a sign including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure. In computing area, only one side of a double-faced sign shall be considered. 
    Single-family residential. A separately owned residence for use by one family as a housekeeping unit with space for eating, living, cooking, and sanitation (Source: N.C.G.S. § 87-15.5) where the dwelling unit is on a separate lot of record, no lot contains more than one dwelling unit, no dwelling unit shares a wall with another dwelling unit (detached), and each dwelling unit is surrounded on all sides by yard. 
    Skilled trade shops. Establishments used for the purposes of cabinet making, machining, sheet metal work, and woodworking, or other similar type uses. 
    Skirting. A weather-resistant material designed expressly for a manufactured home and used to enclose the space from the bottom of the manufacture home to grade. 
    Solar collector. A device or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into usable energy. 
    Solar energy facility. A complete design or assembly for the purpose of transforming solar energy into usable energy, consisting of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy. 
    Solar energy system. A complete design or assembly for the purpose of transforming solar energy into electricity or for heating water, used exclusively for accessory purposes only. 
    Special use. A use that is permitted in a zoning district subject to the issuance of a special use permit by the town board of adjustment. 
    Special use permit. A special authorization for a special use which may be subject to any specific restrictions or conditions on its size, location, intent, character of use, etc. as determined by the town board of adjustment. 
    Stormwater runoff. Rain which falls onto impervious surfaces and is not absorbed into the ground immediately. Stormwater runoff carries pollutants from paved surfaces into streams and rivers and causes flooding by speeding up the rate of water flow into streams and rivers. 
    Street, private. Any right-of-way used for purposes of motor vehicle travel which has not been accepted for maintenance or ownership purposes by a public entity. 
    Street, public. A public right-of-way set aside for public travel and either which has been accepted for maintenance by NCDOT or the town, has been established as a public road prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, or which has been dedicated to the NCDOT or the town for public travel by the recording of a plat of a subdivision with the county register of deeds office. 
    Street orientation. The direction of the architectural front façade of a building in relation to the street. 
    Street yard. The area of land along the front property line parallel to a right-of-way reserved for tree planting and landscaping. 
    Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having a more or less permanent location on the ground. 
    Subdivision. For the purposes of this ordinance in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160A-376, "subdivision" shall mean all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions when one or more of those divisions are created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the regulations of this ordinance; provided, however, that any document or plat to be recorded pursuant to any such exclusion shall bear the notation "no approval required" and the signature of the administrator or his designated agent before being presented for certification by the county review officer: 
A.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this ordinance. 
B.  The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved. 
C.  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of the streets or for public transportation system corridors. 
D.  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots or tracts, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved or proposed, and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this ordinance. 
    Major subdivision. A major subdivision is defined as a subdivision where any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  Dedication of public right-of-way or other public tracts; or, 
B.  The resultant subdivision will produce more than five lots. 
    Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision is defined as a subdivision where all of the following conditions exist: 
A.  No public right-of-way dedication; and, 
B.  The resultant subdivision will produce five or fewer lots. 
    Subdivision administrator. See administrator. 
    Taxicab. A vehicle driven or propelled by gasoline, other than motor buses, operating in and through the town, which shall be used for the purpose of carrying, transporting, or conveying any person from one place to another, for which services a charge or fee is made. 
    Technical review committee (TRC). A group of appointed town staff members and agencies that review sketch plans, subdivision plats, and site plans for proposed developments and make recommendations on design and approval criteria during the development review process. 
    Temporary emergency residence. A temporary dwelling unit used following the destruction or severe damage of a permanent dwelling unit following fire or other natural disaster while the permanent dwelling is being repaired or rebuilt. 
    Temporary structures. Buildings placed on a lot for a specific purpose which are to be removed within a specified time period. Examples of temporary structures include monitoring stations, mobile classrooms or office space, and produce stands. The duration permitted for a temporary structure is established by this ordinance. 
    Temporary uses. Uses which are established on a non-permanent basis, such as construction trailers and guard houses for development projects or manufactured housing placed on a lot for temporary housing while principle home renovations are being done. 
    Tree types. 
    Large maturing tree (canopy). A tree, either single or multi-stemmed (i.e., in clump form) which has a height of at least ten feet and is of a species which, at maturity, can be expected to reach a height of more than 35 feet under normal growing conditions in the local climate. If the tree is single-stemmed, it shall have a caliper of at least two and one-half inches at the time of planting measured six inches up from the highest root of the tree. Also known as a canopy tree. 
    Small maturing tree (ornamental). A tree, either single or multi-stemmed (i.e., in clump form) which has a height of at least eight feet and is of a species which at maturity, can be expected to reach a height less than 35 feet under normal growing conditions in the local climate. If the tree is single-stemmed, it shall have a caliper at the time of planting of at least two inches measured six inches up from the highest root of the tree. Also known as an ornamental or understory tree. 
    Underpinning. Skirting or curtain walls installed in good workmanships-like manner along the entire base of a manufactured home, except for ventilation and crawl space requirements, and consisting of one of the following: 
A.  Metal with a baked-on finish of uniform color; 
B.  Uniform design and color vinyl, including artificial stone; or 
C.  Brick and stone masonry. 
    Utility facilities. Structures, specifically new utility infrastructure, either publicly or privately owned used for the transfer, distribution, and/or storage of gas, electricity, steam, water, communications, or other public services. 
    Variance. Permission granted on the basis of proof of physical hardship by the board of adjustment following quasi-judicial proceedings to depart from or relax the literal requirements of this ordinance relating to dimensional requirements such as setbacks, side yards, street frontage, and lot size that, if applied to a specific lot, would significantly interfere with the use of the property. 
    Vehicle. See motor vehicle. 
    Vehicle sales. Sales of automobiles, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, boats, farm equipment, and other similar products, typically in an open area, used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used vehicles in operable condition where no repair work is done. Small equipment shall not be considered a vehicle herein. 
    Vehicle storage. The outdoor storage of vehicles for an automobile service use. This does not include inoperable vehicles (junk vehicles) which would constitute a junkyard. 
    Vested right. The right to undertake and complete a development or use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific development plan currently in effect or as otherwise allowed by law. 
    Vocational school. A center for higher education that teaches specific job skills. 
    Warehouse, mini. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis that may include outdoor storage when specifically provided for throughout the approval process. 
    Warehouse use. A building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares belonging either to the owner of the facility or to one or more lessees of space in the facility or both, with access to contents only through management personnel. This does not include mini-warehousing or mini-storage. 
    Wholesale. A place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. The majority of all sales of such businesses shall be for resale purposes. Wholesale clubs and similar membership warehouses, where membership is easily available to the consuming public, and similar businesses shall not be deemed "wholesale sales operations". 
    Wind energy facility. A system designed to provide energy, wherein the power is generated from wind turbines, towers, and associated control or conversion electronics. 
    Wind energy system. A single system designed to supplement other electricity sources as an accessory use to existing buildings or facilities wherein the power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption. Such facilities consist of a single wind turbine, tower, and associated control or conversion electronics. 
    Wind turbine. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and may include a nacelle, rotor, tower, guy wires, and pad transformer. Also known as a "windmill." 
    Yard. A land area immediately adjacent to a building. Yards are broken into front, rear, and side. Front yards extend from the architectural front of a building to the fronting street or right-of-way. Side yards extend from the sides of a building to the property lines or a street right-of-way. Rear yards extend from the back of a building to a property line or a right-of-way. Yard configurations establish building typologies. There are four typologies into which most buildings can be classified: perimeter yard buildings, side yard buildings, rear yard buildings, and courtyard buildings. 
    Front yard. An area measured between the edge of the public street right-of-way line, and the front of a building, projected to the side lot lines. On corner lots, the front yard shall be measured perpendicular from the street lot line having the shortest linear footage. If both street lot lines have equal linear footage, the property owner shall determine the location of the front yard where no principal structure is located. If a principal structure is located on such a lot, the front yard shall be based on the architectural orientation of the house. In instances where the street right-of-way line goes to the centerline of the street, the front setback shall be measured at a point 30 feet from the centerline. 
    Rear yard. An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
    Side yard. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line as measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 

    Yard sale. An outdoor sale of merchandise conducted entirely upon a residentially or institutionally developed lot by one or more households or civic groups where goods sold are limited primarily to used merchandise donated by the yard sale participants. 
    Zoning administrator. See administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2012.01, 6-5-2012; Ord. of 5-7-2013(1); Ord. of 5-7-2013(2); Ord. of 2-2-2016; Ord. of 3-5-2019) 
Section A.5. - Flood damage prevention overlay district definitions. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure). Means a structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building. 
    Addition. An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure to an existing building. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of the FDP-O. 
    Area of shallow flooding. A designated Zone AO on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See structure. 
    Chemical storage facility. A building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Disposal. As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater. 
    Elevated building. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
A.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
B.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published. 
    Flood prone area. See floodplain. 
    Flood zone. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
    Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodplain administrator. The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit. Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of the FDP-O, prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
    Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management regulations. The FDP-O and other zoning overlays, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose overlays, and other applications of police power. This term describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Freeboard. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
    Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Hazardous waste management facility. As defined in N.C.G.S. 130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or 
D.  Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic district designated by a community with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program". Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980. 
    Lowest adjacent grade (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the FDP-O. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values. 
    Mean sea level. For purposes of the FDP-O the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
    New construction. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonencroachment area. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as designated in the flood insurance study report. 
    Post-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
    Pre-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
    Principally above ground. At least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground. 
    Reference level. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
    Remedy a violation. To bring the structure or other development into compliance with State and community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the FDP-O or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Salvage yard. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery. 
    Solid waste disposal facility. Any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35). 
    Solid waste disposal site. As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year. 
    Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above-ground. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of substantial improvement. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
A.  Any correction of existing violations of state or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
B.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Threat to public safety and/or nuisance. Anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of the FDP-O. 
    Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Section A.6. - Watershed protection overlay district definitions. 
    Best management practices (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce non-point source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals. 
    Buffer, vegetative (watershed buffer or riparian buffer). An area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers. 
    Built-upon area. Built-upon areas shall include that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel roads, recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts), etc. (Note: Wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious). 
    Critical area. The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending either one-half mile from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first); or one-half mile upstream from the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first). Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate the outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile. 
    Development. Any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil. 
    Existing lot (lot of record). For the purpose of watershed protection, a lot which is part of a plat that has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to October 1, 1993 of this ordinance, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to October 1, 1993. 
    Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants; or a group of not more than six persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Industrial development. Any nonresidential development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or requires the use or storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing any product or commodity. 
    Residential development. Buildings for residence such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and customary home occupations. For definitions of specific types of residential development, see the specific use, as listed in the permitted uses table. 
    Watershed. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point (e.g. the water supply intake). 
Section A.7. - Wireless telecommunications towers definitions. 
    Antenna array. One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omni-directional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The antenna array does not include the support structure. 
    Attached wireless communication facility. An antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall include but not be limited to utility poles, signs, water towers, rooftops, towers with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. 
    Collocation/site sharing. Use of a common wireless communication facility or common site by more than one wireless communication license holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/or placement of an antenna array on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. 
    Equipment facility. Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility that includes cabinets, shelters, a building out of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures. 
Federal Aviation Administration-FAA 
Federal Communications Commission-FCC 
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996-FTA 
    Height. The vertical distance measured from the base of the tower to the highest point on the wireless communication facility, including the antenna array and other attachments. 
    Setback. The required distance from the property line of the parcel on which the wireless communication facility is located to the base of the support structure and equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in the case of guy-wire supports, the guy anchors. 
    Support structure. A structure designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, and other similar structures. Any device (attachment device) which is used to attach an attached wireless communication facility to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures. 
    Temporary wireless communication facility. A wireless communication facility to be placed in use for 90 or fewer days. 
    Tower and antenna use application (TAA). A form provided to the applicant by the town for the applicant to specify the location, construction, use and compliance with the development standards of a proposed wireless communications facility. 
    Wireless communications. Any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which include FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist. 
    Wireless communication facility. Any un-staffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1975 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 2-2 1-7 2.1-1 3-1 4-1-4-7 5-1-5-7 4-9-4-11 5-22-5-24 4-11.1 5-25 4-12, 4-13 5-26, 5-27 4-14 5-27.1 4-16, 4-17 5-20, 5-21 5-1-5-5 7-203-7-207 5-6, 5-7 7-201, 7-202 6-1, 6-2 7-235, 7-236 13-1-13-3 16-1-16-3 13-4 16-5 14-2 17-2 14-4, 14-5 17-7, 17-8 14-7 17-5 14-8, 14-9 17-3, 17-4 14-11 17-54 14-13 17-13 14-15 17-59 14-16 17-11 14-17-14-20 17-60 14-21 17-9 14-22 17-63 14-23, 14-24 17-61, 17-62 14-26-14-30 17-91-17-95 14-31 17-119 14-32 17-121, 17-122 14-33, 14-34 17-123, 17-124 14-35, 14-36 17-126, 17-127 14-37 17-120 14-38 17-130 14-39 17-128 14-40 17-131 14-41 17-125 14-42 17-129  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1991 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1991 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 3-1 3-1 5-1-5-7 5-1-5-7 5-26, 5-27 5-20, 5-21 5-29-5-34 5-22-5-27 5-35 5-27.1 6-1-6-7 7-201-7-207 7-1, 7-2 7-235, 7-236 10-131-10-139 7-151-7-159 10-142-10-145 7-160-7-163 13-1-13-5 12-1-12-5 16-1-16-8 16-1-16-8 17-1-17-13 17-1-17-13 17-32-17-44 17-54-17-66 17-61-17-66 17-90-17-95 17-86-17-88 17-119-17-121 17-88-17-97 17-122-17-131 17-111-17-124 17-159-17-172 17-141 17-200  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted after the 1991 Code was adopted which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since adoption of the 1991 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code  3- 5-1985(Mo.) 12-4  4-15-1986(Mo.) 17-55  5-20-1986(Mo.) 12-5 10-21-1986(Mo.) 12-4  7-21-1987(1)(Ord.) 17-56  7-21-1987(2)(Ord.) 16-4  8- 4-1987(Ord.) 14-43 17-57 12- 2-1987(1)(Mo.) 17-57 12-15-1987(2)(Mo.) 12-3  1- 3-1989(1)(Ord.) 14-1 17-1 14-6 17-10 14-7 17-5 14-12 17-12 14-14 17-58 14-15 17-59 14-17 17-60 14-21 17-9 14-25 17-90 14-27 17-92  1- 3-1989(3)(Mo.) 12-2  4-18-1989(Ord.) 14-3 17-6  5-16-1989(Mo.) 12-1  9-18-1990(Mo.) 17-57 17-61 11-20-1990(Ord.) 16-6  2-19-1991(Ord.) 17-64  3- 5-1991(Ord.) 17-57  5- 7-1991(Ord.) 16-7  9-29-1992(Ord.) 17-172 1-6 17-159-17-164 6a 17-165 6b 17-166 6c 17-167 6d 17-168 7-9 17-169-17-171 9.1 17-171  8- 3-1993(Mo.) 17-56 17-65, 17-66  3- 1-1994(Ord.) 17-200 0202-1  2- 5-2002 1 7-237 1102-1 11- 5-2002 1 16-7  7-19-2005(Ord.) 7-151  8-2005(Ord.) 17-38-17-53 17-122  2-13-2006(Ord.) 1-6  5-22-2006(Ord.) pt. I(5-28.01)- 5-28.01-5-28.16 pt. I(5-28.16) 11- 5-2007(Ord.) pt. 1 17-168 O-2008-02  1- 8-2008 4.1-4.13 4-1-4-13 O-2008-01  2- 5-2008 13-66-13-70 12-66-12-70 O-2008-03  5-12-2008 9-31-9-37 9-31-9-37 9-61-9-71 9-61-9-71 9-76-9-85 9-76-9-85 9-96-9-103 9-96-9-103 9-115-9-124 9-115-9-124 9-126-9-133 9-126-9-133 O-2008-04  5-12-2008 11-1-11-11 11-1-11-11 11-31-11-47 11-31-11-47 11-61-11-65 11-61-11-65 11-81-11-88 11-81-11-88 11-100, 11-101 11-100, 11-101 11-101 11-102 11-103, 11-104 11-103, 11-104 02008-08  9- 2-2008 9-151-9-154 9-151-9-154 O-2010-04  8- 3-2010 1-7       Added Adopt. Ord., pg. xi 1) 2-33(b) 2) 11-101(title) 3) 14-11(a)(2) 4)       Added 14-11(a)(18) 5) 15-29(c) 6) 15-26 7) 17-38 8) 17-171(a)(2) 2010-05  9- 7-2010 1-6       Added UDO adopt. ord., pg. UDO:i 1       Added UDO §§ 1.1-15.6.4, App. A 02010.1 12- 7-2010 UDO § 4.2.9 A. 2011.01  7- 5-2011 UDO §§ 9.3.1-9.3.5       Added UDO §§ 9.3.6, 9.3.7 02012.01A  1- 3-2012 UDO §§ 13.4.1 D., 13.4.2 D. 02012.01  4- 3-2012 (c)       Rpld 4-7(d) 4-12 2012.01  6- 5-2012       Rnbd UDO §§ 4.8.4-4.8.7       as UDO §§ 4.85-4.8.8       Added UDO § 4.8.4 UDO § A.4 2012.02 10- 2-2012       Added UDO §§ 4.11.7-4.11.7.9 2012.03 10- 2-2012 UDO § 3.3 2012.04 10- 2-2012 UDO § 9.1.4.2 2013.01  1- 8-2013 UDO § 9.1.4.3 Ord. of  5- 7-2013(1) UDO, § 4.2.8       Added UDO, § 4.2.9       Rnbd UDO, §§ 4.2.9-4.2.11       as UDO, §§ 4.210-4.2.12 UDO, § 4.10.1.A.1. App. A, § A.4. Ord. of  5- 7-2013(2)       Added UDO, § 4.11.2       Added UDO, § 4.11.4       Rnbd UDO, § 4.11.2       as UDO, § 4.11.3       Rnbd UDO, § 4.11.3-4.11.7       as UDO, § 4.11.5-4.11.9 App. A, § A.4. Ord. of  5- 7-2013(3)       Rpld UDO, § 13.7       Rnbd UDO, §§ 13.8-13.11       as UDO, §§ 13.7-13.12 Ord. of  6- 4-2013       Added 17-300-17-423 Ord. of  7- 2-2013 14-11(a) Ord. of 10- 1-2013 UDO § 10.6.1 Ord. of 11-18-2013 4-1-4-13 Ord. of  7- 1-2014 14-11(a) Ord. of  1- 3-2016(1) UDO, § 4.2.8.B. Ord. of  1- 3-2016(2) UDO, § 9.3.1 Ord. of  1- 3-2016(3) UDO, § 5.3 Ord. of  2- 2-2016 UDO, § 3.3. UDO, App. A, § A.4.       Added UDO, § 4.7.8 Ord. of  5- 3-2016 UDO, § 11.1.D. UDO, §§ 10.2.1, 10.2.2 Ord. of 11- 1-2016 UDO, § 10.7 Ord. of  6- 6-2017(1) 3-31 Ord. of  6- 6-2017(2) 15-35 Ord. of  7-11-2017(1) UDO, § 9.2 Ord. of  7-11-2017(2) UDO, § 9.1.4.2 Ord. of  9-12-2017 UDO, § 5.4 015-2018  5-14-2018 3-1       Added 3-2 Ord. of 11- 5-2018 15-27 15-29 15-32 Ord. of  3- 5-2019 UDO, § 3.3 UDO, § 4.2.10 UDO, § 4.8.4 UDO, § 4.8.5 UDO, App. A  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the North Carolina General Statutes. 
G.S. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-202.10(9), (10), (11) UDO, App. A, § A.4 1-593 1-2 1-597 17-161 1A-1, rule 6 1-2 1A-1, rule 65 1-6 6-47, 6-48 1-6 7A-227, 7A-228 5-28.10 12-3 1-2 14-4 1-6 11-104 14-8 14-1 14-136 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VII 14-202.10 UDO, App. A, § A.4 14-202.10(1) UDO, App. A, § A.4 14-288.1 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VI 14-288.12 Ch. 7, Art. VI 14-360 et seq. Ch. 4 14-366 et seq. Ch. 4 15-27.2 Ch. 5 ch. 18B 3-1 3-2 18B-100 et seq. Ch. 3 18B-102 Ch. 3 18B-103 3-1 18B-300 3-1 3-2 18B-701 3-32 ch. 19A Ch. 4 20-4.01 7-79 20-4.01(46) 1-2 20-37.6(d) 7-130 20-97(d) 9-119 20-134 7-132 20-137.6 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. IV 20-138.1 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 4 20-158 Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 3 20-161 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 6 20-162 7-130 20-169 7-77 20-171.1 et seq. 7-105 20-222 7-159 42-29, 42-30 5-28.10 47-30 12.4.2, 12.4.3 47A-1 et seq. 4.2.7 58-78 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VII 58-79-1 et seq. Ch. 5 ch. 66 Ch. 9 ch. 67 Ch. 4 68-16 Ch. 4 69-25.1 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VII ch. 75B Ch. 9 ch. 87 Ch. 5 87-15.5 UDO, App. A, § A.4 ch. 89(c)-3(7) 3.6.1.6 ch. 89A 3.6.1.6 3.6.1.7 90-5 11-11 91-A-1 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VI ch. 91A 9-151 ch. 93B Ch. 9 95-126 et seq. Ch. 9 105-33 et seq. Ch. 9 105-102.5 Ch. 9 105-316(a)(1) UDO, § 4.2 105-350 Char. § 4.4 ch. 106 Ch. 4 106-581.1 UDO, App. A, § A.4 106-758 UDO, App. A, § A.4 ch. 113A, art. 4 9.4.1 113A-50 et seq. 12-2 ch. 122C 4.2.4 122C-3(11)b UDO, App. A, § A.4 ch. 130A, art. 9 UDO, App. A, § A.5 130A-184 et seq. Ch. 4 130A-290(a)(6), (a)(35), (a)(36) UDO, App. A, § A.5 ch. 131D 4.2.4 ch. 133 Ch. 16 ch. 136 Ch. 16 ch. 136, art. 2E 9.1.1 136-014.14 7-130 136-141 et seq. 7-162 136-143 7-162 143-34.12 9.4.1 143-128 et seq. Ch. 5 143-136 et seq. Ch. 5 143-138(e) Ch. 5, Art. II 7-171 143-143.8 et seq. Ch. 5 143-143.15 3.6.2.5 143-145(7) 5-28.03 143-151.8 et seq. Ch. 5 143-151.13 7-176 143-151.26 et seq. Ch. 5 143-211 et seq. Ch. 17 143-213(18) 17-301 143-214.5 3.6.1.2 143-214.7(c) Ch. 17, Art. VII 143-215.1 17-301 17-347 143-215.1(b) 17-347 143-215.1(g) 17-347 143-215.3(a)(14) 17-301 143-215.6B 17-398 143-215.6B(f) 17-398 143-215.6B(g) 17-398 143-215.6B(h) 17-398 143-215.6B(i) 17-398 143-318.9 et seq. 12-68 15.4.3 143-355 Ch. 17, Art. VI 153A-275 17-300 158-7.2 et seq. Ch. 2 159-1 et seq. Ch. 2 159-24 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 159-80 et seq. Ch. 17 160-71 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 160A 17-1 ch. 160A, art. 8 3.6.2.1 ch. 160A, art. 8, parts 3, 5, 8 3.6.2.1 160A-1 1-2 Char. § 1.2 160A-1 et seq. Ch. 2 160A-29 9-37 160A-33 et seq. Ch. 12 160A-64 2-32 160A-70 2-36 160A-72 2-35 160A-74, 160A-75 Char. § 2.6 160A-76 Ch. 5 Ch. 5, Art. II Ch. 17 160A-77 1-1 1-8 160A-77(a) 1-9 160A-78 2-52 160A-79 1-1 160A-101 et seq. Char. Arts. I-V 160A-147 et seq. 2-101 160A-163 Ch. 7, Art. VII 160A-171 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 160A-173 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 160A-174 5-28.01 Ch. 7, Art. VI 160A-175 1-6 11-1 11-104 15.6.2 160A-176 Ch. 17 160A-181 Ch. 9 Ch. 9, Art. V 160A-182 Ch. 4 160A-184 Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 2 160A-185 Ch. 17 160A-186 et seq. Ch. 4 160A-188 4-2 160A-191 Ch. 9 160A-193 Ch. 14 Ch. 17 160A-194 Ch. 5 Ch. 9 160A-211 et seq. Ch. 9 160A-212 Ch. 4 160A-216 et seq. 5-28.10 Ch. 16, Ch. 17 160A-217 16-2 160A-291 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VII 160A-296 Ch. 17 160A-296 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 6 Ch. 16 160A-301 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III, 
Div. 5 160A-303 Ch. 7, Art. IV 7-152 160A-303.2 7-152 160A-311 Ch. 17 160A-311(2), 
160A-311(3) Char. § 5.1 160A-311(6) Char. § 5.1 160A-312 Ch. 17 17-300 160A-314 Char. § 5.1 160A-317 Ch. 17, Art. II 160A-319 Ch. 17 160A-360 2-1 160A-360 et seq. Ch. 12 160A-361 12-1 160A-364 Ch. 12 14.4.2 160A-376 11.9.4 12.9 UDO, App. A, § A.4 160A-382 3.1.2 160A-383 1.6 160A-385 12-4 14.7 160A-385.1 1.7 160A-386 14.7 160A-411 5-5 160A-411 et seq. Ch. 5 160A-412 5-5 160A-417 1.7.3 160A-435 et seq. Ch. 5 5-3 160A-436 5-4 160A-441 5-28.01 160A-441 et seq. Ch. 5 5-28.01 160A-444 5-28.01 160A-445 5-28.06 160A-458 12-2 160A-460 et seq. Ch. 12 160A-461 7-202 160A-493 Ch. 4 163-1 et seq. Ch. 2 163-292 Char. § 3.1 166A-7 7-201 166A-8 7-203 166A-10 7-202 ch. 168 4.2.4 168-21 4.2.4  
